A 32-year-old, unrestrained male driver was involved in head-on motor vehicle accident at high speed. He was initially evaluated at the pre-hospital setting and was reported to be hemodynamically stable. On arrival, his score on the Glasgow Coma Scale was 15, blood pressure 110/75 mm Hg, pulse rate 100/min, and respiratory rate 17/min. The patent had a deep scalp laceration, signs of recent nasal bleeding and facial bruising suggestive of a high-energy head injury while he was also complaining of a mild mid-epigastrium pain.
On exam, the patient was alert and oriented. The chest wall was not tender to palpation. Auscultation of the chest wall did not reveal any pathology. The abdomen was non-distended, soft with mild tenderness however to palpation of the upper abdomen (mid-epigastrium). Motor and sensory function of all extremities was intact. The urine was grossly clear. Initial radiographic studies included a supine chest film that besides a widened mediastinum was generally inconclusive. Ultrasonography in the trauma unit did not show any abnormal fluid collection. The initial hematocrit value was 39.5% and blood gas pH was 7.37 with a base deficit of 3.8. Meanwhile the patient started complaining of nausea and several blood-spotted vomiting episodes were noted. An investigation in the direction of a traumatic brain injury was conducted with a standard protocol head Computed Tomography (CT) scan. No evidences of midline shift were observed. The presence of a possible intracranial hematoma or a cranial bone fracture was ruled out. Notable oedema of the facial soft tissues, without however underlining fractures, was an additional finding. Approximately, six hours after the initial imaging evaluation, the persistence of patient’s symptoms i.e. vomiting as well as the migration of pain into the lower thorax dictated an additional workup. A second chest x-ray was obtained. (Figures . An elevated left hemi-diaphragm with the stomach in the left chest was observed. Abdominal CT scan confirmed the presence of a left-sided diaphragmatic tear with herniation of abdominal context within the left hemi-thorax. (Figures .
The patient underwent emergency laparotomy via a midline incision where a near total herniation of the stomach into the left hemithorax was observed. No resection was necessary as there were no ischemic changes or signs of perforation of the involved organ. The stomach was then successfully reduced into the abdomen revealing the hernia opening about 5 cm in length. (Figures . A primary repair with interrupted non-absorbable sutures was carried out without the use of a prosthetic mesh. (Figures . The relatively small size of the hernia opening was the main argument for this approach. A chest tube was not necessary as pleura was not violated and a pneumothorax was not present. Operating time was 45 minutes. The patient had an uneventful postoperative period and was discharged on the fifth postoperative day.