A 52-year-old man arrived at the emergency department with a chief complaint of right-sided weakness since 3 h. He had a history of hypertension. Neurological examination revealed right-sided hemiparesis (manual muscle test grade of 3 in the right arm and 4 in the right leg; grade 0 meaning no strength, grade 5 full strength) and hypoesthesia. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 4. His blood pressure was 166/109 mm Hg. To avoid delaying thrombolysis, we first chose non-contrast CT to exclude intracranial hemorrhage. Initial head CT revealed no intracranial hemorrhage and no early ischemic changes and an old lacunar cerebral infarction in the left putamen . The prothrombin time/international normalized ratio and the activated partial thromboplastin time were normal. Intravenous treatment with tenecteplase of 16 mg (0.25 mg/kg) was started 3.8 h after stroke onset. CTA of the head and neck was performed using 50 ml of intravenous iopamidol-370 and flow rate of 4.0 ml/s 0.5 h after IVT. The CTA showed bilateral mild to moderate atherosclerosis of the carotid and fenestration of the left proximal middle cerebral artery without any hemodynamically significant stenosis or occlusion of the carotid and major intracranial arteries . Then, he was transferred to the stroke unit for further evaluation.
At about 1.5 h after CTA, the right-sided hemiparesis deteriorated with a manual muscle test grade of 1 in the right arm and 2 in the right leg, accompanied by drowsiness, aphasia, and urinary incontinence. Immediate head CT showed hyperdense lesions with mild space-occupying effect in the left basal ganglia and both lateral ventricles, which.
had a mean Hounsfield unit (HU) of 55 (range from 24 HU to 79 HU) . He was transferred to our department for further treatment. The follow-up CT after 5 h showed that the hyperdensity in the left basal ganglia and lateral ventricles was reduced in size. A mild hyperdensity of the right posterior insular cortex was found . Two days later, CT showed that the hyperdense lesions in the lateral ventricles had almost completely disappeared and only a small amount remained in the basal ganglia and insular, without obvious surrounding edema and mass effect . The hyperdensity in the right posterior insular cortex remained, probably representing a mild HT . Only some scattered small petechiae could be seen in the left infarcted area on CT eight days after intravenous thrombolytic treatment . The patient was improving with physical, occupational and speech therapies during hospitalization and was eventually discharged to a rehabilitation center.