We report the case of an 8-year-old male child who presented to the neurology department with complaints of headache and vomiting for 3 months. Physical examination did not reveal any focal neurological deficits. The patient was referred to neurosurgery and underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . The imaging findings revealed a well-defined supratentorial cyst measuring approximately 4 × 5.5 × 6 cm located in the left occipital region. The cyst was isointense to CSF in all sequences, with faint isointensity in the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence, and was surrounded by a thin hypointense rim in T2* and T2WI. Minimal edema was noted anterior to the cyst, and there was no evidence of abnormal enhancement after contrast injection. However, the 3D thin slices showed meningeal enhancement around the upper margin of the lesion, suggesting that the cyst was located between meningeal layers. The posterior wall of the cyst appeared irregular and was associated with prominent enhancement at adjacent meninges, with irregular erosions of the adjacent occipital bone. The cyst was causing pressure effects on the straight and superior venous sinuses and the splenium of the corpus callosum and left lateral ventricle, and was deviating the midline to the right by approximately 8 mm. Radiological investigations of the chest and abdomen did not reveal any abnormalities.
The patient underwent a craniotomy . While retracting the bone, a thin layer of periosteal layer of the dura covering a cyst was noticed. The dura was gently retracted, and the cyst was visualized. No rupture was noted, and the cyst was successfully removed, leaving the inner layer of the dura intact. This gentle maneuver during the craniotomy is essential to avoid any eventual rupture of any superficial cyst that could be located anywhere under the bone flap. Postoperatively patients had a completely normal neurological examination, he was referred to internal medicine for medical treatment by albendazole. The follow-up lasted for 3 months without any complications .