A 73-year-old, 153-cm, 50-kg female was scheduled to undergo a robot-assisted right upper lobectomy for lung cancer. She had undergone a lingula-sparing left upper lobectomy 5 years before. A chest X-ray revealed angulation of the left main bronchus with a 3.4-cm distance from the trachea to the angulation point, 127° T-MB angle, and 132° PL-DL angle , which did not meet the angle criteria for remarkable angulation. Therefore, a standard left-sided DLT was selected.
A thoracic epidural catheter was placed. After induction of general anesthesia with propofol, remifentanil, and rocuronium, a standard 35-Fr left-sided DLT (Portex Blue Line®, Smith Medical, Minneapolis, MN) was correctly placed with the video-assisted laryngoscope (McGrath MAC®, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) and a bronchoscope. The outlet of the bronchial port was partly faced with the bronchial wall. Test OLV with pressure-controlled ventilation with a peak pressure 20 cm H2O and positive end-expiratory pressure 4 cm H2O achieved a tidal volume above 250 mL while she was placed in the supine position. After placement in the left lateral position, test OLV could achieve a tidal volume above 200 mL. Although the tube outlet seemed almost fully faced with the bronchial wall, the bronchoscope could be advanced into the bronchus by flexing its tip. However, as soon as OLV was attempted after she was repositioned in the lateral jackknife position with the lowest chest raised and the lower trunk lowered by a flexed operating table , the tidal volume decreased to less than 50 mL. Adequate manual OLV was impossible. Bronchoscopically, the outlet was obstructed by the bronchial wall, and the bronchoscope could not be advanced beyond the tube outlet.
Immediately, the jackknife position was released, and adequate manual OLV became possible. The tube was exchanged for a 37-Fr left-sided DLT with a flexible wire-reinforced tip and a narrow bronchial cuff (Silbroncho®, Fuji Systems, Tokyo, Japan) , using an airway exchange catheter and the video-assisted laryngoscope while she remained in the lateral position. Further, under bronchoscopic guidance, the tube tip was placed below the angulation point and above the secondary carina so that the secondary carina was seen in front of the tube outlet. Thereafter, a tidal volume during OLV remained above 250 mL even after repositioning in the lateral jackknife position. The scheduled robotic surgery was completed within 146 min under combined general and epidural anesthesia. She was extubated 9 min after the surgery and discharged from the hospital on the fourth postoperative day.