A 29 years old female proband experienced an episode of venous thrombosis at the age of 18. The thrombosis of left deep femoral vein occurred at the background of oral contraceptives. She also had a family history of thrombosis - father and grandmother had had thromboembolic events . The proband was diagnosed with primary AT deficiency type I based on coagulation profile. Her main concern was to determine the hereditary nature of AT deficiency; she was highly interested in prospective and reproductive genetic counseling and planning for pregnancy. No DNA testing had been performed prior to our counseling.
The proband’s phenotype was unremarkable, no findings specific for syndromic or metabolic diseases were made. The level of antithrombin was measured routinely by colorimetric method (CS-5100i, Sysmex, “Berichrom Antithrombin III” kit). Mutation screening in the coding and adjacent intronic areas of the SERPINC1 gene was performed by PCR-based bi-directional Sanger sequencing: oligoprimer design was performed in the Laboratory of medical genetics with PrimerQuest and NCBI Primer Blast tools; Sanger sequencing was performed on Applied Biosystems™ 3730xl DNA Analyzer, followed by sequence analysis with Chromas DNA Sequencing Software. Bioinformatic resources PolyPhen2, SIFT, Mutation Taster, NetGene2, and NetNGlyc 1.0 Server were used for in silico analysis of genetic variants. Databases “1000 Genomes”, “dbSNP”, and “Exome Variant Server” were used to evaluate the frequency of detected variant. Assessment of clinical significance of the detected variant was evaluated according to Joint Consensus Recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology . SWISS-MODEL integrated service was used for SERPINC1-W221S protein modeling [–]. We also used NGlycPred Server to evaluate the probability of glycosylation occurring at a newly created site.
In the proband the residual antithrombin level was found to be significantly decreased down to 44–48% (AT deficiency type I) in independent repetitive measurements. Repetitive measurements were performed in order to confirm the low level of antithrombin in our patient and to rule out the artificially low results. A new genetic variant c.662G > C (p.W221S) in 4 exon of the SERPINC1 gene was detected in the proband. Cascade family screening was performed; genetic variant c.662G > C (p.W221S) was found in the symptomatic father of the proband and was absent in the healthy sister. Variant c.662G > C (p.W221S) had not previously described in the literature and was absent in the “1000 Genomes” and other available databases. PolyPhen2, Mutation Taster and SIFT resources characterize c.662 G > C (p.W221S) as probably damaging; no possible splicing effect was detected.
To improve the predictive value of the variant we proceeded with in silico analysis. Loss and acquisition of the glycosylation sites were both described in AT deficiency. Consequently, we analyzed glycosylation pattern in wt-AT and in W221S-AT using NetNGlyc 1.0 resource. According to NetNGlyc 1.0 Server prediction, p.W221S could create an additional glycosylation site .
To evaluate the possibility of glycosylation occurring at a 219–221 site in the mutated SERPINC1 protein we built a model of it using a SWISS-MODEL service and analyzed it with NGlycPred Server. Both protein models with and without ligands were analyzed. According to NGlycPred Server prediction, the newly created 219–221 glycosylation site will not be glycosylated .
Our classification of the c.662 G > C (p.W221S) variant was based on familial screening, population data from open-access databases (Exome Sequencing Project, 1000 Genomes, ExAC) and in silico analysis. We also assume that a PP4 criterion is applicable to our case, because clinical findings in our patient are specific for hereditary AT deficiency which is a monogenic disorder. No functional studies are available for this variant.
The proband was diagnosed with AT I deficiency, which is highly likely to be of hereditary nature. Based on all the evidence we classify the c.662 G > C (p.W221S) variant as a variant of unknown clinical significance.