A 16-year-old female came with mid backache since 3 months with bilateral lower limb weakness and urinary incontinence since 5 days. The backache was localized initially, gradually progressive aggravated since the past 5 days. The backache was not associated with any constitutional symptoms but the patient reported that the pain worsened at night. She noticed weakness while getting down the stairs 5 days ago and had difficulty in maintaining her balance while walking. Her symptoms rapidly progressed over 2 days and she was unable to walk without support with increased tightness in her lower limbs and also had urinary frequency and urge incontinence. She denies any history of trauma or fall. She gave a history of having undergone an surgical instrumented intervention in the mid back region for similar complaints 1 year ago. She does not report any history of trauma. She was brought on a wheel chair to our emergency department. On physical examination, the neurological examination of the upper limb along with the higher motor functions was found to be normal. The lower limbs were found to be spastic. Power in both the lower limbs was found to be 1/5. There was impairment in the touch and the pain sensations as well. Sensory level was found to be D10. The X-ray done of 1 year back was suggestive of the corrective measures taken for ver-tebral hemangioma . The patient was then subjected to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The axial and the sagittal T2 images of the MRI had high intensity signals in the extra osseous portion of D9 compressing the cord, indicating of vertebral hemangioma. This lesion was causing spinal cord compression, ultimately leading to acute onset paraplegia .
The decision was taken by the consulting orthopedic surgeons to manage the case with surgical intervention. The patient underwent arterial embolization 12 h before surgery. Decompression with long segment instrumentation was performed (, ). On the 14th post-operative day, the patient had improved neurology with complete sensory recovery and Grade 2 power in right lower limb and Grade 1 power in the left lower limb. Histopathology report confirmed the findings correlating with that of hemangioma . At 6-month follow-up after aggressive rehabilitation, the neurology of the patient improves to Grade 3 power in the left lower limb and Grade 4 power in the right lower limb. However, the spasticity persisted but was reduced. The sphincteric control was also found to be fair at 6-month follow-up.