A 54-year-old woman presented at our hospital had left knee pain and gradually uncomfortable for 5 years. Symptoms rapidly worsened with limited activity in the last 5 months. The patient suffered from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura which needed low-dosage oral prednisone (5 mg for three times per day) 6 years ago. Recently, she was frequently suffering from pain on the lateral side of the knee during long time walk and stair performance.
Physical examination: There was focal tenderness over the lateral femoral condyle of the left knee. The physical examination elicited severely knee pain of the lateral side on extremes of range of motion, as well as during valgus stress test on the knee, but range of motion was not significantly limited. The EuroQol five-dimension (EQ-5D) quality of life score was 0.587, Knee Society score (KSS) was 64 and WOMAC score was 38.
Preoperative radiographs: Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed avascular necrosis of the lateral femoral condyle and bilateral femoral head necrosis . According to the Ficat-Arlet classification (modified version) [, ], this knee osteonecrosis was classified as stage IV.
The diagnosis was secondary osteonecrosis of the lateral condyle and Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Due to the presence of a large lesion limited to lateral femoral condyle, no evidence of joint space narrowing in the medial tibia-femoral compartment, and intact cruciate and collateral ligaments, the therapeutic treatment was fixed bearing lateral unicompartmental knee arthroplasty (LINK German). General anesthesia combined with midthigh saphenous nerve block was used for the operation. The knee was exposed via a lateral parapatellar approach to achieving a good view. Osteonecrosis of the distal aspect of the femur produces a large segment of dead bone (approximately 8.17 cm2) on the weight-bearing portion of the lateral femoral condyle . A large amount of necrotic bone, which mainly located on the posterior portion of femoral condyle, was completely removed down to the bleeding bed of bone by a spatula. Then we drilled several holes on the necrotic bone bed and filled the large bone defect with cement, which facilitated a solid initial fixation for cemented prosthesis. The rest of procedures was performed according to the lateral UKA operation manual. After the surgery, we enjoined her to avoid excessive knee flexion and intense activity in the early stage after surgery.
Follow-up: The patient was evaluated clinically and radiographically at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year postoperatively and on an annual basis thereafter unless a problem arose. She could walk without ambulation aid shortly after the operation on the surgery day by virtue of rapid anesthetic resuscitation from general anesthesia combined with midthigh saphenous nerve block. Postoperative radiographic imaging showed optimal size and precise position of the prosthesis. On the 2nd day after surgery, she felt significant pain relief and VAS pain score improved from 7 to 2. Her left knee range of motion (ROM) was at 0° to 90° . The patient could unlimitedly walk for hours, go up and down stairs freely and achieved satisfactory knee joint function with ROM of 0° to 120° at 6 weeks after the operation. Improving joint function provided a physical, mental and emotional boost to the patient. She could return to work and sport at two months postoperatively. The EQ-5D score was 1, the KSS and WOMAC score were 91, 20 respectively at the latest follow-up. The total follow-up period was 1 year and there was no pain, loosening, fracture, or wear of the prosthesis.