A 69-year-old Japanese man underwent treatment for liver dysfunction 3 years after aortic valve replacement. Later, rapid elevation in his serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level was recorded and he was readmitted to determine the etiology. His body temperature was 36 °C, blood pressure 164/65 mmHg, and pulse rate was 66/minute. Laboratory data revealed mild anemia and liver-renal injury: white blood cells (WBC) 4600/uL, hemoglobin 9.7 g/dL, platelet 18.9 × 104/dL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 0.29 mg/dL, ALP 1138 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 40 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 37 U/L, and γ glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP) 298 U/L. His blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 22.4 mg/dL, creatinine 1.14 mg/dL, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 45.6 seconds, and prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) 2.67. He also had a past history of duodenal ulcer perforation and was currently being treated with warfarin, angiotensin receptor blocker, and proton pump inhibitor. In addition, he was taking orally administered ursodeoxycholic acid for unknown liver function disorder. He had no alcohol consumption or tobacco smoking history and no relevant family history.
A plain radiograph showed no significant findings, but computed tomography (CT) revealed an enhanced tumor within the hilar bile duct and dilatation of the left hepatic duct , which are typical findings for hilar cholangiocarcinoma. In addition, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed tumor shadow in his bile duct, and the cytology confirmed malignant cells in the bile . As no lymph node and distant metastases were detected, we inserted endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD) to reduce jaundice as preparation for surgery. We performed extended left hepatectomy with resection of his bile duct; his postoperative course was good without severe complications. After 3 months postoperatively, he was readmitted for subacute cholangitis and obstructive jaundice. Immediately, percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography drainage (PTCD) was performed, followed by cholangiography that exhibited the intrabiliary tumor growth in the remnant liver.
Simultaneously, histological examination of resected specimens revealed tumor growth in the hilar duct across the left hepatic duct . Microscopic findings at the same site revealed a dilated bile duct filled with well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma . On immunohistochemical examination, tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 20 but negative for CK7 . Furthermore, CK18 as control and CDX2 were stained. Although these findings were not typical of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, hepatic metastasis from another primary lesion was strongly suspected [, ]. Furthermore, CT revealed an enhanced tumor-like lesion at the descending colon, followed by diagnosis of type 2 cancer in total colonography. Then, left hemicolectomy was performed; the immunohistochemical-identified feature matched with an intrabiliary tumor. Meanwhile, the PTCD fluid turned bloody, which was considered to indicate bleeding from a residual bile duct tumor . Accordingly, we planned chemotherapy with orally administered capecitabine but our patient experienced a spike fever because of refractory cholangitis. Thus, we abandoned chemotherapy and initiated radiotherapy to stop the tumor bleeding around the hilar bile duct. After completing radiotherapy (total 50 Gy) for approximately 1 month, we observed an improvement in his liver function because of tumor shrinkage. Unfortunately, the effects were short-lived, intrabiliary growth and cholangitis rebooted after 1 month leading to his death due to septic liver failure . Autopsy revealed a remnant tumor in the bile duct , but no noticeable nodular metastasis was observed, except for a single small metastasis in the lower lobe of his left lung.