A 53-year-old Caucasian woman with unremarkable clinical history underwent a training for advanced scuba diving without any specific clinical evaluation, except for a standard visit with the GP and an electrocardiogram, both resulted normal, as required by Italian legislation for non-competitive sports activities. She had already completed a basic scuba diving course (maximum depth of 18 m) without any problem. Once surfaced after her first dive at 30 m, the woman displayed a transient congested cough and rales disappearing after a few minutes. Roughly 15 min into her second dive, the woman started experiencing nausea. Her instructor assisted her in conducting a swift ascent. While at a depth of 12 m, the woman’s condition deteriorated rapidly. Upon reaching the surface, she experienced intense bouts of coughing and proceeded to vomit a yellowish mucus. Subsequently, she lost consciousness. When emergency services arrived, the patient had no pulse and no shockable rhythm. She was successfully resuscitated through basic life support manoeuvers but did not regain consciousness. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan of the brain was suggestive of anoxic brain damage, while there was no evidence of air embolism.
At the time of hospitalization, an echocardiogram was not immediately performed because the woman promptly underwent oxygen therapy in a hyperbaric chamber. Troponin values showed pathological levels (T 416.0 ng/L) while, in the following 2 days, two echocardiograms were performed, documenting respectively a non-dilated left ventricle with wall thickness at higher normal values, with hypokinesia of the base segments and hyperkinesia of the apical segments (suspected reverse Takotsubo), and then, an akinesia of the basal segments and normal contractility of the apex. Both examinations, however, did not show signs of HCM.
From the interview with the family, it emerged that the patient did not suffer from pathologies and did not usually take medications. The use of oral contraceptives was also excluded, and no history of familial cardiomyopathies was reported.
After 4 days in the intensive care unit, brain death was declared.
Because of the suspicion of cardiac hypertrophy on the echocardiogram, a post-mortem magnetic resonance scan was performed. The exam confirmed LV concentric hypertrophy ( and ) and showed myocardial fibrosis in the most hypertrophied area as well as extensive oedema (as a sign of acute myocardial damage; ).
On macroscopic examination, the heart weighed 300 g and wall thickness was up to 20 mm (in the basal septum) and 18 mm (in the basal anterior and lateral segments; ). No abnormalities of the heart valves or coronary arteries were noted.
Histological examination of the myocardial tissue showed diffuse hypertrophy and disarray of cardiomyocytes with foci of fibrosis and mid-adventitial thickening of subendocardial arterioles .
In conclusion, the autopsy findings combined with evidence provided by microscopic examinations of the lungs have allowed us to highlight the presence of a massive acute pulmonary oedema. This condition was deemed to be secondary to the rapid ascent from the dive, which, however, was carried out by the woman due to the acute cardiac symptoms she had developed.