An Italian Caucasian 28-year-old woman was transported by ambulance to the emergency room (ER) on 27 July 2019, due to sudden and progressive dyspnoea, epigastric pain, and palpitations occurring while she was at the beach. The patient denied relevant pathological medical history except for short-lasting episodes of palpitations. She was on no regular medication and denied substance abuse.
Early medical examination in the ER revealed paleness, cold sweat, epistaxis, and signs of pulmonary oedema due to a new-onset atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response (170 b.p.m.); blood pressure (BP) was 230/110 mmHg and SpO2 was 96%.
Blood tests revealed leucocytosis, hyperglycaemia (309 mg/dL—normal range 70–110 mg/dL) and troponin T elevation (151 ng/L—normal range 0–14 ng/L). Blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis. Electrocardiogram revealed ST-segment depression in the lower lateral leads. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed too, showing 33% left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) with diffuse akinesia.
The patient was sedated, intubated and mechanically ventilated. Polypharmacological therapy, including amiodarone, bisoprolol, nitroglycerine, furosemide, ticagrelor, acetylsalicylic acid, heparin, ceftriaxone, and pantoprazole was started.
The patient was subsequently transferred to a II level emergency department. At her arrival, she presented with anisocoria, BP was 220/100 mmHg, heart rate was 160, and SpO2 was 74%. Blood gas analysis showed persistent severe metabolic acidosis with elevated lactate levels (5.8 mmol/L—normal value <2 mmol/L). A new TTE was performed, showing 20–30% LVEF. Chest X-ray revealed bilateral symmetrical and diffuse alveolar opacities .
Given the sustained hypertension (mean arterial pressure 140 mmHg), despite sedation and maximal pharmacological therapy, resulting in progressive haemodynamic impairment with low ejection fraction, severe pulmonary oedema, and metabolic acidosis, the patient underwent urgent venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) in the cath lab. Coronary angiography did not show any coronary artery stenosis. A percutaneous left ventricular assist device (IMPELLA) was implanted. Three endomyocardial biopsies were obtained, subsequently turning out to be negative for myocarditis but suggestive of catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy. The patient was then admitted to the cardiothoracic intensive care unit.
In the following day, she developed thrombocytopenia (platelet count of 33000 plt/mm3—normal range 150 000–450 000 plt/mm3) and acute kidney injury requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT).
On 29 July, sedation was transiently stopped. Neurological evaluation revealed right hemiplegia. Cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan showed hypodense (ischaemic) bilateral parieto-occipital areas and a hypodense subcortical area in the left frontal lobe . Abdominal CT scan revealed a 5 cm tumour of the left adrenal gland compatible with pheochromocytoma .
On 30 and 31 July, ECMO and IMPELLA were respectively removed, due to a gradually recovery of the LVEF. Hypertensive crisis and episodes of atrial fibrillation were treated with urapidil, esmolol, and amiodarone. CT scan was repeated confirming the previous findings.
As it was not possible to determine urinary metanephrines due to the ongoing RRT, on 1 August, plasmatic catecholamines were dosed, showing increased adrenaline and noradrenaline levels and therefore confirming pheochromocytoma diagnosis.
On 2 August, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain confirmed the presence of bilateral parieto-occipital ischaemic lesions of recent onset. Ischaemic lesions of the right cerebellum, right centrum semiovale and left frontal subcortical region where also found. Intense vasogenic oedema accompanied these lesions , thus suggesting the diagnosis of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES).
On 5 August, the patient was transferred from the cardiothoracic intensive care unit to the Department of Shock and Trauma of the same hospital. Neurological evaluation showed persistence of the right hemiplegia. She was still sedated, intubated and mechanically ventilated. Sedation with sufentanil, propofol, and dexmedetomidine improved BP control. Moreover, antihypertensive therapy with doxazosin 16 mg/day and labetalol by continuous intravenous infusion was started, leading to rapid BP and heart rate control. Due to persistent oligo anuria, RRT was continued.
The following days, haemodynamic stability was reached: labetalol infusion was stopped and doxazosin administration was reduced up to 4 mg × 2/day.
On 13 August, left videolaparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed. Histological analysis confirmed the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. The same day, doxazosin treatment was stopped. On 14 August, the patient was extubated. She was discharged from our department on 22 August. She was conscious; no residual focal deficit could be detected at neurological examination. She was breathing spontaneously. RRT had been stopped due to autonomous diuresis.
On 25 August, she was discharged from hospital. TTE was repeated before discharge, revealing complete recovery of left ventricular systolic function (LVEF 58%). Grade I diastolic dysfunction persisted, as suggested by E/A reversal (ratio < 1.0).