A previously healthy 9-month-old local Chinese boy presented to emergency department with acute onset of generalised seizures. He was well except for mild upper respiratory tract symptoms with intermittent low-grade fever a week prior. There was no reported history of trauma. The seizures had started at his childcare centre after receiving a bath and milk feed. Emergency Medical Services (EMS) was activated and arrived approximately 20 min later. His childcare teacher, who had no prior basic life support training, commenced chest compressions and rescue breathing prior while waiting for EMS, as he appeared off-colour during the seizures. Paramedics on arrival assessed that he had a pulse and cardiac output; therefore he was given rescue breaths via bag-valve-mask ventilation en-route to the nearest emergency department.

He was brought to the nearest general hospital with no specialised paediatric services. His vital signs were: heart rate of 144 beats/minute, blood pressure of 130/72 mmHg, SpO2 was 83% on bag-valve-mask ventilation by paramedics, and axillary temperature was 36 degrees Celsius. As he continued to have more generalised tonic-clonic seizures, he was intubated with rapid-sequence-intubation and mechanically ventilated thereafter. He also received 10 ml/kg of normal saline fluid bolus for persistent tachycardia and poor peripheral perfusion. He was started on midazolam infusion and was transferred to our Children’s Emergency for further management.

At our Children’s Emergency, about 45 min after initial resuscitation, his vital signs were reflective of ongoing sympathetic overdrive. He was severely tachycardic (heart rate was 180 beats/minute) and markedly hypertensive despite repeated non-invasive blood pressure measurements from all limbs (blood pressure was 191/120 mmHg). He also had frequent desaturations to SpO2 80 to 90% (on FiO2 100% via bag-and-mask ventilation) with audible leak. He was poorly perfused but central pulses were present. Bilateral diffuse crackles were heard on lung auscultation, and there was large amount of frothy endotracheal tube (ETT) secretions that required frequent tube suctioning. Dual heart sounds were appreciated with no murmur. Liver edge was felt 1 cm below right subcostal margin, and no organomegaly was noted. Neurological examination revealed generalised hypotonia, areflexia, with no plantar response elicited, likely due to residual muscle relaxant effect. There were no external injuries found. Fundoscopy was not possible as his pupils were pinpoint due to ongoing midazolam infusion. Further history from his childcare teacher and both parents did not suggest an apparent unifying diagnosis for his clinical presentation then. Computed topography (CT) scan of the brain showed acute subdural haemorrhages along the posterior falx, left tentorial leaflet and overlying both high parietofrontal convexities. No significant mass effect, hydrocephalus, brain herniation or acute territorial infarct was noted. As he continued to have frequent recurrent desaturations despite ETT suctioning which by then yielded blood-stained frothy secretions, he was re-intubated with Size 4.5 cuff ETT (previous ETT was Size 4, uncuff), as these events were attributed initially to high leak and resultant inadequate ventilation. Prior to transfer to the paediatric intensive care unit (PICU), his blood pressure had returned to normal values, but his SpO2 continued to fluctuate between 80 to 90% on FiO2 100% despite high ventilatory pressures. Neuroprotective measures were instituted.

On transfer to the PICU, he continued to have persistent desaturation (SpO2 70–80%) despite adequate ventilation of the patient. Chest X-ray showed bilateral pulmonary airspace shadowing and infiltrates suggesting pulmonary oedema. Oxygenation index ranged from 22 to 37.8 in the next 6 h. The patient also continued to have brief clinical seizures and was treated with anti-epileptic medication. He also had worsening haemodynamics, necessitating commencement of inotropic support with adrenaline infusion of 0.03 to 0.1mcg/kg/min to maintain adequate blood pressure.

Bedside transthoracic 2D-echocardiogram subsequently showed moderate to severe reduction of LV systolic function and moderately reduced right ventricular systolic function. LV ejection fraction (biplane Simpson) was scored at 31% and fractional shortening was 25%. Hypokinesia involving predominantly the mid LV to LV apex was noted with a qualitatively dilated left atrium and mildly dilated LV. Normal origins of left and right coronary arteries were seen. There was no structural abnormality. Serum creatine kinase (CK) and creatine kinase-MB (CKMB) were normal at 87 U/L and 5.1 μg/L respectively, but troponin I was elevated at 392 ng/L. N-terminal proB-type natriuretic peptide (NT-ProBNP) was normal at 1223 pg/ml. 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with no ST elevation or T-wave inversion.

With the 2D-echocardiogram findings and abovementioned initial investigations, we narrowed the differentials to acquired causes: acute viral myocarditis versus Takotsubo cardiomyopathy triggered by a hyperacute stress response after an acute severe brain injury accompanied by status epilepticus.

Intravenous furosemide was given to offload a dilated LV, and milrinone infusion was started at 0.5 to 0.7mcg/kg/min to reduce LV afterload. The patient continued to deteriorate with type 2 respiratory failure due to refractory pulmonary oedema secondary to LV systolic failure despite best medical management. Within 10 h of admission to the PICU, veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) support was initiated. ECMO flow ranged from 0.7 to 0.98 LPM (Cardiac index of 2.0 to 2.1 based on his basal surface area). He was peripherally cannulated via right internal jugular vein and right common carotid artery. The extracorporeal circuit was anticoagulated with systemic heparin. There was no haematological complication, even though he had coexisting bilateral subdural haemorrhages on admission. The pulmonary radiological changes on serial Chest X-rays improved remarkably within less than 24 h. Repeat 2D-echocardiogram done in less than 24 h from ECMO initiation also showed satisfactory biventricular free wall function with mildly dyskinetic interventricular septum, which was significantly improved when comparing with the admission scan. Investigations were performed to evaluate for possible infective myocarditis and encephalitis, and all of these yielded negative results (blood and urine cultures, and viral PCR studies). He was on ECMO for total of 57 h, and was subsequently successfully decannulated.

This was a dangerously ill 9-month-old boy who was previously well presenting with several clinical problems – firstly, convulsive status epilepticus as a result of acute severe brain injury for which CT imaging revealed bilateral acute subdural haemorrhages despite not having a known history of trauma; secondly, rapidly deteriorating cardiogenic shock with resultant flash pulmonary oedema resulting in respiratory failure despite being on high ventilatory support, finally requiring ECMO support. Possible differential diagnoses considered for his acute brain injury were that of underlying undiagnosed bleeding diathesis, intracranial vascular malformation, aneurysm or neoplasia, cerebral infections, rare metabolic disorders such as glutaric aciduria, and lastly non-accidental injury (NAI). His initial coagulation profile and full blood count were both normal, and had no previous or family history suggestive of an underlying bleeding diathesis. His clinical presentation, initial white blood cell count and inflammatory markers did not suggest bacterial sepsis or meningitis, and later viral studies did not suggest viral encephalitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain that was done 2 days after decannulation from ECMO showed bilateral subdural haematomas and mild sulcal subarachnoid haemorrhage. There was diffuse symmetrical white and grey matter signal abnormality and focal areas of parenchymal swelling. These features were suggestive of diffuse brain injury, which may have been a result of hypoxic-ischaemic injury, post-seizure changes, toxic and metabolic derangements or post-trauma changes. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) brain scan and transcranial doppler (TCD) of major cerebral vessels were both normal. Comprehensive metabolic workup did not reveal any underlying metabolic disorder. Slit-lamp examination of the eyes, which was done on the second day of admission, revealed extensive acute bilateral intra-retinal haemorrhages, raising the possibility of shaken baby syndrome. A full skeletal survey did not reveal any other bone fractures. A thorough investigation by the local justice system did not uncover any proof of NAI at home or at his childcare centre.