The first donor was a 40-year-old man who suffered brain death due to intracranial hemorrhage after a traffic accident. His terminal serum creatinine level was 0.8 mg/dL and his Kidney Donor Profile Index score was 27%. The first recipient was a 45-year-old man with a 20-year history of hypertension and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) due to hypertensive nephropathy, who had received regular hemodialysis for 2 years. In June 2005, at another hospital, single renal transplantation was performed in the right iliac fossa, with a cold ischemia time of 5 h 10 min and a warm ischemia time of 1 h 48 min. After reperfusion, the recipient immediately passed urine. He was administered an immunosuppressive regimen comprising methylprednisolone, cyclosporine, everolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil, and he was discharged 10 days after the transplantation with a serum creatinine level of 1.4 mg/dL. At regular follow-up over the next 6 months, his serum creatinine levels remained within the normal range.
Over the following 9 years, the recipient showed no episodes of rejection, and his serum creatinine levels and creatinine clearance rates were within the normal ranges . In 2010, he underwent coronary percutaneous angioplasty and stent placement for coronary artery disease, and thereafter he regularly took aspirin. However, in June 2014, he suffered a right cerebral aneurysm rupture that resulted in brain death. At that time, his serum creatinine level was 0.94 mg/dL and the creatinine clearance rate was 90 mL/min. Before his death, the patient (while completely conscious) and his family had expressed a wish for his organs to be donated; we therefore harvested the transplanted kidney for reuse.
The second recipient of the kidney was a 40-year-old man with ESRD caused by diabetic nephropathy, who had been undergoing hemodialysis for 5 years and had been added to the waiting list for renal transplantation at that time. His blood group was the same as that of the initial donor and the first recipient (A rhesus positive). There were four human leukocyte antigen mismatches with the original donor and two with the second donor . Crossmatching with the initial donor was not possible because of the long time that had elapsed since the initial transplantation, but crossmatching with the second donor was negative. A biopsy demonstrated the quality of the donated kidneys: the Remuzzi score was 1 and the Kidney Donor Profile Index score was 74%.
Kidney transplantation was performed in June 2014, with a cold ischemia time of 4 h 12 min and a warm ischemia time of 1 h 12 min. After transplantation, the recipient was administered an induction immunosuppressive regimen comprising basiliximab, high-dose methylprednisolone, and cyclosporine, subsequently shifted gradually to a maintenance immunosuppressive regimen comprising prednisolone, tacrolimus, everolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil. The second recipient was discharged 13 days after the transplantation, and his serum creatinine level was measured at follow-up every 3 months. As of June 2018, his renal function has remained stable, with a serum creatinine level of around 1.24 mg/dL . There have been no episodes of rejection, and the patient has remained in a good clinical condition.