A 9-year-old boy was admitted to the paediatric department because of an ongoing headache that had been getting worse in the weeks preceding the hospitalisation.
The headache was the main symptom, it was ongoing and had been getting worse in the past weeks. The headache started eight months prior to the visit with a frequency of one per month, then escalated to one per week and has been present every day in the last week. He described it as a dull non-spreading pain above the right eyebrow, with an intensity of 5/10. The episodes lasted five to 15 min and usually disappeared after a short rest. He had no need for analgesics. Several times, he was also woken up during the night by the headaches and vomiting. He denied any history of nausea, flashing of light or scotoma.
The boy had no history of other illness except middle ear inflammation at the age of 9 months and took no medications. He had no known allergies.
At the admission, the physical examination was within normal limits, as was the neurological examination. The dilated fundus examination showed bilateral papilledema, indicating raised intracranial pressure.
Laboratory examinations were within the normal range. The haemostasis was normal, as was the blood count and the biochemistry test. The routine laboratory results were normal.
The MRI substantiated the diagnosis by showing hypointensive modality in the right part of the mesencephalic tectum, which was highly suspectful for a tectal low-grade astrocytoma. It was completely obstructing aqueduct of Sylvius, causing extensive supratentorial hydrocephalus with some reliable findings, such as enlarged third ventricle that was bulging into the sella turcica. Additionally, the periventricular hyperintensive area, effacement of cortical sulci, dilatation of lateral ventricles and intracranial hypertension with important narrowing of transverse sinuses were observed . There were no signs of a hyperdynamic CSF circulation on the MRI at the level of the aqueduct, suggesting a complete flow blockade by the tumour.