A 34-year-old female patient in the second trimester of pregnancy presented to the emergency department with complaints of moderate intensity pain in the lower abdomen, predominantly on the right side, which had been present for 3 weeks and had worsened markedly in the last 2 days. The patient did not have any other symptoms apart from the referred pain, such as fever, loss of appetite, nausea or vomiting. Given the diagnosis of abdominal pain predominantly in the right iliac fossa, laboratory tests were requested to assess inflammatory and infectious activity, and ultrasound (USG) of the total abdomen was performed in the emergency radiology department.

The USG confirmed the pregnancy without obvious changes related to the uterus, placenta and foetus. The evaluation directed to the right iliac fossa did not characterise signs suggestive of acute appendicitis, which, in this context, would be hyperecogenicity and densification of the pericecal and/or periapendicular fat, locoregional lymphadenomegaly of reactive aspect with cortical thickening and, sometimes, increased flow to colour Doppler mapping and presence of laminar free liquid or in the form of locoregional collection. The cecal appendix was thickened in the body portion, reaching 9.2 mm in maximum transverse diameter (considered normal up to about 6.0 mm) and with segmental increase in calibre in that region, without other characteristics of inflammatory nature. In the thickened region, the lumen of the appendix was collapsed, and the wall of the organ presented increased echogenicity, homogeneously, and with echotexture similar to that of fat. The appendicular compressibility was slightly reduced. In the region of the apical appendix, the outer diameter was within the normal limits (4.5 mm). Colour Doppler mapping did not show increased flow. There were also no signs of hyperecogenicity of the periapendicular fat.

Laboratory tests did not show any changes (leukocytes and C-reactive protein within normal limits). The findings of the ultrasound did not suggest an acute inflammatory process, but rather benign changes of a probable infiltrative fatty nature. An MRI was requested to complement the diagnosis.

The MRI confirmed the findings described in the USG, with focal parietal thickening of the appendix without inflammatory signs. Diffuse hypersignal of the appendix was observed in the in-phase sequence, with loss of signal in the out-phase sequence, indicating the presence of a significant amount of fat in the intracellular compartment, characteristic of lipomatosis. There was no appreciable enhancement in the appendix in the MRI examination. In view of the clinical and laboratory findings and the characteristics of the USG and the MRI, the diagnosis of lipomatosis could be confirmed. The patient was discharged with analgesia, without return of the symptoms.
