A 48-year-old woman with a non-tender firm mass in the right breast was admitted to an affiliated hospital of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences in September 2008. A palpable and immobile mass in the lower outer quarter of the right breast, approximately 3.0 cm in diameter, was revealed on examination. The mass was not attached to the skin and there was no lymph node enlargement, nipple inversion, or mass in the opposite breast. A 3.5 × 1.5 cm tumor in the lower outer part of the right breast was reported by ultrasound . So we suspected it was a breast tumor and it was surgically removed (Lumpectomy). She underwent Sentinel lymph node biopsy and stage II A invasive ductal carcinoma of the right breast with no lymph node metastasis was reported by pathological examination. Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor was estrogen receptor positive, progesterone receptor positive, and human epidermal growth factor receptor negative.
The patient received adjuvant treatment with 8 cycles of chemotherapy (4 cycles of adriamycin and cyclophosphamide, and 4 cycles of docetaxel), followed by 25 fractions of radiotherapy and because the patient’s mass was pathologically estrogen positive, the patient was eligible for adjuvant hormonal therapy. The patient was regularly monitored for breast cancer and had no problems. In March 2023, the patient’s routine laboratory test results were as follows: WBC = 22,000 (lymphocyte = 55%), hemoglobin = 13, platelet = 180,000, BUN = 15, creatinine = 1.0, ALT = 20, AST = 25, ALK = 160, and LDH = 420. The patient did not mention B symptoms (fever, weight loss, or night sweats) and the clinical examination was normal. Due to leukocytosis with a lymphocyte predominance, peripheral blood flow cytometry was performed on the patient, and the results were as follows: HLA-DR: 84.5%, CD3: 10%, CD4: 5%, CD5: 96%, CD19: 89.5%, CD20: 89.6%, CD23: 34.8%, CD45: 85%, Cd5/CD19: 89.
The patient was diagnosed with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound showed no pathological findings and based on the absence of B symptoms and disease symptoms as well as other routine laboratory tests, the patient was followed up. In July 2023, the patient had vague abdominal pain, so a comprehensive examination, tests and an abdominal and pelvic ultrasound were performed. The abdominal ultrasound detected a 3.5 cm lesion in the right kidney. To examine the lesion in more detail, we recommended computed tomography (CT) with and without contrast, and a 4 cm mass with enhancement and necrosis was reported . Based on the history of CLL, we recommended an ultrasound-guided core biopsy of the renal mass. The patient's pathology confirmed RCC . After consulting with the urology department, the patient underwent a partial nephrectomy. Postoperative pathology also confirmed clear cell RCC. The patient is being monitored periodically for renal tumors and CLL, and her general health condition is good.