This is the case of a 18-year-old woman who visited the surgery due to discomfort caused by hypertrophy of the upper lip.
No findings were found on preoperative examination and electrocardiogram (ECG) .
No specific findings were found on the patient's history.
The patient had no family or genetic disease history.
Vital signs were assessed before anesthesia induction: Blood pressure, 111/79 mmHg; HR, 94 beats/min; and SpO2, 99%.
On perioperative laboratory examinations and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level were within normal range.
She was diagnosed with hemangioma by ultrasound . Intraoperative picture, tracing with black silk to expose the surgical site during the approach to the surgical site .
Anesthesia was induced by injecting 2 mg/kg of IV propofol, ventilating with 5%–6 vol % of desflurane using a mask, and simultaneously administering remifentanil at the target site with a concentration of 2.0 ng/mL for balanced anesthesia using a target- controlled infusion pump (Orchestra®, Fresenius Vial, France). After the loss of consciousness was confirmed by a bispectral index (BIS) of less than 40, rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg IV was administered. After confirming that the muscle had appropriately relaxed, endotracheal intubation was performed. The blood pressure measured after intubation was 110/62 mmHg, and the heart rate was 59 beats/min. During the operation, the respiratory rate was controlled to maintain the end-tidal CO2 partial pressure of 32–38 mmHg, and mechanical ventilation was performed with oxygen 1 L/min and air 2 L/min. Desflurane was controlled to maintain BIS from 40 to 60. The operation proceeded normally for about 1 hour, but a constant 1:1 premature ventricular complex (PVC) was detected in the course of approaching the more profound part with more strong traction for exposure of the part , and blood pressure was decreased from 97/60 mmHg to 88/47 mmHg, respectively. The procedure was stopped after vital signs and ECG had changed. Arrhythmia disappeared shortly after traction was released, and vital signs were stabilized within a few seconds. When traction stimulation started for surgery again, bradycardia recurred with 35 PVCs.