A 45-year-old Tibetan female (actual age corrected from 35 years, as stated incorrectly in the medical records) presented with significant swelling and pain in the bilateral metacarpophalangeal and elbow joints. She reported muscle weakness in all four limbs, with slight swelling and discomfort in both knee joints and restricted range of motion in all four limbs, particularly in the right upper limb. She experienced morning stiffness lasting more than one hour and exhibited a right hand deformity with a right angle bend at the proximal interphalangeal joint of the ring finger. Eyelid swelling was also observed. Physical examination revealed 5–6 ulcerated wounds, approximately 1*2 cm in size, with yellow viscous secretions on the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of both hands. These wounds showed a trend of increasing number as well as rapid expansion and deepening. There was a longitudinal ulcerated wound, approximately 8*2 cm in size, on the right elbow joint. The periorbital area showed erythema, and scattered skin rash was observed on the back. The patient did not report any ulcers or itching. Additional observations noted severe deformity, multiple ulcerations with purulent discharge, and necrotic ulcers on the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of both hands, indicative of mechanic’s hands. The patient exhibited cyanosis of the lips, hair loss, symmetrical chest without deformities, and occasional dry and moist rales in both lungs. The spine appeared normal, and multiple joints throughout the body were tender with restricted movement. Local skin temperature was elevated.

The patient was admitted with approximately normal liver and renal function, high blood lipids, creatine kinase: 40 U/L, blood count: lymphocyte count: 0.63*10^9/L, percentage of lymphocytes: 7%, monocytes: 0.28*10^9/L, neutrophil count: 7.98*10^9/L, CRP: 83.2 mg/L. The patient’s diagnosis was not clear, and a sample of his serum was sent to an external clinical Laboratory, myositis-specific antibody profile report suggested positive anti-MDA5 antibody, titre: 1:300 (fibronectin/CBA method), positive anti-SSA/RO52 antibody. Skin biopsy: the tissue was covered with slightly hyperplastic squamous epithelium, subepithelial fibrous hyperplasia, vitellosis, and culture of multidrug-resistant organisms (Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus) in the mesenchyme, perivascular area, and wound secretion from the joints around the skin appendages. Chest CT scan half a month later showed interstitial lung lesions, and the patient was found to be suffering from new oral ulcers around 20 days. Twenty-four days later, the patient’s medical condition was controlled and stabilised, and the erythema and ulcers had subsided locally with no new eruptions, and the medical problems were basically resolved, but the patient’s right elbow lesion was large and deep, and in order to deal with all the lesions that were unable to heal on their own, the patient was transferred to the Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery of the Sichuan Provincial People’s Hospital, where he was proposed to have a debridement and skin grafting. In conclusion, the patient’s symptoms, signs, examinations and tests were highly consistent with the symptoms of this disease.9 Based on these results, we diagnosed a double-positive dermatomyositis with anti-MDA5 and anti-SSA/RO52 antibodies.


Typical Skin Ulcers
On the day of admission (2023-07-01), the patient had ulceration and crusting at the distal interphalangeal joint of the left second finger, proximal interphalangeal joint of the left fourth finger, metacarpophalangeal joints of the right second and fifth fingers. The affected areas showed exfoliation and erythema of the superficial skin, with the presence of yellow viscous secretions upon compression. There was a dark red rash at the bottom of the joint of the left foot at the first toe and on the outer side of the metatarsophalangeal joint of the left foot. A longitudinal ulcerated wound on the right elbow joint had crust formation and measured approximately 8*2cm (prior to admission, the patient had received “cauterization treatment” at a local Tibetan medicine clinic for the right elbow, but there was no significant improvement). Irregularly shaped scattered skin rashes were observed on the back, approximately 4*3cm in size, and there was noticeable erythema around both eye sockets.

On the 6th day of admission (2023-07-06), the muscles surrounding the distal interphalangeal joint of the left second finger, proximal interphalangeal joint of the left fourth finger, metacarpophalangeal joints of the right second and fourth fingers, and the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints of the right fifth finger were affected. The white joint capsule was exposed, accompanied by exfoliation and erythema of the superficial skin. Yellow viscous secretions were observed upon compression. The crusts on the longitudinal ulcerated wound of the right elbow joint broke, and yellow viscous secretions spontaneously flowed out. A new ulcerated wound, measuring 1*2 cm, had developed on the left elbow joint without purulent discharge. A fresh red rash, approximately 2*1 cm in size, appeared on the right knee joint. The condition of the skin rashes in other areas remained the same as before.

On the 11th day of admission (2023-07-11), the patient had severe purulent discharge at the site of the longitudinal ulcerated wound on the right elbow joint. The patient was advised to seek treatment at the dermatology department of our hospital for dressing changes. Some of the wounds were debrided and dressed by the dermatology department. There were scattered bruises near the ulcerated wound on the left elbow joint, and the condition of the skin rashes in other areas remained the same as before, with no new developments at the moment.

On the day of discharge (2023-07-25), the patient had ulceration at the distal interphalangeal joint of the left second finger, metacarpophalangeal joint of the right second finger, and proximal interphalangeal joint of the left fourth finger. The white joint capsule was exposed at the metacarpophalangeal joints of the right second and fourth fingers, as well as the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints of the right fifth finger. No secretions or erythema were observed at these sites.