A 37-year old female patient was admitted to the emergency room 24 h after binge eating. She had no relevant medical history but described a loss of 10 kg in 1997. At that time, she was 62kg and wanted to lose weight. She started vomiting. She also reported a stressful relationship with her partner at this period. BN remained undiagnosed during 15 years.
shows the timeline of the most relevant events of this clinical case report, and the evolution of weight and body mass index (BMI).
In the emergency room, in July 2012, the patient reported chronic abdominal pain. Physical examination at admission revealed hemodynamic stability, sepsis syndrome, and distended abdomen with defense. Laboratory test results showed high lipasemia and acute renal failure. Abdominal Computed Tomography (CT) imaging showed major gastric distension reaching the pelvis and compressing the digestive organs with no signs of pneumoperitoneum. Conservative gastric decompression was started first using a nasogastric tube aspiration that discharged almost 6.5 litres. Twenty-four hours after hospitalization, the patient exhibited tachycardia and hypotension. Increased doses of Noradrenaline were prescribed unsuccessfully. The patient was prepared for urgent laparotomy showing a large gastric distention associated with necrosis. Total gastrectomy and jejunostomy were performed. The patient was discharged 35 days after the surgical intervention. She was referred to the Department of Clinical Nutrition (Rouen, France) for the nutrition rehabilitation. She weighed 40 kg at this time. Enteral nutrition was administrated through the jejunostomy (1500 kcal/day) and well tolerated. Enteral nutrition was progressively relayed with oral nutritional supplements associated with oral food intakes. The patient reported reduction in bulimic symptoms, structured meals and weight stabilisation around 48 kg (body mass index=17.6kg/m²). At the time of first referral in our institution, the patient did not declare any fear for gaining weight or any body shape concern. She was happy with gaining weight thanks to jejunal tube feeding. On following consultations, eating disorders were routinely screened with by the self-administered French version of the SCOFF questionnaire (SCOFF-F) . This validated test is routinely used, composed of ﬁve dichotomous questions. One point is given for each “yes” answer. At least two positive answers indicate a positive SCOFF score with a sensitivity of 88.2% and a specificity of 92.5%. This screening consistently resulted in 5 negative answers. One year after total gastrectomy, jejunostomy was finally removed and the patient returned to work. She was admitted to the Digestive surgery department for occlusive syndrome, 5 years after gastrectomy. Laparoscopic viscerolysis has been done, with no complications. The patient has been discharged and maintained sufficient oral food intake. Today, she is still followed-up in the Nutrition unit at least once a year. She still has a negative SCOFF-F score, with abstinence of binge eating and compensatory behaviors (self-induced vomiting, laxative use, diuretics, compensatory exercise, fasting), structured meals and biological markers in normal range .