A 26-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department due to intense headache, chest discomfort, palpitations, and breathlessness, with 4 h of evolution.
Physical examination showed tachypnoea, tachycardia (145 b.p.m.), blood pressure of 158/95 mmHg, no fever, and oxygen saturation on room air of 92%. Cardiac auscultation was normal but pulmonary auscultation revealed bilaterally dispersed crackles. She was pale, with cold and clammy extremities and decreased capillary refill time but peripheral pulses were easily palpable.
The patient had a personal history of migraine and had been submitted to periodontal surgery on the previous day. She was medicated with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and prednisolone. No relevant family history was reported.
The electrocardiogram (EKG) revealed sinus tachycardia, left axis deviation, V4–V6 ST-segment depression, maximum 2 mm at V5, and an inverted T wave in aVL .
Transthoracic echocardiography showed severe LV systolic dysfunction with midbasal segments akinesia and hypercontractility of the apical segments (, , Video S1).
The patient underwent aortic computed tomography angiography that excluded an acute aortic syndrome, but identified signs of severe pulmonary oedema and two heterogeneous solid masses in both adrenal glands, the largest on the right adrenal gland, measuring 9.2 × 9.2 × 10.8 cm, suggestive of a bilateral pheochromocytoma .
The patient progressed with respiratory failure and shock signs with poor peripheral perfusion, oligoanuria, and arterial hyperlactacidemia (41 mg/dL; normal range≤ 18 mg/dL), despite her hypertensive profile (mean arterial pressure 110–120 mmHg). At this stage, she was submitted to mechanical ventilation. Due to the rapidly deteriorated clinical status, she was referred and transported to the closest hospital with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) capability for immediate mechanical circulatory support.
The patient remained with veno-arterial ECMO (VA-ECMO) support for 14 days and progressive recovery of LV dysfunction was observed, enabling the weaning of the VA-ECMO support from the 10th day, without use of inotropics. There were no significant changes on the EKG on the following 2 days, with regression of repolarization changes at follow-up. The peak troponin I level was 1.73 ng/mL (normal range ≤0.015 mg/dL), on the first day of hospitalization with a slow but progressive fall and subsequent normalization.
Urinary catecholamines and metanephrines in 24-h urine were elevated . Alpha-blockade was started with phenoxybenzamine and subsequently beta-blockade with metoprolol.
On the 35th day of hospitalization, open bilateral adrenalectomy was performed, without complications, and she began supplementation with gluco and mineralocorticoids. Anatomopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral pheochromocytomas. The patient was discharged on the 49th day of hospitalization with complete recovery of the left ventricular systolic function and preserved neurologic status.
After discharge, the patient performed body scintigraphy with MIBG-123 that excluded pheochromocytoma metastases or synchronous tumours, but she was diagnosed with bilateral thyroid medullary carcinoma. Total thyroidectomy was performed and the diagnose of Type 2 multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndrome was established.