A 71-year-old Japanese woman underwent a living-donor liver transplant for hepatocellular carcinoma 18 years prior to her inclusion in this case study. She was receiving TAC orally at 2 mg/day (twice daily), with a trough blood concentration of approximately 4 ng/mL and stable trough blood concentration/dose (C/D) ratio (ng/mL/mg) of approximately 2. The patient presented night sweats, anorexia, and swelling on the left side of the neck. Owing to the presence of atypical cells in her peripheral blood and a substantial decrease in her platelet count (20,000/µL), she was urgently referred to our hospital for admission, thorough examination, and treatment. The patient was diagnosed with post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease (histological type: Burkitt's lymphoma) after admission. She was managed in the intensive care unit with continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) and positive airway pressure (CPAP) for 2 weeks because of tumor collapse syndrome, left subdural hematoma, and acute kidney injury (AKI). Figure illustrates the course of this case. Upon admission, the patient presented with elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; 11,232 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT; 164 U/L) levels, indicating potential liver dysfunction. Consequently, the TAC dose was reduced from 2 to 1 mg/day. Furthermore, owing to the presence of AKI, TAC administration was temporarily discontinued. As oxygenation improved and the patient's condition progressed, cyclophosphamide–prednisolone (CP) therapy was initiated. Following CP therapy, the LDH and ALT levels decreased. Subsequently, TAC administration was resumed at 2 mg/day. The patient received two cycles of R-HyperCVAD (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and DEX) and R-MA (rituximab, methotrexate, cytarabine, and methylprednisolone) alternating therapy. DEX (33 mg/day) was administered intravenously on days 1–4 and days 11–14 of the R-HyperCVAD course. Additionally, aprepitant (APR) was administered on days 1–5 in both courses. The TAC dosage was adjusted to maintain a trough blood concentration of approximately 2 ng/mL. Fluconazole 200 mg/day was administered orally throughout the TAC-administration period.
The C/D ratio of TAC during the first course of R-HyperCVAD was initially low (1.07) on day 11, but then increased, reaching 2.57 on day 25. Similarly, during the second course of R-HyperCVAD, the C/D ratio on day 3 (in Fig. , day 57) was 2.42, but subsequently decreased to 0.92 on day 11. However, it then exhibited an upward trend, reaching 1.8 on day 18 and 2.86 on day 32. The C/D ratio of TAC on day 4 (in Fig. , day 93) of the second course of R-MA was 4.4, but decreased to 1.25 on day 11. Notably, the C/D ratio started to increase during DEX administration on days 11–14 of R-HyperCVAD treatment and did not decrease after 2 weeks, whereas it exhibited a decreasing trend during R-MA treatment. Therefore, the decrease in the C/D ratio was primarily attributed to APR rather than to DEX.