We introduced a 34-year-old man with a definitive diagnosis of KS from two years ago, with a history of trauma to the ankle from 18 days ago. His family history of venous thromboembolism (VTE) was negative. He was hospitalized in the cardiology ward to treat chest pain and dyspnea, with the New York Heart Association Classification of Heart Failure (NYHA) class III. The clinical examination at the time of admission in OR exposed a drowsy patient with a history of twice syncope from the day before, palpitation (PR = 120), sweating, chest pain, blood pressure at 80/55 mmHg (with invasive blood pressure monitoring IBP), SpO2at 85% in ambient air and 92% under oxygen, and two-sided crackles on chest auscultation. In paraclinical findings, a D-dimer test was 1700 mg/mL, ECG revealed tachycardia with RBBB, transthoracic echocardiography presented a D-shape septum due to high RV pressure, moderate to severe RV enlargement, moderate to severe RV systolic dysfunction, hypertrabeculated RV apex, at least moderate TR, TRG = 40 mmHg, severe PAH, PAP = 55 mmHg, dilated IVC with respiratory variation < 50%, visible fresh cloth in main PA, and proximal part of branches in suprasternal view. On computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the lungs, a massive embolus was reported in the main pulmonary artery as well as in the right and left main branches. The troponin was negative. The lower extremities venous Doppler ultrasound revealed normal flow and no thrombosis. Because of this massive pulmonary embolism, the patient was a candidate for surgical embolectomy. After general anesthesia and placement on the hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) in the 28-degree centigrade, pulmonary embolectomy was done . After rewarming, weaning off from the CPB was easily done, without the need for inotrope. After four hours, the patient was extubated and weaning off the ventilator with a stable hemodynamic condition. The congestive signs were retreated well using diuretic treatment. The patient was discharged from the hospital in good general condition after one week with a warfarin prescription.