The patient was 76-year-old male, right-handed, living by himself, and fully able to walk independently. His chief complaint was right shoulder pain, limited range of motion (ROM) in the right shoulder. He fell on his right shoulder while walking and injured it. He visited another hospital 3 days after the injury where he was diagnosed with dislocation of the right shoulder and received manual reduction followed by immobilization with a sling. Due to persistent pain and limited ROM of the right shoulder, plain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)was performed and revealed a massive rotator cuff tear. He was then referred to our hospital 2 months after the injury. Physical findings on initial examination were markedly limited ROM and decreased abductor/external rotator muscle strength were observed, with an active flexion angle of 10°, active abduction angle of 10°, active external rotation angle of 0°, and manual muscle test (MMT) for abductor and lateral rotator (at a hanging position) muscle strength of 2 . Visually discernible atrophy of the deltoid, supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles and hypoesthesia (5/10) in the axillary nerve region were also observed. At this point, the patient was given an American shoulder and elbow surgeons (ASES) scoring system of 10/100, University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) shoulder scaling system of 4/35, and Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) scoring system of 37/100. The plain X-ray findings were irregular glenohumeral joint surface and subacromial osteophytes, diagnosed as Grade 3 on the Hamada classification , were observed. The plain MRI findings were massive tear of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles, which were withdrawn back to the glenoid fossa, diagnosed as Stage4 atrophy of supraspinatus muscle and Stage3 atrophy of infraspinatus muscle on the Goutallier classification was observed. The subscapular muscle was completely torn with bone fragment formation and diagnosed as Grade 3 on the ide classification . Electromyography was performed at the neurology department of our hospital to evaluate the degree of axillary nerve palsy. A motor nerve conduction study of the axillary nerve showed a marked decrease in compound muscle action potential in the deltoid muscle. An electromyogram showed a denervation potential suggestive of neurogenic changes in muscles innervated by the axillary nerve, leading to a diagnosis of axillary nerve palsy, leading to a diagnosis of neuropraxia in axillary nerve. However, muscle contraction was maintained in the axillary nerve region, suggesting the possibility of restoration. Therefore, a treatment plan was developed to conduct an outpatient rehabilitation program to improve the ROM and enhance the muscle strength of the shoulder until the palsy is improved, and then perform the surgical treatment. Hypoesthesia improved to 7—/10 with a reduced affected area. Furthermore, noted was an improved ROM, with active flexion, abduction, and external rotation angles of 20°, 20°, and 40°, respectively, and gradual improvement in muscle strength, with an abductor and external rotator (at a hanging position) muscle strength of 2 and 3 by MMT, respectively ( and ). Given these findings, ASCR was performed 6 months after injury.
The operation was started with the patient placed in a beach chair position under general anesthesia. Two portals were made in the posterior and lateral aspects of the shoulder, and the posterior portal was used to perform intra-articular locking. Arthroscopy revealed no injury in the tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii muscle, but its origin was detached along with the labrum. The rotator cuff was extensively torn, involving the tendons of the subscapular, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus muscles, with the stumps withdrawn back to the glenoid fossa. Osteoarthritic changes were observed in the joint surface but were mild in severity. Mild injury of the glenoid labrum was observed, but it was not associated with joint dislocation under anesthesia. The subscapular muscle tear was repaired as it was considered reparable. In contrast, the supra/infraspinatus muscle tear was considered irreparable; therefore, the contralateral fascia lata was collected, folded in half and used as a graft for ASCR. Although it was initially planned to repair the humeral head side of the graft using a bridging suture, it was difficult to place four anchors due to poor bone quality. Therefore, the graft was fixed using single-row interrupted sutures. Finally, to complete the operation, the graft was attached to the residual teres minor muscle by interrupted sutures . After surgery, the patient wore a shoulder abduction pillow for 3 weeks, followed by immobilization with a sling for 2 weeks. On the day after the operation, the patient started shoulder girdle relaxation, passive ROM, and periscapular muscle training. An ultrasonography performed 4 weeks after operation showed coverage of the torn portion by the graft. External fixation was removed 5 weeks after the operation, and active ROM training was started. Hypoesthesia in the axillary nerve region was almost completely resolvedat 3 months after operation, with no bilateral difference. Pain and deltoid muscle atrophy were resolved by 4.5 months after operation. During the first 2 years after operation, improvements were observed in both the ROM and muscle strength of the shoulder, with an ASES shoulder score of 96, UCLA shoulder rating scale of 34, and JOA score of 95. An MRI performed 2 years after operation also showed adequate coverage of the torn portion by the graft ( and ).