A 74-year-old previously healthy man was referred to our institution for repeated palpitations over 6 months. A Holter electrocardiogram (ECG) from the local hospital showed persistent AT. No oral anti-arrhythmia drugs were prescribed. The initial workup included baseline ECG, routine blood tests, chest X-ray, echocardiogram, and coronary angiography. There was frequent unifocal initiating AT with a P-wave morphology of positive amplitude in I, II, III, aVF, and V1 .
The patient underwent an electrophysiological study and ablation. Endocardial mapping of the atrium was performed using a PentaRay catheter (Biosense Webster, Inc., CA, USA) and a smart-touch contact force (CF)-sensing catheter (Biosense Webster, Inc., CA, USA) with the CARTO mapping system (Carto, Biosense Webster). Spontaneous AT was identified and mapped throughout the procedure using activation mapping, voltage mapping, and ripple mapping. Intracardiac electrophysiology during AT [cycle length (CL) 184 ms] showed atrial signals with an eccentric pattern of atrial activation on the coronary sinus catheter . Further activation mapping showed the earliest activation zone of AT originated in the right atrial FO. Ripple mapping showed activation progressing from the FO to both the right atrium and left atrium . Voltage mapping revealed no low-voltage regions in either atrium .
In the FO, further high-density mapping (HDM) using the PentaRay catheter and point-to-point mapping using the CF-sensing catheter (Biosense Webster, Inc., CA, USA) demonstrated significantly long-duration fractionated electrograms covering a considerable percentage of the CL of the tachycardia within a localized region . About 107 points at 12 cm2 were taken for the map. The colours of the wavefront on the activation maps can be tracked by following the regions where red meets purple . Concealed entrainment was fulfilled only at the FO, which implied the tachycardia mechanism is micro-reentrant in nature.
A radiofrequency catheter ablation (RFCA) current was delivered at 30 W in power-controlled mode at 43°C and a normal saline velocity of 17 mL per minutes. The RFCA was delivered to the middle of the micro-reentrant circuit, terminating the AT immediately after 3 s (, Video S2). No AT was induced during programme stimulation and isoproterenol infusion (10 µg/min). The patient had no further episodes of AT over the ensuing 12 months until he was discharged to his home without antiarrhythmic drugs.