In December 2022, a 26-year-old Iranian woman was referred to the otolaryngology clinic of our institution, complaining of a growing neck mass, hoarseness, dysphagia, and nocturnal sweating over four months. Her family history and past medical history were unremarkable.
On examination, a palpable mass (approximately 4 × 4 cm) was located at the left thyroid lobe. The mass was mobile, non-tender, and hard in consistency. The rest of the physical examination findings were unremarkable.
The laboratory tests revealed no abnormalities, and her thyroid function test results were all in the normal range.
Neck ultrasonography showed the increased size of the thyroid gland (right lobe 50×19×17 mm and the left lobe 72×31×27 mm). Parenchymal echo of the isthmus and left thyroid lobe was decreased and heterogeneous, suggesting replacing the entire left lobe and the isthmus with a hypoechoic mass. Moreover, it revealed two hypoechoic nodules (sizes of 6 and 10 mm) with distinct boundaries in the right thyroid lobe. No calcification and lymphadenopathy were reported in the neck ultrasound.
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) cytology of the left lobe of the thyroid gland revealed colloid goiter without evidence of malignancy.
The patient underwent a total thyroidectomy. Intraoperatively, due to the firm consistency of the mass and suspicion of malignancy, the frozen section was performed. The frozen section analysis of the left lobe and isthmus was positive for malignancy. According to the lack of evidence regarding the lymph nodes’ involvement in ultrasound and benign FNA cytology results, only paratracheal lymph node dissection was performed for the patient, instead of complete neck dissection.
The postsurgical course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the third day following the operation.
Postoperative histopathological examinations of the surgical specimens obtained from surgery were performed. Gross examination showed the replacement of most of the left thyroid lobe and isthmus with a white multinodular mass, as well as a part of the right lobe with different tumors, including a white multinodular mass and two distinct white nodules. On microscopic examination of the same tumors in the left and right lobe by H and E staining, tumor cells had ill-defined cell borders with vesicular nuclei and distinct nucleoli arranged in well-demarcated lobular growth with fibrous bands separating variably sized solid islands and some lymphocytes between tumoral cells with focal necrosis. The immunohistochemical analyses of this tumor were positive for CD5, P63, CD117, CK 5/6, CKAE1/AE3, and Ki-67 labeling index (15-20%, hot spot) but negative for thyroglobulin, calcitonin, TTF 1, and TdT. Hence, based on the immunohistochemical results, this tumor was definitely diagnosed as ITTC.
The gross examination of two other smaller tumors, which were near the first tumor in the right lobe, showed two white cream nodules with sizes of 0.2 and 0.7 cm attached to the thyroid capsule. Microscopic examination of both nodules showed small to medium-sized follicular structures with nuclear grooves, intranuclear inclusions, and ground glass appearance. These tumors were diagnosed as follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma according to the immunohistochemical analyses: negative for CD5, P63, CK 5/6, while positive for TTF 1, thyroglobulin, and CKAE1/AE3.
The excised paratracheal lymph nodes were tumor-free based on histopathological studies.
ITTC invaded the cervical muscles and fibrofatty tissue with no lymphovascular or perineural invasion, but the PTC tumor was localized into the thyroid gland and did not spread outside the thyroid capsule.
The pathological and immunohistochemical analysis results of our case are shown in and , respectively.
The patient underwent postoperative radiotherapy with 60 Gy in 30 fractions over one month. She remained well during the one month of the follow-up period, with no tumor recurrence or metastasis on imaging studies.