A 25-year-old male presented to our department with two episodes of gross hematuria. Personal and family medical history were negative of any underlying diseases. Ultrasound revealed lobulated paracalyceal cystic – like lesions in the parenchyma of the right kidney with no dilation of its pelvicalyceal system .
Contrast enhanced computed tomography in the arterial phase demonstrated dilated upper lobe interlobar artery of the right kidney and early enhancement of a variceal venous structure which drained in the right renal vein, findings indicative of renal arteriovenous fistula . There was no history of trauma or medical procedure, so the RAVF was considered as non -traumatic. Fistulous site was measured approximately 12 mm.
The procedure was conducted in the cath lab (Siemens Artis Zee) under aseptic conditions and local anesthesia. Patient was in supine position and vital signs were monitored throughout the procedure. Under ultrasound guidance puncture of the right common femoral artery was performed and a 5F vascular sheath was introduced. A pre – shaped 5F Cobra catheter (Merit Medical) was advanced. Then, a 6 F × 45 cm Ansel guiding sheath (Cook Medical) was advanced into the proximal right renal artery. DSA revealed an enlarged interlobar renal artery and early opacification of an enlarged draining vein and inferior vena cava (IVC), findings indicative of type I RAVF .
Next, under ultrasound guidance, puncture of the right common femoral vein was performed and a 5F vascular sheath was introduced. A pre—shaped 5F Simmons catheter (Merit Medical) was advanced into the right renal vein and selective catheterization of the dilated vein was performed with the help of a hydrophilic guidewire (Terumo). Super – selective catheterization of the venous pouch adjacent to the feeding artery was achieved by a 2,7F microcatheter (Progreat, Terumo).
Then, a Hyperform 7 × 15 mm balloon (Medtronic) was advanced into the feeding artery across the site of the fistula. Selective angiogram with the balloon inflated showed no opacification of the fistula and the accurate site of the communication was documented and type I RAVF was confirmed. A 2,6 F microcatheter (Asahi Intecc) was advanced at the venous pouch at the site of the fistula and multiple electrically detachable metallic coils (Optima/OptiMAX/BALT) were simultaneously deployed through the transarterial and transvenous microcatheter into the fistula initially with the balloon inflated . In particular, there were used three coils 18 × 20 mm, one 14 × 47 mm, one 13 × 43 mm, one 12 × 40 mm, two 10 × 30 mm, one 10 × 17 mm and one 10 × 13 mm. Balloon inflation prevents coil migration and protrusion of the coils into the feeding artery.
The final result was total occlusion of the fistula with preservation of feeding artery and the renal parenchyma .
There were no minor or major complications. Patient was discharged the following day in good condition, with the instruction of a new contrast enhanced computed tomography after 6 months.