A 34-year-old Han female patient with ataxia was admitted to our department. The patient had a slight limp without obvious inducement 7 or 8 years previously. Approximately 1 year prior to the presentation, she had given birth to a boy and subsequently developed progressive walking instability. Five months prior to the evaluation, she started experiencing static tremors in her hands and head, difficulty speaking, occasional numbness in the limbs, and a cough after drinking water. The tremor was significantly aggravated during movement. The patient also reported headaches, dizziness, and nausea. One year prior, she lacked appetite and had lost more than 10 pounds. The patient had a history of cephalosporin allergy and had undergone an appendectomy 20 years prior. She had a history of tobacco and alcohol use for 10 years and had quit smoking 6 months ago. Her parents were still alive, and she was the only child. She also reported that she had no relatives with similar symptoms. She had 27 teeth, a smaller tooth size, and normal sex hormone levels. And her menstruation was normal. At the time of presentation, she had dysarthria and upbeating nystagmus, with right gaze-evoked nystagmus. Her limb reflexes were absent, and her bilateral finger-nose test was unstable. She demonstrated instability on her calcaneus tibial test, and had a positive Romberg sign and bilateral Babinski and Chaddock's signs.
The total score of the scale for the assessment and rating of ataxia was 24, and the single-item scores were gait (score 5), stance (4), sitting (2), speech (2), finger chase (2), nose–finger test (2), fast alternating hand movement (3), and heel–shin slide (4). The patient's Mini-Mental State Examination score was within the normal range, and she failed to complete the Montreal Cognitive Scale due to tremors of the hands and head. The results for tumor markers, ceruloplasmin, immune-related autoantibodies such as the five items of thyroid function (thyroid stimulating hormone, free T3, free T4, thyroglobulin antibody and thyroid peroxidase antibody), three items of rheumatism (rheumatoid factors, anti-streptolysin O and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein), five items of immunity (immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin A, immunoglobulin M, complement C3 and complement C4), antinuclear antibody, anticardiolipin antibody, and screening and confirmation of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were not significantly abnormal. Lumbar puncture results for the patient showed no abnormalities. Brain MRI revealed speckled and small patchy abnormal signals bilaterally in the corona radiata, the paraventricular and frontal lobes, and the left temporal lobe. The lesions appeared hypointense on T1 images and hyperintense on T2 and FLAIR images. There were no obvious abnormal signals on diffusion-weighted images (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient maps (–). The radiological diagnosis was multiple white matter demyelinating lesions. Color Doppler ultrasonography of the gynecological, abdominal, cardiac, carotid, and intracranial arteries revealed no obvious abnormalities.
The detection of hereditary disease genes revealed mutations, namely c.4044C > G and c.1186-2A > G, in POLR3A . According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines, the genetic variant c.4044C > G is classified as PM2; however, its clinical significance remains unclear. The genetic variant c.1186-2A > G, classified as PVS1 and PM2, has the potential to influence RNA splicing, subsequently impacting protein function and causing disease. Respecting the patient's opinion, we did not perform genetic testing for her parents or son. Based on the results of physical examination, laboratory tests, imaging tests and gene reports, her condition was diagnosed as POLR3A-related leukodystrophy (HLD7).
We administered oral vitamin B12 and injectable acetylglutamine to nourish the nerves. No other drugs were used during the hospital stay. However, the symptoms did not show significant improvement during the 1 month of follow-up and appeared aggravated. The patient required assistance to walk and was unable to hold objects in her hands. After discharge, the patient was treated with vitamin B12, vitamin E, coenzyme Q, and traditional Chinese medicine, with Ganoderma lucidum, ginseng, and Poria Cocos as the main ingredients. As of recent follow-up (1 year after she was discharged), she is able to walk slowly alone and climb stairs, and the degree of head and hand tremors has reduced significantly. She is also able to hold objects and cook independently. However, her speech is slower and more indistinct than before.