A 48-year-old caucasian male with an extensive psychiatric history of depression was admitted to the intensive care unit at a local hospital following intoxication of approximately 20 g venlafaxine, 450 mg zolpidem, and 250 mg propiomazine. His past history included intensive care hospitalization due to two suicidal attempts through pharmacological intoxication and self-harm with a knife. On admission, he was awake but drowsy and had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 13 of 15 (E3 + V4 + M6) but stable respiratory and circulatory status. His electrocardiography (ECG) was normal with a sinus rhythm of 57 beats per minute. Laboratory findings were within normal range . Admission occurred approximately 2 hours after intake of the pills. Activated charcoal suspension was administered via a nasogastric tube upon arrival at the intensive care unit.
The patient was stable during the first 5 hours at the intensive care unit (ICU), but then 7 hours post-intoxication he experienced tonic–clonic seizures. This was successfully treated with diazepam 10 mg intravenously, and he was subsequently intubated and sedated with propofol and remifentanil. Vasopressor support with low-dose norepinephrine was also initiated.
Nine hours after ingestion, his circulation began to slowly fail. Increased doses of norepinephrine were required, and the patient developed metabolic acidosis with lactate elevation. Fifteen hours after ingestion, the patient’s blood pressure fell rapidly despite high doses of norepinephrine. Prompt echocardiography revealed prominent hypokinesia with akinesia from the mid-left ventricle to the apex, as in TTC, with a left ventricle ejection fraction (EF) of 20%. The right ventricle was also affected with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) measuring 10 mm. At this point, dobutamine was added to norepinephrine, but only a few micrograms were infused prior to cardiac arrest.
Shortly after the addition of dobutamine, his circulatory status deteriorated further, and the patient suffered a cardiac arrest with an initial rhythm of asystole. Advanced cardiac life support was initiated according to national guidelines including manual CPR and intravenous epinephrine. The patient was given three doses of epinephrine 1 mg intravenously, and after 5 minutes without return of spontaneous circulation, the ECMO center at a tertiary hospital was contacted. Fifteen minutes post cardiac arrest, the patient regained circulation temporarily for approximately 10 minutes before relapsing into cardiac arrest. The patient’s circulatory status and blood pressure were, however, inadequate during these 10 minutes. High-dose epinephrine infusion (1.0 µg/kg/minute) was initiated and manual CPR continued for another 30 minutes. The patient was then transported by helicopter to a tertiary hospital using mechanical CPR (AutoPulse Resuscitation System) and ongoing epinephrine infusion. Transportation time was approximately 30 minutes. One hour 15 minutes after the cardiac arrest, the patient was delivered to the tertiary hospital for ECMO initiation.
Upon arrival at the tertiary hospital and prior to initiation of ECMO, the patient had a sinus rhythm but very low cardiac output. Blood pressure was 55/45 mmHg without cardiac arrest, and external compression was continued whilst ECMO system treatment was established. Short pauses were taken during specifically vulnerable periods of the cannulation procedure. Lactate peaked at 4.6 mmol/L. Two hours after the cardiac arrest, the patient was on ECMO.
After ECMO initiation treatment with sedation and circulatory drugs continued, continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was initiated. CRRT was initiated due to anuria and creatinine level of 265 µmol/L. Sedation was reinitiated using midazolam and morphine instead of propofol and remifentanil. The amount of epinephrine was significantly decreased during the initial hours of ECMO treatment, and norepinephrine and milrinone were used instead. Multiple plasma and red cell concentrate (RCC) transfusion were also required due to significant bleeding from the femoral artery catheter. The patient was successfully weaned after 32 hours of ECMO. Epinephrine infusion was terminated the same day, while milrinone continued until the following day.
The patient was transported back to the primary hospital with decreasing doses of norepinephrine the day after ECMO termination. Three days after the cardiac arrest, his cardiac function was echodynamically restored with an EF of above 55%. Values of the cardiac biomarker NT-proBNP decreased from 8360 ng/L the day after the cardiac arrest to 1190 ng/L 36 days after the intoxication. He was ventilated for 8 days and received CRRT for 3 weeks. Two days after extubation, the patient gradually regained consciousness. Thirty days after the intoxication, he had regained normal cardiac and cognitive function and left the hospital for further psychiatric treatment. The patient’s renal function was fully restored with normal creatinine level (82 µmol/L) 7 weeks after the intoxication. He was finally discharged in good health without his former prescribed psychiatric medications. Two years later, his cardiac and renal function were normal, although his psychiatric medication was reinstated.
The serum venlafaxine concentration 24 hours after ingestion was 12.6 mg/L, but this laboratory result was not received until 1 week after ingestion.