A 56-year-old woman with staghorn calculi with 43 mm as long diameter in the abdominal X-ray was referred to our hospital. She had the comorbidities of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity (Body Mass Index was 33), and without coagulopathy.
The surgical procedure was as following. The patient was set in the Galdakao-modified-Valdivia-position under general anesthesia. We planned to puncture into the dorsal-middle calix along the anterior line to avoid the renal cyst . 0.035-inch guidewire was successfully inserted into the urinary collecting system at the first puncture of the 18 gauge needle guided by ultrasound and fluoroscopy. The 24Fr Amplatz sheath was inserted through the tract which was enlarged by metallic telescopic serial dilator. The stone was crushed by Holmium laser (Lumenis VersaPulse PowerSuite 30W: 0.5–0.6 J/ 5–15 Hz) and removed by forceps visualized by the rigid and flexible nephroscope. There was no bleeding which prevent the endoscopic view during the surgery. The 20Fr nephrostomy tube with the 5Fr ureteral catheter to prevent slip-out was indwelled at the end. The operation time was 97 min. The dust and multiple fragments smaller than 3 mm diameter were seen in abdominal X-ray on the next day of PNL , and hemoglobin drop was not seen (11.9 g/dl).
Suddenly, massive bleeding was seen around the nephrostomy tube on the 2nd day after PNL. CECT was examined after 37 min from onset of the bleeding. The extravasation of contrast agents was seen in the abdominal wall . It could not be controlled by finger pressure and suturing around the nephrostomy. Then, the patient had got into the hemorrhagic shock status (the blood pressure was 76/44 mmHg and hemoglobin dropped to 9.1 g/dl).
Emergently, TAE was performed by the interventional radiologist after 123 min from onset of the bleeding. The 4Fr sheath was inserted into the right femoral artery by the Seldinger technique under local anesthesia. The injuries of the distal branches of the 9th and 10th intercostal arteries were identified and embolized by gelatin sponges cut into 1 mm size through the micro-catheter involving the communicating branch of the circumflex iliac artery . The blood pressure had been recovered to 97/65 mmHg as soon as closing TAE. A lot of infusion (normal saline, 3000 ml, and albuminous preparations, 5% 500 ml) were intravenously dripped to stabilize hemodynamics. On the next day of TAE, the hemoglobin dropped down to 7.2 g/dl and the transfusion of red blood cells (560 ml) was needed.
On the 7th day after PNL, the patient got a high fever. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was detected in her blood and urine sample. Ceftriaxion and ceftazidime were intravenously administered for 7 days. The 2nd PNL by flexible nephroscope and basket retrieval device was performed on the 19th day (operation time was 51 min), and she could discharge without residual fragments on the 30th day from the first PNL .