In August 2016, an 85-year-old Iranian male with hypertension and diabetes mellitus presented with a history of dysuria, hesitancy, and urinary frequency and was found to have a urea level of 52 mg/dl and creatinine level of 1.95 mg/dl. Further investigations with the suspicion of prostate cancer were done on the patient. The Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was 8.9 mg/dl and suggested the possibility of prostate cancer. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) test showed the normal size of the prostate gland, but peripheral zone lesions were suggestive of prostate cancer. Prostate Imaging Reporting & Data System (PI-RADS) score was 5 (very suspicious). According to the PI-RADS score, direct biopsy from the lesions was recommended for the peripheral zone. The pathologic study of 12 separate samples from different areas of the prostate revealed unilateral adenocarcinoma with a histologic Gleason score of 8 (4 + 4), the malignant neoplastic proliferation of epithelial cells with a monolayer glandular design, invasion of the neighboring tissues, and desmoplastic reaction in five samples. However, the appearance of the normal texture was reported in other samples. In the whole-body scan, a bony lesion in the mid portion of the left femur was described. Hormone replacement therapy was started for him in September 2016.
In June 2017, the patient presented with fatigue, weight loss, and left upper quadrant pain. His Complete blood count test showed a hemoglobin level of 10.7 g/dl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) level of 23.9, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) level of 27.9, and an elevated RDW-CV with the value of 19.5. White blood cell (WBC) count of 171.84 109/L and platelet count of 644 109/L revealed Leukocytosis and thrombocytosis. He was suspicion of CML and was asked for quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR). Real-time PCR examination was positive for BCR/ABL P210 fusion gene t (9;22) (q34; q11), which confirmed the CML diagnosis. He started treatment with a TKI, imatinib (400 mg/daily). During the follow-ups, due to severe and symptomatic anemia, generalized edema Erythropoietin (Eprex, Epoetin Alfa®) was prescribed for the patient. Due to the treatment failure with imatinib (400 mg − 2 years), the patient was shifted to nilotinib (300 mg − 3 years), a second-generation TKI. After administration of nilotinib, the patient was not symptomatic. Quantitative BCR-ABL1 was negative, and the patient showed a deep molecular response to treatment.
The patient was followed up for about 5 years. In May 2021, the patient presented with nausea, lethargy, bone pain, weight loss and he had the creatinine level of 4.73 mg/dl, hemoglobin level of 7 g/dl, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate 1st hour level of 104, RBC count of 2.4 × 1012/l and Platelet count of 82 × 109/l which was indicative for anemia and renal failure. However, molecular study (quantitative assessment of BCR-ABL1) was still negative and BCR-ABL1 transcript copy was not detected. Further workup revealed a serum total protein level of 8.8 g/dl, albumin level of 3.3 g/dl, immunoglobulin (Ig) G level of 5295 mg/dl, IgA level of 22 mg/dl, IgM level of 10 mg/dl. Serum protein immunotyping (capillary Electrophoresis) detected monoclonal IgG (kappa), which may describe multiple myeloma. Urine protein electrophoresis showed negative detection of Bence Jones kappa to lambda. After injection of 99 m Tc-methylene diphosphonate (MDP), the whole-body bone scan was done with suspicious of prostate cancer bone metastasis. Thoracolumbar scoliosis, degenerative changes in the knee, shoulders and hips was noted. The bony lesion in the mid portion of the left femur were described. Regarding no changes as compared to the previous scans, these findings were not likely due to bone metastasis. Lumbar MRI did not reveal any bony lytic changes. A bone marrow biopsy revealed that 60% of nucleated cells were immature plasma cells which were suggestive of MM . The Electrodiagnosis (EDX) of the lower limbs showed no SNAPs, reduced CMAPs of bilateral peroneal nerves, and neurogenic pattern on needle EMG. Therefore, the test was abnormal and compatible with chronic sensorimotor distal polyneuropathy with axonal features. We started MP (melphalan and prednisolone) due to his neuropathy. Unfortunately, despite our treatment, he passed away after 6 months.