A 36-year-old female patient presented in the emergency department with sudden-onset palpitations that had started 2 h before. She had been suffering from comparable self-limiting episodes since the age of 24 years and was found to have a structurally normal heart on an earlier cardiology examination including transthoracic echocardiography. As the episodes were generally self-terminating within 10 min, she never took any medication to prevent recurrences. She had no other relevant medical history. Physical examination showed no abnormalities other than a regular tachycardia at 190 b.p.m., and blood pressure was 137/78 mmHg. The ECG on presentation in the emergency ward is presented in .
The ECG on presentation showed a regular narrow QRS tachycardia with a ventricular rate of 192 b.p.m. The presence of a retrograde p-wave in or at the end of the QRS-complex is the hallmark of typical slow/fast AVNRT. Other tachycardias that should be considered in the differential diagnosis are orthodromic atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT) over an accessory pathway, focal atrial tachycardia, and atrial flutter. In orthodromic AVRT, the retrograde p-waves are typically identified later (80–120 ms) after the end of the QRS-complex as the atria are only activated retrogradely over the accessory pathway after the ventricular myocardium has been depolarized. In focal atrial tachycardia, the p-waves are not retrograde and typically present not after, but just before the QRS-complex, with a PR-interval depending on antegrade conduction properties. In atrial flutter, flutter waves with a typical sawtooth pattern can be regarded as the main hallmark of common clockwise isthmus-dependent atrial flutter.
When confronted with patients with haemodynamically stable narrow QRS tachycardia, vagal manoeuvres can be used as a first-line attempt to achieve reconversion to sinus rhythm. In patients with AVNRT and AVRT, carotid sinus massage and Valsalva manoeuvres are often used successfully to terminate the tachycardia by slowing conduction over the atrioventricular (AV) node, which is a critical part of the circuit.
In 2015, it was shown that the modified Valsalva manoeuvre, combining Valsalva with a postural modification (leg elevation and supine positioning at the end), was more efficient in terminating episodes of supraventricular tachycardia than the standard Valsalva manoeuvre (43% vs. 17% restoration of sinus rhythm, P < 0.0001). Therefore, this method is currently recommended as a first-line over other vagal manoeuvres to achieve sinus rhythm in the acute phase.
When vagal manoeuvres fail to restore sinus rhythm, intravenous adenosine can be administered as second-line therapy. Although adenosine blocks AV nodal conduction and therefore is mainly used to terminate AVNRT and AVRT, it may also terminate some forms of focal atrial tachycardia that are based on triggered activity. When adenosine fails to terminate AVNRT, or when there is rapid recurrence after cardioversion, intravenous administration of calcium channel blockers (verapamil/diltiazem) or beta-blockers may be used to restore sinus rhythm.
In patients with recurrent symptomatic episodes of AVNRT, there is a good and clear indication for catheter ablation, which can be performed with a high success rate (97%) and a very low risk of complications. By avoiding ablation in the mid-septal area and the roof of the coronary sinus, targeting the inferior nodal extensions of the AV node for ablation, the risk of periprocedural AV block can be reduced to a minimum. Special consideration should be given to older patients with a baseline first-degree atrioventricular block, as the risk of iatrogenic AV block after ablation has been reported to be considerably higher in this group.
Our patient consented to an ablation procedure which was performed under general anaesthesia with propofol and mechanical ventilation, as is the standard in our centre. After obtaining bilateral femoral venous access, three diagnostic catheters and one ablation catheter were positioned intracardially according to the positions shown in . The procedure was performed under X-ray fluoroscopic guidance without the use of a three-dimensional (3D) mapping system, as is usually the case for such procedures. With incremental atrial pacing, a clear jump from antegrade conduction over the fast pathway to the slow pathway was observed, with initiation of typical slow/fast AVNRT, as represented by the intracardiac recordings in .
Ablation was then performed in the slow pathway region, corresponding to the rightward inferior extension of the AV node. Before ablation, a 3D reconstruction of right atrial anatomy was performed using 3D rotational angiography, as part of a study protocol on the anatomical evaluation of Koch’s triangle in patients with AVNRT. A oesophageal temperature probe was used as part of this study protocol to improve image integration accuracy; not to monitor temperature as there is no oesophageal temperature rise during ablation in the slow pathway region. Using dedicated software, the position of the ablation catheter could be projected on the 3D model during ablation, demonstrating the site of successful slow pathway ablation .
During ablation in this region, accelerated nodal rhythm occurred indicating heating of the rightward inferior nodal extension, as is typically seen during successful radiofrequency applications in this region. The ablation power was increased from 25 to 40 W at the site of accelerated nodal rhythm and the application was continued for 90 s. After the first RF application, there was complete elimination of 1:1 antegrade slow pathway conduction, as can be seen in , and tachycardia was non-inducible during a waiting period of 30 min. The different chronological steps of the procedure are illustrated in the .