A 47-year-old man was initially diagnosed as dysphagia. On the next day, he developed dysarthria and tongue deviation to the left, and he visited our hospital. He had no history of trauma nor any other significant medical history. Blood pressure was 184/126 mmHg. Neurological examinations revealed leftward deviation of the tongue on protrusion and dysarthria, suggesting a left hypoglossal nerve palsy. There were no other neurological deficits. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance images (MRI) did not demonstrate any lesions that could cause left hypoglossal nerve palsy . Axial T2-CUBE MRI demonstrated a false lumen of ICAD that compressed the outlet portion of the hypoglossal nerve tube and dilation of the perineural space in the hypoglossal canal . The false lumen of ICAD was adjacent to the hypoglossal canal at its distal side and protruded toward the hypoglossal neural tube. These findings indicated that direct compression by the false lumen was the cause of hypoglossal nerve palsy . MR angiography (MRA) showed dissection of the left ICA accompanied with a false lumen . The patient was admitted and we started transoral administration of amlodipine (5 mg/day) and azilsartan (20 mg/day) for antihypertensive treatment. On the 2nd day, he felt headache, and transoral administration of loxoprofen was started. On the 7th day, he was started on aspirin (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg/day) for prevention of thromboembolism from the dissected portion. Cerebral angiography performed on the 8th day showed an ICAD consistent with the findings on MRI and MRA . Cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) showed protrusion of the false lumen to the hypoglossal canal .
Although medical treatment was continued, his headache worsened, and the neurological symptoms were not improved. Therefore, CAS was performed on the 19th day to thrombose the false lumen and decompress the hypoglossal nerve. A 6Fr guiding catheter (Axcelguide MSK, Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted through the right brachial artery and a 4-6Fr catheter (Dymon catheter, Silux, Saitama, Japan) was placed in the left common carotid artery. An embolic protection device (FilterWire EZ, Boston Scientific, MA) was advanced through the lesion and a filter was deployed in the ICA at the petrous portion. A carotid stent (Wallstent, Boston Scientific) was advanced to the dissected portion and deployed. Angiography immediately after stenting showed dilatation of the true lumen and congestion of contrast medium in the false lumen . There were no neurological symptoms or vital changes throughout the procedures. Pre- or post-dilation was not performed because the vessel was sufficiently dilated and there was a risk of enlargement or rupture of the false lumen.
His headache gradually improved after CAS and disappeared on the 25th day. His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged on the 26th day. No improvement of hypoglossal nerve palsy was observed at the time of discharge. At 1 month after discharge, neurological symptoms, such as tongue deviation and dysarthria, improved. Cerebral angiography performed at month 6 showed well-dilated ICA and disappearance of false lumen .