The patient is a 58-year-old man with a history of well-managed glaucoma and psoriasis. The patient was notified of the writing of this deidentified case report and provided written consent. Institutional approval was not required to publish case details. His glaucoma was maintained with a single topical agent taken twice daily. The patient initially presented for examination with mild pain and conjunctival hyperemia, without visual changes. He also denied photophobia.

On exam, the patient’s visual acuity was 20/40 OD and 20/25 OS. In the left eye, the patient had a salmon-colored lesion on the superior conjunctiva. The cornea below the lesion had an area of thinning consistent with peripheral ulcerative keratitis. The epithelium measured 40 microns superiorly. On fluorescein staining, there was a partial defect in the central part of the circumferential ulcer. There was mild conjunctival hyperemia without episcleritis, corneal infiltrate, scleritis, or anterior chamber inflammation. There were no ocular surface changes such as tear film abnormalities, blepharitis, or dry eye. Fundus examnation revealed superior arcade cream colored faint lesions. The rest of the physical exam including tonometry was within normal limits.

The patient underwent excisional biopsy of the left conjunctival lesion with placement of an amniotic membrane graft and was prescribed tobramycin–dexamethasone QID for a week after surgery. Flow cytometry demonstrated an aberrant population of CD5 negative, CD10 negative small B lymphocytes compatible with a B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The pathologic surgical specimen confirmed the diagnosis of extranodal marginal zone lymphoma (EMZL). The patient was referred to oncology and underwent a systemic workup including PET/MRI imaging to search for orbital involvement and underlying primary disease elsewhere. All tests were negative for tumor elsewhere. The patient had undergone screening colonoscopy 1-month prior to presentation, which was normal. No other local therapies were administered for the PUK. The patient is following up closely with oncology and is being treated with local radiation therapy of the conjunctiva. He is receiving radiation of the conjunctival sac and lacrimal gland. On follow-up, 3 months after the initial work-up, excision of lesion, and radiation treatment, the area of superior thinning has improved. His visual acuity OS was 20/30, and he refracted to −5.00, −1.50 with an axis of 090, and is doing very well.