A 50-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department (ED) in significant respiratory distress. She had a known past medical history of tobacco dependence, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), gastroesophageal reflux disease, and hypertension. On arrival, the patient was noted to be apneic and was actively being ventilated with a bag-valve-mask ventilation. She rapidly progressed from an irregularly irregular cardiac rhythm to sinus bradycardia, and then into a pulseless electrical activity (PEA) arrest within minutes of arrival. She underwent approximately 30 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, with endotracheal intubation performed via video laryngoscopy. She was noted to have significant resistance to bagging after intubation, and after return of spontaneous circulation, was noted to have high peak pressures on the ventilator and was persistently hypotensive.
On examination, the patient was noted to have distant, rhonchorous, and wheezy breath sounds bilaterally, and she was treated for her bronchospasm with nebulized albuterol-ipratropium solution, continuous nebulized albuterol, magnesium sulfate, methylprednisolone, subcutaneous terbutaline, and titratable epinephrine (to also assist with her hypotension). She was noted to have continuously high peak pressures; so, an intravenous push of vecuronium was given without improvement in ventilation and with continuously high peak airway pressures noted on the ventilator. She had an electrocardiogram concerning for new-onset atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response, left axis deviation, a new right bundle branch block, and a left anterior fascicular block with signs of right heart strain. Given her difficulty with ventilation with high peak pressures and hypotension, she was taken for a computed tomography (CT) with pulmonary embolism protocol as there was concern that the etiology of her arrest may have been a massive pulmonary embolism.
This revealed no evidence of pulmonary embolism; however, it did show evidence of alveolar rupture with pneumomediastinum consistent with the Macklin effect and a small left-sided pneumothorax with associated medial left hemi diaphragmatic rupture with pneumoretroperitoneum tracking along the left upper abdomen and left perinephric space with left-sided nondisplaced rib fractures of the fifth and sixth ribs . A CT of the abdomen and pelvis was then performed, which showed a small amount of free air consistent with pneumoretroperitoneum adjacent to the gastric cardia, left kidney, and left adrenal gland, but with no definitively identified intra-abdominal traumatic injury.
Further history from the family, who arrived several hours after the patient’s initial presentation, revealed she had been complaining of difficulty breathing earlier in the day, and she subsequently suffered a witnessed fall down a flight of stairs with head trauma and apparent loss of consciousness. The patient’s physical examination revealed no external signs of trauma on initial arrival.
The patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit in the setting of cardiac arrest with prolonged down time, with improvement in her pneumomediastinum and pneumoretroperitoneum with lung-protective ventilation strategies and paralytics. The patient’s treatment for her COPD exacerbation was extensive and included continuous albuterol nebulization of 40 milligrams (mg) over four hours, intermittent scheduled three-milliliter ipratroprium-albuterol nebulizers every six hours, 0.25 mg of budesonide twice daily, 0.5 mg of ipratroprium four times daily, isolated two mg of magnesium sulfate administration daily if worsening wheeze on examination, 80 mg of methylprednisolone daily, a one-time dose of 0.25 mg of subcutaneous terbutaline, and a one-time dose of one microgram (μg) of epinephrine. Sedation was maintained with both ketamine at 1.5 mg per kilogram (kg) per hour and propofol at 20 μg/kg per minute. For the patient’s hypotension, she was treated with epinephrine as the first-line vasopressor choice given its underlying beta adrenergic effects in the setting of her profound bronchospasm.
However, the patient’s cardiac arrest resulted in severe hypoxic brain injury, leading to subsequent diffuse cerebral edema with effacement of the basal cisterns and tonsillar herniation seen on CT of her head. She became increasingly hypertensive and was weaned off vasopressors and started on titratable nicardipine at a maximum of 12.5 mg per hour and was given a hypertonic saline bolus. The patient lost all evidence of brainstem reflexes five days after suffering cardiac arrest but continued to trigger some spontaneous breaths on the ventilator. Multiple family meetings were held regarding patient prognosis, and ultimately the patient was palliatively extubated with subsequent demise 26 days after arrival.