A 74-year-old female patient presented with an abnormal shadow on chest computed tomography (CT) at a medical checkup and subsequently visited our hospital. Chest CT showed a 17 mm × 8 mm ground-glass opacity with approximately 30% solid component in the right superior segment (S6) . The patient had undergone radical treatment of right breast cancer staged at pT2N0M0 IIA, followed by four cycles of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy 11 years prior. All other medical history was unremarkable.
Relevant examinations were performed after admission, and no obvious contraindications to surgery were observed. Because it was difficult to palpable the lesion and the location of lesion was closed to the bronchus, a thoracoscopic right S6 segmentectomy was planned. We performed thoracoscopic surgery using two ports. We made a 2-cm incision in the 7th intercostal space of the right midaxillary line and a 4-cm incision in the 4th intercostal space of the right anterior axillary line as the observation and operating holes, respectively. Pleural adhesions were observed throughout the thoracic cavity perioperatively. The right lung was found to be divided into three lobes after being released. The horizontal and posterior oblique fissures were poorly developed, and the intersegmental plane could not be distinguished. Digital palpation indicated that the nodule was located in a high position, and lifting the right upper lobe revealed the suspected location of the nodule in the upper lobe. The interlobar fissures were separated, and the posterior segmental and superior segmental arteries were located following the pulmonary trunk arteries . After labelling the nodule on the pleural surface, multiple comparisons were performed, and the nodule was eventually found in the S2 of the right upper lobe . So the recurrent and ascending arteries were dissociated and resected. Then, the posterior segmental bronchus (B2) was exposed and transected. Finally, the right lung was reventilated with pure oxygen and the intersegmental plane was clear after 20 min. The intersegmental plane was divided along the inflation-deflation line using the endostaplers; thus, resection of the S2 of the right upper lobe was completed . The tumor was 3 cm away from the incisal margin. As intraoperative pathology analysis revealed minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA), hilar lymph node sampling was performed. On postoperative day 2, the right lung was completely redilated on CT , and postoperative pathological examination revealed MIA with negative surrounding lymph nodes.
We reviewed lung CT images and performed three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions using Mimics Medical 21.0 software postoperatively. It revealed that the B2 originated from the bronchus intermedius, the posterior segmental artery (A2) of the right upper lung lobe bifurcated into the A2a and A2b branching from the recurrent and ascending arteries, respectively, and the right superior pulmonary vein had no central vein but a posterior intrasegmental vein ( V2t ) that travelled below the S2 .