A 40-year-old Asian man was hospitalized in our emergency department because of sudden abdominal and lumbar pain that woke him while sleeping. He had a medical history of hypertension but was not being treated with medications. He also had a current cigarette smoking history of 40 cigarettes per day for 20 years, and had no other related familial history. A physical examination showed left upper quadrant abdominal tenderness and bilateral costovertebral angle tenderness. No cardiac murmur or abnormal respiratory sounds were heard on auscultation. His blood pressure was 215/118 mmHg, heart rate was regular at 73 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 12 breaths per minute, and his body temperature was 36.8 °C.
A serial hematologic workup showed an extremely high hemoglobin level (19.4 g/dl) and hematocrit (54.3 %), but his white blood cell count and platelet count were within normal limits. No abnormal values of blood urea nitrogen, creatinine level, and hemostasis system function were found in this workup. His international normalized ratio of prothrombin time (PT-INR), fibrin degradation products (FDP), and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) levels were 1.02, 2.8 μg/ml, 26.9 seconds respectively. Only the level of his D-dimer was slightly increased (2.7 μg/ml).
In a later analysis, lupus anticoagulant and anti-cardiolipin antibody were not detected, and his protein C and protein S activity levels were 115 % and 113 % respectively. His counts of erythroblasts and reticulocytes, and erythropoietin level were 0 parts per 1000, 17.2 parts per 1000, and 10.6 mIU/ml, respectively, and these results indicated no findings of polycythemia vera. His electrocardiogram was normal sinus rhythm on admission. Transthoracic echocardiography excluded wall motion abnormalities, valve dysfunction, intracardiac thrombus, and any other patent circulatory shunts. CECT revealed a huge intra-aortic thrombus at the level of the descending to abdominal aorta just superior to his renal artery with patchy emboli in his spleen and bilateral kidneys , and a segment of the thrombus existed just near the ostia of his celiac artery and superior mesenteric artery .
After his admission to our emergency department, we immediately started systemic heparinization. But as we were concerned about the extremely high possibility that the thrombus could cause a further fatal systemic embolism, emergency surgical thrombectomy was performed on the same day.
The operation was started with our patient in a right half-lateral position, and preparations for femoral arteriovenous extracorporeal circulation were completed. A thoracoabdominal spiral incision was performed, and his aorta was approached at the level of the sixth intercostal via a retroperitoneal route. Epiaortic ultrasonography was performed prior to taping to detect the exact lesion of the thrombus, and we taped to aorta at the level of the fifth thoracic vertebra and just superior to the level of his renal artery. After his celiac, superior mesenteric, and left renal arteries were individually taped, his temperature was controlled to a mild hypothermia of 33 °C.
To prevent dissemination of the thrombus during extracorporeal circulation, we first clamped his proximal and distal aorta on either side of the thrombus, which had been preliminarily taped. After partial arteriovenous extracorporeal circulation from his femoral artery was started, an aortotomy was performed. We found a fresh thrombus and easily removed the 14-cm length of intra-aortic thrombus without residual lesion . There was no arteriosclerotic lesion in the intimal layer, but a spot of organized intramural thrombus in the descending aorta was found, and fresh thrombus seemed to develop secondary to this organized intramural thrombus.
After the thrombectomy, his aorta could be sutured directly. He was discharged from our hospital 20 days after the surgery without any complications. He had no past medical history of atrial or ventricular arrhythmia and we found no signs of a paroxysmal arrhythmic event during admission.
Presently, he is still undergoing antiplatelet therapy and warfarin administration. Since he quit cigarette smoking, he has had no findings of polycythemia.