A 4-year-old Japanese girl with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) presented to the emergency room with febrile convulsion. The age of disease onset was 3 years and the patient received maintenance chemotherapy in our outpatient clinic. The patient had a high fever (40.1 C°), tachypnea (respiratory rate 38/min), and tachycardia (pulse rate 180/min). She was diagnosed with febrile neutropenia and systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) based on her neutrophil count, which was 322/μL, as well as remarkably elevated inflammatory responses (CRP: 2.2 mg/dl; procalicitonin: 67.8 ng/mL). Chest X-ray revealed mild perihilar infiltration with normal cardiothoracic ratio (51.6%), and chest computed tomographic scanning showed bilateral consolidation and pleural effusion. Within two hours after admission, the patient’s respiratory condition continued to deteriorate despite oxygen supplementation while lactate levels increased to 62.6 mg/dL. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for mechanical ventilation; however, her systolic blood pressure decreased gradually from 116 to 40 mmHg despite hydration and blood transfusion for volume expansion. Therefore, catecholamine administration, intravenous immunoglobulin, and continuous venovenous hemofiltration were initiated. As we suspected myocardial dysfunction, cardiac ultrasound was performed and showed depressed left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of 27%, as well as a left ventricular Tei index of 0.62 indicating global systolic and diastolic ventricular function, mitral regurgitation, and tricuspid regurgitation. An electrocardiogram showed ST-T wave change in V4-6. Furthermore, a marked increase in myocardial markers was noted, including Troponin-I 0.541 ng/mL (normal 0-0.04 ng/mL), myoglobin 91.2 ng/mL (normal 12.8-66.1 ng/mL), and CK-MB 10.6 ng/mL (0.9-5.9 ng/mL).

Two days after admission to the hospital, her systolic blood pressure improved to 120 mmHg and inotropic support was gradually reduced and stopped by day 9. In addition to the administration of milrinone for 11 days, continuous hemofiltration was carried out for 6 days to treat the heart failure. Subsequently, left ventricular function gradually improved, and myocardial markers returned to normal levels 17 days after admission to the hospital. Finally, she was discharged from the intensive care unit on day 13.

Three separate blood cultures were negative. Additionally, the patient tested negative for influenza virus, human-metapneumovirus, adenovirus, and Group A streptococcus using rapid antigen tests; however, RSV antigens were detected in a nasal swab at the time of hospital admission. Moreover, seroconversion of RSV antibody titers (< 4 and 16) was confirmed using a neutralizing antibody test (SRL Inc., Tokyo, Japan). In order to elucidate the pathophysiology of RSV infection, serially collected tracheal tube aspirates and serum samples were examined using real-time RT-PCR. Real-time RT-PCR analysis detected high amounts of RSV type B RNA in the tracheal aspirates on day 2 (1.6 × 109 copies/ml) and day 5 (1.4 × 108 copies/ml) after the onset of the disease. Interestingly, viral RNA was also detected in the serum sample obtained on day 1 of the illness (3.2 × 104 copies/ml), but it had decreased to undetectable levels in serum samples collected on days 5 and 8.

In order to examine the pathophysiology of this severe cardiac complication caused by RSV infection, various cytokines and chemokines were measured in serially collected serum samples using the Cytometric Bead Array system. Serum samples were serially collected before the onset of the RSV infection and on days 1, 5, 7, and 14 after illness onset. IL-6, IL-10, IL-8, IFN-γ, MCP-1, and IP-10 were markedly elevated at the time of disease onset. The levels of these biomarkers returned to normal by 14 days after illness onset.