The patient is a 46-year-old male with a three months’ history of progressive dyspnea on exertion. His past medical history was significant testicular cancer involving the right testes 32 years prior with pulmonary and widespread lymph nodal metastasis. He was treated at that time with orchiectomy, and chemotherapy along with radiation to the brachial plexus for distant metastasis. Eight years later, the patient was found to have a pulmonary nodule on chest x-ray that was treated surgically and was a teratoma. Since then the patient had remained asymptomatic.

As a part of a dyspnea workup, the patient underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) that showed two large, well circumscribed, partially mobile right ventricular masses. One was in the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) measuring 2.8×2.0 cm) and the other was toward the RV apical free wall (3.3×2.9 cm). The RV and left ventricle (LV) systolic function was normal though the RV was mildly dilated. There was color flow turbulence across the RVOT indicating some obstruction to flow, though velocity was not elevated. The patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital with Cardiothoracic Surgery and Oncology consults for further workup of his RV masses.

Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed these two intra-cardiac masses in the RV. One was located in the RVOT and the other in the diaphragmatic wall of the RV. Dynamic perfusion MRI demonstrated central delayed hyper-enhancement suggesting necrosis. These findings were thought to be suggestive of tumor. RV systolic function was low normal. Chest computerized tomography (CT) re-demonstrated the RV masses but also showed scattered areas of nodularity in the peripheral pulmonary arteries with areas of peripheral wedge-shaped consolidation and ground glass opacity likely related to tumor emboli and associated pulmonary infarcts. Supraclavicular and gastro-hepatic adenopathy was noted that was concerning for metastatic disease. These findings were new compared to prior CT from two years ago. Testicular ultrasound was negative for recurrence of cancer in the solitary remaining testicle.

Laboratory data demonstrated elevated brain natriuretic peptide at 466 pg/mL (normal 0–100 pg/mL), minimal elevations in α-fetoprotein (AFP) to 32 ng/mL (normal 0–15 ng/mL), and LDH to 300 U/L (normal 100–210 U/L). B-HCG was negative. Mild thrombocytopenia was also noted with a platelet count of 132,000 U/mL. Troponin was negative at <0.02 ng/mL (normal 0.00–0.07 ng/mL).

Given concerns for RVOT obstruction, early RV failure and multiple tumor emboli to the lungs, patient was taken to the operating room by Cardiothoracic Surgery team for resection of the masses. On intra-operative gross visualization, the first mass was noted to be a pedunculated mass with a thin stalk while the second mass was a sessile mass imbedded in the wall of the ventricle. The pedunculated mass was easily resected in total. The sessile mass was debulked so as to not compromise the ventricular wall or damage the tricuspid valve.

The specimens were sent to pathology. Both tumors were positive for glypican 3, pancytokeratin, antibody to CDX2, and AFP. They were negative for OCT4, TTF-1, PAX-8, vimentin, WT-1, and podoplanin. Ki-67 showed a high proliferative index. Several histological features of these masses were consistent with yolk sac carcinoma with endodermal differentiation. The first finding consistent with yolk sac carcinoma was presence of periodic acid Schiff positive hyaline bodies known as Schiller-Duval bodies. Second was the presence of mixed mesenchymal and epithelial cells, tubular and papillary structures and possibly an eosinophilic basement membrane known as Reichert’s membrane. Lastly, immunochemical staining for AFP was used to confirm the diagnosis.

Post procedure the patient continued to deteriorate clinically with worsening right-sided heart failure, requiring multiple vasopressor medications. Initial plan was for PET/CT of the abdomen/pelvis for identification of primary tumor and staging followed by chemotherapy. However, the patient was never hemodynamically stable to undergo further testing and unfortunately passed away 14 days after the surgery. The family opted to forgo an autopsy so complete staging of the cancer was left incomplete.