A 43-year-old female presented at our Emergency Department complaining of an acute generalized abdominal pain. Eight days ago, the patient was hit by a motorbike, resulting in a closed left tibial plateau fracture. The patient underwent bone fusion surgery and was discharged after four days without any complications. The patient could urinate independently after the injury, and routine urine analysis showed no obvious abnormalities. Two days ago, the patient experienced hypogastric discomfort accompanied by urinary retention. One hour before admission, the patient felt severe bladder retention and then heard a “poof” sound from her abdomen, which relieved the bladder retention but caused generalized abdominal pain. At admission, the patient reported a sudden, constant, dull pain in the lower abdomen, along with a gradually distending abdomen. Physical examination revealed a pulse of 110 beats per minute, blood pressure of 80/60 mmHg, oxygen saturation of 92 %, and a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute. Laboratory tests showed elevated white blood cells (17.55 K/uL) with 91.6 % neutrophils, elevated creatinine (331 umol/L), and high potassium (6 mmol/L). Urinalysis results indicated significant hematuria (+++). No abnormal findings were found on the abdominal X-ray. A point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) revealed large amounts of abdominal fluid. Subsequently, abdominal paracentesis showed a yellow-like urine fluid, increasing creatinine levels (1383 umol/L) and urea (44.4 mmol/L).

The patient was diagnosed with generalized peritonitis due to a late bladder rupture and underwent exploratory laparoscopic surgery. During the surgery, approximately 2.4 L of clear yellow fluid was suctioned from the abdomen, and a hole about 2x3cm in size with rough edges was found at the top of the bladder. The surgical team decided to biopsy the edge of the perforation and suture it with two-layer Vloc 3.0 sutures, placing an abdominal drain at Douglas. Post-surgery, the patient received intravenous antibiotics, fluids, and painkillers. On the first postoperative day, kidney function and potassium levels returned to normal, and abdominal fluid culture results showed no bacteria. Postoperative pathology results indicated acute cystitis. A follow-up ultrasound on the fourth postoperative day revealed no abdominal fluid. The drainage tube was removed on day five, and the patient was discharged on day nine in stable condition with average laboratory results. A two-week follow-up showed an asymptomatic patient without signs of recurrence or complications.