A 69-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation of weight loss and deterioration of diabetes mellitus. He was a smoker as well a social drinker with no signs of obesity; he had no history of pancreatic disorders. His latest serum HbA1c level had risen to 9.8%. His vital signs were as follows: body temperature of 37.6°C, blood pressure of 146/80 mmHg, pulse rate of 80 beats/min, respiratory rate of 18/min, and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air temperature. Physical examination revealed mild left-upper quadrant tenderness without rebound tenderness. Laboratory tests showed that a complete blood count and coagulation function were unremarkable. Serum biochemistry analysis revealed increased lactic dehydrogenase levels (LDH; 1118 U/L), C-reactive protein (CRP; 5.16 mg/dL), and decreased total protein and albumin levels. Tumor markers showed a mild elevation in carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 7.5 ng/mL), carbohydrate 19–9 (CA19–9; 109 U/mL), and a marked elevation in neuron-specific enolase (NSE; 270 ng/mL; normal value: <16.2 ng/mL). The level of duke pancreatic monoclonal antigen type 2 (DUPAN-2) was within the normal limits. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a well-defined, irregular-shaped, heterogeneous mass at the pancreatic tail . The MPD was dilated with hyperechoic structures . Abdominal precontrast computed tomography (CT) showed a 97 × 77-mm irregular hypodense mass in the pancreatic tail. Ascites was noted around the liver and pelvis. Dynamic contrast-enhanced CT revealed that the mass in the pancreatic tail had solid and cystic components. The solid components of the lesion showed hypo-enhancement, whereas the cystic components of the lesion showed non-enhancement during all phases . The MPD was diffusely dilated up to 27 mm (predominantly in the tail) without both obstruction and wall thickness, accompanied by marked atrophy of the pancreatic parenchyma. Multiple, well-defined, predominantly solid nodules were observed in the peritoneum and omentum, suggesting tumor dissemination. Following magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , T2-weighted images showed a heterogeneous and hyperintense mass in the pancreatic tail . The area corresponding to the solid component seen on CT showed hyperintensity on diffusion-weighted images with b factor of 800 s/mm2 and hypointensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient map, indicating diffusion restriction . The signal intensity of the MPD in the tail was high on the T1-weighted image and low on the T2-weighted image , suggesting the presence of a highly viscous substance like mucin within the MPD. The correlation between the cystic components of the lesion and MPD was suggested but not confirmed following CT and MRI. The MRI signal pattern of peritoneal and omental nodules was similar to the solid component of the pancreatic mass. Contrast-enhanced harmonic EUS (CH-EUS), the solid component of the pancreatic tail tumor, showed mixed hypo- and non-enhancement patterns . Additionally, the hyperechoic lesions in the MPD showed non-enhancement, suggesting mucus clots. EUS-TA for the pancreatic mass was not performed owing to the intervening cystic components of the tumor and the avascular areas suggesting tumor necrosis.
The features of the pancreatic tumor with cystic components that were communicated with the MPD favored the possible diagnosis of IPMC. Since the MPD was diffusely dilated, POPS-guided direct tumor biopsy under endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) guidance was planned to confirm the histological diagnosis. The ampullary orifice was dilated to the so-called fish-mouth appearance . After ERCP catheter insertion into the MPD, extrusion of highly viscous mucus from the pancreatic orifice of the ampulla was observed . Contrast injection during ERCP confirmed the correlation between the MPD and the mass at the pancreatic tail . Pancreatography revealed that the MPD was filled with contrast defects, suggesting large amounts of mucus. A pancreatoscope (SpyGlass DS, Boston Scientific Corporation, Marlborough, MA, USA) was inserted into the pancreatic tail along with the guidewire kept in the MPD. The wall of the MPD was smooth and no papillary lesions suggestive of mucinous neoplasm were observed. POPS revealed an irregular-shaped solid mass in the pancreatic tail after the removal of the abundant and highly viscous mucin . Visually directed biopsies were performed from the reddish and raised part of the mass in the pancreatic tail to confirm the histological diagnosis. Histopathological examination of the biopsied material with hematoxylin and eosin staining showed a marked proliferation of small round atypical cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and scanty cytoplasm . Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the constituent cells were positive for synaptophysin , chromogranin A, and CD56 and negative for leukocyte common antigen, MUC1, MUC2, and MUC5AC. They had a Ki-67 labeling index of 90% . The findings on pathology and immunohistochemistry suggested the diagnosis of small-cell-type PanNEC.
Due to the patient's rapid deterioration, chemotherapy could not be initiated. Although the best supportive care was given to the patient, he died 28 days after the diagnosis.