A 72-year-old female was admitted to hospital suffering from fatigue, weight loss and rectal bleeding. Total colonoscopy demonstrated adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon at 25 cm from the anal verge. A chest x-ray was normal. No sites of distant metastasis were reported on abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. The serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was normal. The patient underwent sigmoidectomy in May 2008. During the operation, the left ovary was fixed at the site of the sigmoid colon cancer and was removed en block. Thorough macroscopic examination of the liver and rest of the abdomen showed no sign of metastatic disease. Histopathological examination of the specimen revealed a moderately differentiated mucus-producing adenocarcinoma, 3 cm in diameter located 5 cm from the peripheral surgical margin . The tumor invaded into but not beyond the muscularis propria (T2). Ki 67 antigen and p53 tumor suppressor protein staining were positive and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) negative. The left ovary was free of neoplasmatic tissue. Only four lymph nodes were counted, free of metastatic adenocarcinoma. The patient had an uneventful recovery. On rectum examination one year later a palpable extramucosal mass was noticed at the anterior rectum wall. An abdominal CT scan revealed a tumor 2 cm in size at the lower anterior mesorectum in close relation with the posterior vaginal wall and a second mass 2 cm in size at the anterior abdominal wall midline . Total colonoscopy showed no mucosal lesion. A chest x-ray was normal. Rectal endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a tumor infiltrating the rectum muscularis propria from outside. Core needle biopsy demonstrated the presence of a mucus producing adenocarcinoma with the same histological futures with the primary tumor and therefore it was considered as metachronous metastasis. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was normal. Since no other site of recurrence was identified, an abdominoperineal resection was attempted . At laparotomy, the anterior abdominal wall mass was located at the site of previous incision and after complete resection, fast biopsy showed adenocarcinoma. Surgical examination of the abdominal cavity showed no sign of reccurence. At that time, sinus bradycardia and ST segment depression was noticed on electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring. The termination of the operation was decided and a loop transverse colostomy was immediately perfomed. Postoperative cardiologic examination revealed an acute muocardium infract and the patient was treated respectively. Chemo-radiation of the mesorectum tumor and re-evaluation for surgical excision was decided and she was discharged on the eleventh post operative day.