A 25-month-old boy was referred to our outpatient clinic without complaints due to a gestational ultrasound that showed kidney cysts. The patient was already under antibiotic prophylaxis and physical examination and vital signs within normal limits. The parents reported no family history of kidney disease and/or other heredofamilial disorders. Renal ultrasound performed at 2 days of life showed bilateral hydronephrosis, mainly on the right kidney. At 5 months of age, a DTPA and a DMSA were performed. The DTPA showed strong retention of the marker in the pyelocalyceal system bilaterally, with little response to diuretic stimulus (. A1, A2), while the DMSA indicated preserved kidney function and symmetrical radiotracer distribution in kidneys with relative kidney function of 46% in the left kidney and 54% in the right kidney (. A3).
Based on the first appointment at our clinic, the antibiotic prophylaxis was maintained and a new kidney ultrasound was requested, which showed dilation in the entire length of both ureters (10 mm on the right side and 8 mm on the left), with an abrupt stenosis in the distal region of both ureters at the bladder entrance with a caliber of only 2 mm. In addition, moderate bilateral hydronephrosis and slight thinning of the renal cortex parenchyma were also observed (. C2-C5). These findings indicated the diagnosis of bilateral megaureter secondary to stenosis caused by VUJO and vesicoureteral reflux (VUR). At 2 years and 10 months of age, DTPA and DMSA were requested. The DTPA showed obstructive pyelocalyceal and urethral stasis in both kidneys, with a scintigraphic pattern compatible with bilateral hydronephrosis secondary to stasis at the level of the VUJ with preservation of kidney function (. B1, B2). Despite the observed dilation, the parenchyma and renal cortex were preserved and the pattern of DTPA showed a slow emptying degree, while the DMSA showed that relative kidney function remained stable at 46:54 (. B3).
Taking into account the clinical and imaging findings, non-surgical management was adopted, with clinical follow-up and serial imaging evaluation. During the first year, the patient visited the ambulatory semiannually and in the following 2 years, annually. At 7 years and 7 months, antibiotic prophylaxis was discontinued, with no history of urinary tract infections, and follow-up visits were maintained every 2 years. Kidney ultrasonography at 10 years of age showed significant improvement of all parameters with ureteral transverse diameter exhibiting a slight to moderate increase (0.9 cm) and preserved VUJ, indicating a satisfactory evolution and expected bilateral kidney development with the non-surgical approach. For the entire follow-up time, the patient stayed normotensive, with normal serum urea and creatinine levels, and without proteinuria, indicating favorable clinical evolution.