This Chinese patient was 59 years old. He was healthy before, without history of thrombosis. When he was admitted to our hospital, CT examination showed a mass in the right kidney, and there was no sign of infection. However, the subsequent CT angiography showed that the mass in the right kidney had abundant blood supply, and there was thrombosis in the right renal vein. Near the left renal vein there was another mass, but there were no thrombi in the left renal vein and portal vein . The entire right kidney and the mass in the left kidney were excised by surgeons, and histological examination suggested WHO/ISUP grade-3 clear cell carcinoma. Post-operatively, he developed acute kidney injury (AKI) as evidenced by decreased urine volume (0.27 ml/h/kg for 3 h) and increased serum creatinine (75 mol/l higher than the preoperative level), and selective left renal venography showed a 2 cm filling defect in the left renal vein, suggesting thrombosis . After the thrombus was removed, we performed continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) on the patient. Within the first 12 h, the patient was conscious, with stable vital signs. In addition, he had no fever, and the urine volume exceeded 40 ml/h, indicating that AKI was prerenal AKI caused by the thrombus in his left renal vein. Thus, he improved quickly after thrombectomy.
However, in the following 12 h, the patient showed signs of infection. His consciousness became poor, while body temperature and heart rate increased, and blood pressure, urine volume and oxygenation index decreased. The high CRP (71.82 mg/l) and PCT (22.82 ng/ml) levels also suggested that the patient might be infected. Based on the 2016 SSC guidelines, the patient had septic shock. In addition, SOFA score and laboratory test results were deteriorating . Therefore, we immediately started fluid resuscitation, drew the patient's blood for culture, and empirically commenced meropenem and teicoplanin for treatment of the suspected sepsis.
Unfortunately, he continued to deteriorate such that by the second day his respiratory and circulatory systems collapsed and he required ventilation with almost pure oxygen. He died on the third day of respiratory and circulatory failure, and the result of the blood culture, which was received two days later, showed that he had F. nucleatum bacteremia, sensitive to penicillin, cefoxitin, piperacillin/tazobactam, cefoperazone/sulbactam, imipenem/cilastatin, meropenem, clindamycin and metronidazole, intermediate to ceftriaxone, and resistant to none.