In December 2017, a 50-day-old female Caucasian infant was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit due to acute bronchiolitis with severe respiratory distress. Multiplex real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis on a nasal swab sample for the qualitative detection of RNA was positive for respiratory syncytial virus. Simultaneously, influenza A virus (flu A) and influenza B virus (flu B) infection were excluded with the same method. The girl was the firstborn of unrelated healthy parents who did not suffer from any respiratory illnesses and denied exposure to sick people. The infant was delivered by uneventful vaginal delivery at 37 weeks and three days. The birth weight was 2980 gr (0.29 SDS, 61st percentile). She did not present any health problems in the first days of life, and showed regular physical growth during the first weeks of life.

Two days before hospitalization, the infant presented with a cough, rhinitis, and inappetence. Upon later appearance of respiratory distress, she was conducted to the emergency department. On admission, the girl was afebrile. Physical examination demonstrated severely compromised general conditions, with wheezing, dyspnea, and decreased breathing sounds on auscultation of lungs. Blood tests showed a clinical picture of severe hypercapnic respiratory failure (on capillary blood sample: pH 7.25, PaCO2 71.4 mmHg, HCO3 -31.3 mg/dL, excess base 3.9). Sepsis was excluded. A chest X-ray showed signs of severe respiratory distress. Echocardiography excluded congenital heart defects. The infant was immediately intubated, and conventional mechanical ventilation with synchronous intermittent positive pressure ventilation (SIPPV) was started, with constant monitoring of vital parameters. After placing a central venous line and a nasogastric tube, adequate sedation was provided and total parenteral nutrition was initiated. Simultaneously, inotropic agents (dopamine and dobutamine) were administered to offer support to the cardiovascular system; this strategy was not adopted with the support of targeted neonatal echocardiography (TnEcho), which was unavailable in the neonatal intensive care unit. Antibiotic prophylaxis with cephalosporine and macrolides (ceftriaxone and clarithromycin, respectively) was started. Despite the ongoing invasive ventilatory strategy, the patient’s general conditions worsened with increased O2 demand. After approximately 20 h of conventional mechanical ventilation, high-frequency oscillatory ventilation was started. Nevertheless, blood gas monitoring showed a progressive increase in CO2 level.

On the third day of hospitalization, exogenous surfactant (poractant alfa; Curosurf, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma, Italy) was administered via intratracheal instillation, followed by a bronchoalveolar lavage with exogenous surfactant during the next day. Despite the ongoing medical and ventilator strategies, hypercapnia progressively worsened, reaching a capillary PaCO2 level of 123 mmHg. At this point, rescue treatment with whole-body hypothermia (34.0 °C) was started in an attempt to reduce CO2 production. Of note, the infant showed gradual respiratory improvement with a decrease in CO2 level. To further enhance gas exchanges by increasing lung vasodilatation, nitric oxide by inhalation was started. Overall, whole-body hypothermia was maintained for 48 h, with further lowering of capillary PaCO2 level and no side effects. Afterwards, the baby was gradually warmed up by increasing the core temperature by 0.25 °C/h, without detecting a subsequent CO2 increase. High-frequency oscillatory ventilation was maintained for five days, after which SIPPV was started. The need for O2 therapy progressively reduced. Overall, nitric oxide was provided for 10 days. Extubation was performed after 10 days of hospitalization, with a switch to non-invasive mechanical ventilation (high-flow nasal cannula) for two days. Hemodynamic support lasted six days, while antibiotic prophylaxis was discontinued on day nine. During hospitalization, no neurological deficits were observed. To exclude the injury to the central nervous system caused by severe hypercapnia, the infant underwent a brain ultrasound, electroencephalography, and magnetic resonance imaging, the results of which were normal. Overall, after 20 days spent in the hospital, the patient was discharged due to her good general condition. The infant was followed over the next few months without showing any growth or nervous/cognitive disorders.