A 49-year-old male was admitted to Nephrology Department for oedema for 1 month and dyspnea for 1 week, with painful livedo reticularis in his left foot. His past history included recurrent episodes of brucellosis over the past four years. Two months prior to admission, brucellosis reoccurred and doxycycline and rifampin had been taken for 6 weeks and his symptoms of fever, sweating and general malaise disappeared. He had hypertension for 10 years, treated with telmisartan, nifedipine and indapamide and his blood pressure was about 150/90 mmHg. He underwent an iliac aneurysm stent implantation 6 years ago. He self-reported no evidence of renal disease before.
On admission, the patient had no fever, and his blood pressure was 163/111 mmHg. Clinical examination revealed a puffy and pale appearance, general oedema, weakened breath sound in the bottom of both lungs and moist rales heard in both lungs. The ischemic manifestation occurred in the left lower limb including cold skin temperature and pulseless in arteria dorsalis pedis. Livedoid changes in the left sole were in Fig. .
Laboratory tests showed elevated blood white blood cell (WBC) count with increased neutrophil ratio (WBC: 13.2 × 109/L and 90% neutrophil). The hemoglobin was 8.1 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed 2 + protein with dysmorphic red blood cells (77–430 /HP). Total urine protein excretion was 2.1 g/day. Blood urea nitrogen was 20.3 mmol/L, serum creatinine 203 µmol/L and creatinine clearance 31.9 mL/min/1.73 m2. Serum albumin was 23.4 g/L. Serum brain natriuretic peptide was 4087.3 µg/mL. Parathyroid hormone was 219.3 pg/mL. C-reaction protein was 53.2 g/L. Hypocomplementemia with C3 0.197 g/L and C4 0.101 g/L. Rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibody IgG, cytoplasmic ANCA and proteinase 3 ANCA were positive. Reversible cryoprecipitate appeared and serum cryoglobulin level was 1.53 g/L. Immunoelectrophoretic analysis of the serum cryoglobulin showed the mixed polyclonal IgG and IgM . Brucella serum agglutinins test (SAT) was positive at a titer of 1:200 and both the blood and the bone marrow culture were negative.
The pulmonary computed tomography (CT) scan showed a bilateral exudative lesion, bilateral pleural effusion and pulmonary atelectasis with pericardial effusion. The abdominal CT showed peritoneal and pelvic effusion, diffused abdominal wall oedema, metal stents image in the abdominal aorta, bilateral common iliac arteries and left external iliac artery. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with left ventricular high voltage. Ultrasonographic imaging of the kidneys revealed normal-sized kidneys with increased parenchymal echogenicity. The transthoracic echocardiogram detected enlargement in all four chambers and myocardial wall hypokinesia with decreased ejection fracture of 41%. Other changes included moderate pulmonary artery hypertension and a small amount of pericardial effusion with no vegetation on the cardiac valves. Pathological examination of the bone marrow showed hyperplasia of bone marrow with a normal ratio of granulocytes to erythrocytes. No poisoning particle was present in granulocytes. no parasites or bacteria were found.
The patient received continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) to relieve the dyspnea and heavy oedema. A renal biopsy was performed after the patient’s condition become stable. The renal pathology revealed endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis with crescent formation. Hypertensive renal injury was also prominent . On light microscopy, 32 glomeruli were identified. Glomerular sclerosis in 11 glomeruli. Hypercellularity in the remaining glomeruli, mainly endothelial cells and mesangial cells with a few neutrophils. A cellular, a fibrinous and a small cellulofibrous crescent were found. No basement membrane thickening. Severe vacuole and granular denaturation in tubular epithelial cells. 40% tubular atrophy, mild tubular interstitial oedema and multiple inflammatory cells infiltration with fibrosis. Thickening and narrowing of arteriole wall with segmental hyalinization. The immunofluorescence revealed diffuse strong C3 deposits along the capillary wall. No other immunoglobulin or complement deposit was present. Hump-like electron-dense deposits were found under epithelial cells by electron microscopy superimposed on hypertensive renal injury contributed to the patient’s renal involvement.
The patient was diagnosed with acute post-infectious glomerulonephritis (APIGN), AAV- related glomerulonephritis, secondary cryoglobulinemia, acute kidney injury on chronic kidney disease, primary hypertension Grade 3 (very high risk), congestive heart failure. Methylprednisolone (40 mg/QD/IV) was given on the 3rd day of admission to treat the acute nephritic syndrome. More important was the presence of ANCA and other immunological disorders and the severe foot pain and livedo reticularis which was a skin vasculitis related to cryoglobulinemia. And all the symptoms of the patient were relieved promptly and no need for CRRT treatment. Oral prednisone 50 mg per day was used and the patient was discharged from the hospital. For the treatment of brucellosis, anti-brucellosis treatment was suggested at the same time though the patient had no sign of active infection. Doxycycline and rifampin were added with a prolonged course of 6 months.
The patient recovered soon and on the 1st follow-up one month later, oral cortisone began to taper. 2 months later the prednisone was tapered to 30 mg/day and on the 3rd month, prednisone was 10 mg per day. The patient felt well and had no oedema, no fever and no dyspnea. The foot pain and livedo reticularis disappeared. There were little proteinuria and a slightly elevated creatinine level left. Now the patient is still under intensive follow-up. The biochemical examination records were listed in Table .
Antihypertensive treatment was given at the very beginning. Sacubitril/valsartan was given to reduce the elevated blood pressure and reverse the enlarged ventricle accompanied by amlodipine and arotinolol. Now the sacubitril/valsartan was used at the maximal dose (200 mg bid) and blood pressure is well controlled under 130/80 mmHg. The Echocardiography re-checked 3 weeks later showed left ventricular enlargement only and improved ventricular motion with an improved ejection fraction of 53%. There was still 5–8 mm pericardial effusion and no pulmonary hypertension.
The patient worked as a shepherd from 2012 to 2015. But he was first diagnosed with brucellosis 2 years after ceasing sheep husbandry with classical symptoms of fever, sweating, muscle pain and ankle pain. After combined use of oral doxycycline and rifampin for 6 weeks. His symptoms disappeared completely. But his symptoms were repeated another 3 times. Each time he was treated with the same therapeutic regimen and responded well. But his brucella antibody persists positive which may be a sign of inadequate treatment.