This case report is a sequel to that by Kabashima et al. An 82-year-old man underwent laparoscopy-assisted partial gastrectomy for gastric tumor at an outside hospital. The gastric tumor was pathologically diagnosed as UPS, which is a rare high-grade sarcoma. The patients’ clinical course after his partial gastrectomy and the case-specific histopathological findings are reported in detail by Kabashima et al. 3 months after the patient’s first surgery, he was referred to our hospital due to new-onset dizziness and headaches. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large cerebellar tumor with marked peritumoral edema. The tumor had not been present on staging scans (whole-body computed tomography [CT]) conducted immediately after the gastrectomy. On admission, brain CT revealed a 43 mm × 38 mm × 32 mm tumor in the left hemisphere of the cerebellum. MRI revealed that the tumor was iso-to-hyperintense on T1-weighted image (T1WI) and hyperintense on T2WI and demonstrated strong contrast enhancement after gadolinium injection . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission-CT (18FDG-PET-CT) revealed FDG uptake of SUV max 7.17. No other region with18FDG uptake was detected.
The patient underwent standard suboccipital craniotomy without navigation or monitoring, performed in the prone position, and the cerebellar tumor was completely resected. The consistency of the white–yellow tumor tissue was dense, and the tissue plane between tumor and normal brain was clearly identified and microscopic gross total resection was achieved, and his postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative MRI (within 24 h) and contrast MRI (within 72 h) revealed complete resection of the tumor . Symptoms improved after surgery, and he had no deficit and was discharged to go home after 20 days from his operation.
Histopathological analysis showed a proliferation of spindle-to-polygonal-shaped tumor cells with enlarged irregular nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in sheet-like patterns, accompanied by chronic inflammatory infiltration and hemangiopericytomas Staghorn-type branching vessels [ and ]. Employing Ki-67 stains, mitotic figures were frequently observed. Immunohistochemical panel demonstrated that tumor cells were positive for p53 and p16, focally positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 CAM5.3, alpha-smooth muscle actin, desmin, and muscle-specific actin (HHF35), but negative for multiple other markers such as cytokeratin CK5/6, CK903, CK14, p40, EMA, GFAP, Oligo-2, IDH-1, ERG, STAT6, and GRIA2. The automated count of MIB-1-labeling index was high and estimated at 37%. We compared brain specimen from the specimen of the stomach after microscopic analysis, and both specimens showed the same histological characteristic. Pathological findings were compatible with that of metastatic tumors from gastric UPS.
The patient underwent repeat brain imaging after 1 and ½ months at follow-up, and no apparent brain tumor residual or recurrence was observed. Only 2 weeks after that last visit, the patient started complaining of headache and nausea. A repeat MRI was ordered, which revealed a 4-cm recurrent cerebellar tumor in the same region, indicating that the 4-cm mass must have grown almost entirely within 2 weeks’ window. Since 2 weeks prior, he had undergone a non-contrast CT with 5-mm slice thickness. Systemic restaging was not performed because the pathological diagnosis was not clear. Again, the patient was taken to surgery and the recurrent tumor mass was completely resected. Histopathological findings were indistinguishable from the previous metastatic tumor again with a MIB-1 labeling index of 37%. After the second operation, the patient received focused brain radiation therapy with added local irradiation (40Gy/20Fr) and three dimensional intensity-modulated radiation therapy (30 Gy/3 Fr) to the tumor cavity. However, a second 9-mm metastatic brain tumor appeared in the temporal lobe. In addition, at the time of radiation therapy to the two lesions of the CNS, further metastatic tumors were detected in the patient’s tonsils. Although systemic chemotherapy was initiated adriamycin (30 mg/m2) plus ifosfamide (2 g/m2) (AI) at an age-adjusted dose of 75% and administered together with dexamethasone coverage; the metastatic tonsilar tumor grew rapidly, indicating that chemotherapy was not effective. Further local radiotherapy in this region also had no effect. The patient was thus transferred to a palliative hospital where he expired 10 days later.