A 69-year-old Japanese man who sustained an injury in a car collision received first aid at a nearby hospital and underwent craniotomy surgery for traumatic acute subdural hematoma, traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, and traumatic localized brain contusion. Conservative treatment was given for left-sided condylar process fracture, axis fracture, right clavicle fracture, and right fracture of the distal radius. After his consciousness disorder improved, 4 months after injury, it became clear that the patient was unable to close his mouth. His TMJ may have been dislocated during intubation. The mouth presented in an open state, with lip closure incapacity . Stenosis of the jaw dentition was demonstrated with labioclination of the front tooth, open bite, and xerostomia. The patient had a tracheostomy and could not evaluate the verbal response, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 11. Traumatic brain injury left paralysis of his right upper extremity. The patient was at high risk of aspiration pneumonia due to diminished swallowing function, so the previous doctor had performed an additional gastrostomy, which recovered his ability to eat.
Panoramic radiography examination revealed a left condylar process fracture and dislocation of the bilateral mandibular condyles. On computed tomography examination, the left condylar process fracture on the medial side and both mandibular condyles greatly exceeded the articular tubercle .
We attempted a manual reduction owing to the existing diagnosis of old left condylar fracture and bilateral anterior dislocation of the TMJ, but reduction was impossible. Therefore, we planned to perform right condylar resection using an intraoral approach. In addition, we evaluated the planned procedure using a three-dimensional model and confirmed that it would not disturb the jaw reposition, because the left condylar process fractures to medial. We confirmed that it was difficult to reduce and fix the old fracture and that it did not interfere with the reproduction of the original occlusion on the three-dimensional model, so we decided to treat it conservatively.
We performed right condylectomy with the patient under general anesthesia. Manual reduction was performed again in a state of muscle relaxation, but reduction was not possible. After an incision was made in the buccal mucosa according to the sagittal split ramus osteotomy, the inside and outside of the mandibular ramus was revealed, and the coronoid process and the neck of the mandible were confirmed . The coronoid process obstructed the visual field, so it was cut and resected with a reciprocating saw . Using a saw and osteotome, the base of the condylar was cut and separated from the surrounding soft tissue to remove the condylar head . We confirmed that the mandibular body had moved backward and that the molars could achieve the occlusion, and the wound was closed. Intermaxillary traction was started during the postoperative period using an intermaxillary fixation screw inserted in the alveolar region to improve occlusal deviation. Twenty-one days after the operation, a normal occlusion was obtained, and intermaxillary fixation screw was removed. During the 12-month postoperative follow-up period, no TMJ dislocation recurred, and the occlusion remained stable . After the operation, he was able to open and close the mouth by himself, and the lips could be closed, so that hypersalivation did not occur. His left condylar process was displaced inward owing to a fracture, but the opening and closing movements were possible because the hinge movement centered on the left condylar process.