A 51-year-old perimenopausal white woman with no significant past medical history other than chronic back pain presented to her primary care physician in October 2013 with fainting spells, worsening back pain and severe fatigue of 1 month's duration. Her laboratory workup revealed a white blood count of 7,100/μl, hemoglobin of 8.9 g/dl and a platelet count of 60,000/μl, an unremarkable basic metabolic profile and normal liver function tests. Her ferritin (682 ng/ml) was elevated and both vitamin B12 (392 pg/ml) and folate (20 ng/ml) levels were within normal range. The patient developed another syncopal episode at home, and an emergency room workup confirmed mild anemia and thrombocytopenia with no clear evidence of active gastrointestinal bleeding. In December 2013, due to worsening symptoms, the patient presented to a different emergency room with gingival bleeding and petechiae on her lower extremities. She was found to have a hemoglobin level of 7.2 g/dl with a platelet count of 10,000/μl. The patient was admitted to the hospital, and a bone marrow biopsy was performed. Bone marrow aspiration could not be obtained, and the core biopsy revealed extensive involvement of metastatic carcinoma . Immunohistochemistry studies were highly suggestive of a breast primary (data not shown). A mammogram demonstrated a 2.4-cm mass at the 2 o'clock position in the right breast with suspicious axillary lymph nodes. The patient underwent a biopsy of both the primary breast lesion and of the axillary lymph nodes, which revealed invasive ductal carcinoma that was estrogen receptor-positive, progesterone receptor-positive and human epithelial growth factor receptor (HER2)-negative. Further staging workup demonstrated extensive osseous metastases, but no visceral metastases. She received a transfusion with 2 units of red blood cells and 1 apheresis unit of platelets, resulting in an improvement in hemoglobin from 7.2 to 10.1 g/dl and platelet count from 10,000 to 20,000/μl. She was discharged home and was started on endocrine therapy with both leuprolide and letrozole. Denosumab was also administered monthly for bone metastases. However, she did not respond either clinically or biochemically (rising CA 15-3) to the endocrine therapy and continued to experience frequent gum bleeds and petechial rashes throughout her body.
In March 2014, the patient transferred her care to our center. Restaging workup demonstrated extensive skeletal metastases without visceral involvement or splenomegaly (data not shown). A complete blood count showed a white blood count of 5,000/μl, hemoglobin of 9 g/dl and a platelet count of 10,000/μl. The patient received 1 unit of apheresis platelets urgently. Surprisingly, her platelet count did not increase at all, but decreased to 6,000/μl. The patient did not have headache, but she developed more extensive petechiae and hemorrhagic blisters in her mouth. Hence, she was admitted to the inpatient unit for further management. Both bone marrow biopsy from an outside facility and peripheral smear from our center were reviewed, and our pathologist concurred with the initial diagnosis. Peripheral blood examination of the peripheral blood smear in March 2014 revealed marked thrombocytopenia and anemia; some large platelets but no giant platelets were seen (photos are not available). There was no evidence of schistocytosis, which essentially ruled out intravascular or microangiopathic processes. It did reveal some teardrop cells, which was consistent with her bone marrow finding – a myelophthisis process. However, bone scan showed that a large fraction of long bones was spared by metastases. The disproportionate thrombocytopenia seems to suggest a dual pathological process: myelophthisis and peripheral consumption. The fact that her platelet count decreased upon platelet transfusion seems to suggest an immune-mediated peripheral destruction of platelets, which is, at least in part, responsible for her marked thrombocytopenia. All the other pertinent laboratory studies including folate, vitamin B12 level, thyroid function tests, antinuclear antibodies, Helicobacter pylori antibodies, hepatitis panel and HIV test were normal, and therefore a clinical diagnosis of ITP was established. In view of the substantial risk of fatal bleeding, the patient received IVIG (1 g/kg) daily for 2 days (3.4.2014 to 3.5.2014) and high-dose steroid methylprednisolone 500 mg i.v. daily for 3 days (3.4.2014 to 3.7.2014). As shown in figure , the patient's platelet count responded dramatically, increasing from 6,000 to 32,000/μl in 3 days. She was discharged home with oral prednisone 80 mg (1.5 mg/kg) daily. Her platelet count improved to 155,000/μl 1 week later and 171,000/μl 2 weeks after discharge. We started to taper down her prednisone and treat her metastatic breast cancer using chemotherapy with capecitabine (500 mg p.o. daily) since she did not respond to the first-line hormonal therapy. The patient's platelet count continued to improve and was stabilized at around 250,000/μl. Prednisone was tapered off over 3 months, and capecitabine was gradually increased to 1,500 mg p.o. daily. Interestingly, her hemoglobin had also improved during the course of the treatment, mirroring the response of platelet count. It cannot be explained by the therapeutic response from capecitabine which was started on 3.20.2014, while her hemoglobin improved dramatically from 8.1 to 10.3 g/dl in 3 days (3.4.2014 to 3.7.2014) and further improved to 12.2 g/dl on 3.14.2014. This seems to suggest a similar immune-mediated mechanism involved in the development of anemia. By the time of completion of this report, the patient continued to respond to the current therapy with discontinuation of steroids, and the restaging CT and bone scan in September 2014 demonstrated an excellent response to capecitabine.