A 53-year-old man, who was morbidly obese with a BMI of 75 kg/m2, presented with shortness of breath (SOB) and hypercapnia. He had never smoked but had a history of hypertension and severe obstructive sleep apnea with an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) >30 per hour. There was no known family history of cardiac disease, and the patient did not have a history of syncope.

On examination, his blood pressure was 132/83 mmHg, and he had a regular pulse of 98 bpm, a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/minute, a temperature of 98.7°F, with oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 88% on room air. His heart sounds were normal without murmurs. Lung auscultation showed reduced but clear breath sounds, and mild lower limb edema was present.

Blood gases showed a pH of 7.31, PaO2 of 57 mmHg, a PaCO2 of 61 mmHg, and a SaO2 of 86% on room air. Serum bicarbonate was 30 mmol/L, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 160 pg/ml, troponin 0.030 ng/ml, and thyroid function tests were normal. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm with a rate of 95 beats/min, a normal electrical axis with good R wave progression in the precordial leads. No epsilon waves were seen in the precordial leads.

Pulmonary function tests showed no obstruction or restriction with a normal diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) and normal total lung capacity (TLC). The patient had a reduced forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC) with a normal FEV1/FVC ratio, which are commonly seen with obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS).

Chest computed tomography (CT) showed normal lung parenchyma without pulmonary embolism. Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed normal left ventricular function and a dilated right ventricle (RV) with a flattened septal wall (1.3 cm in diameter), moderate tricuspid regurgitation, an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 55–60 mmHg, right and left atrial dilatation, mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50%. The right ventricle was severely dilated and dysfunctional. There was moderate tricuspid regurgitation (max. velocity 303 cm/sec) with an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 55–60 mmHg. Pulse-wave tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) of the anterior and posterior mitral annulus showed abnormal left ventricle relaxation. The patient was discharged on continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and oxygen at night, and as needed during the day.