We report the case of a 67-year-old man who presented to the services of Manatí Medical Center with a chief complaint of fatigue upon exertion, dyspnea, and lower-extremity edema that had been progressively worsening for 2 weeks. His medical history was significant for a 30-year history of hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) Hurley stage III, hypertension, major depressive disorder, and a positive Mantoux test, treated with isoniazid 12 years ago. On physical exam, he was hypotensive, tachycardic, and tachypneic. On auscultation, a mild holosystolic murmur with S3 gallop was heard at the apex. Crackles and rales were appreciated in all lung fields, as well as bilateral lower-extremity edema. Additionally, there was mild ascites without abdominal tenderness or guarding. The patient was not confused at any point during history taking or physical exam.

Troponin levels remained constant at less than 0.015 ng/mL, CK-MB less than 1.00 mg/mL, and total creatinine kinase at 15 IU/L, all within normal limits. However, Pro-B natriuretic peptide was elevated at 77 660 pg/mL (normal levels are 5–125 pg/mL). The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with no indication of acute ischemic changes or arrythmia. A chest X-ray showed marked Kerley B lines, enlarged cardiac silhouette, and bilateral pleural effusion, suggesting exacerbated congestive heart failure. He was admitted to the hospital the same day for clinical stabilization and further treatment.

During the hospital stay, various studies were performed to find the etiology of his CHF. The patient’s echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction (EF) of 20–25%, significantly different from a previous study done 2 months ago, which reported an EF of 50%, which also mentioned findings of global hypokinesis of the left ventricle with enlarged atria, left worse than right, and present mitral regurgitation. There were no changes indicating possible myocarditis or pericarditis. Findings of this study suggested new-onset decompensated congestive heart failure (CHF). Other diagnostic tools looking for ischemic and infectious etiology yielded negative results.

A chest CT scan without contrast showed bilateral pleural effusions with bibasilar compressive atelectasis and no evidence of pulmonary or infectious processes. There was also no evidence of an intra-abdominal emergent process on abdominal imaging. The patient did not have significant leukocytosis, with negative blood cultures and pleural fluid culture, suggesting there was no systemic infection or sepsis that may have caused the heart failure. The patient had no coronary disease or cardiovascular risk factors that could explain his symptoms’ severity and rapid progression. However, his clinical history revealed that he was re-initiated on adalimumab 2 months before this presentation. Therefore, adalimumab was discontinued as a precaution of potential cause, with an adverse drug reaction probability of 5.

Further investigation with his dermatologist revealed he first started adalimumab treatment 3 years ago with the standard HS regimen, beginning with subcutaneous 160 mg on the first day, and 80 mg on day 15. On day 29 and weekly thereafter, the dose was maintained at 40 mg. After 2 years of utilizing the medication with no complications, it was discontinued due to his lesions’ progression. However, even with alternate standard treatments and procedures, his condition had not stabilized. After various hospital admissions, adalimumab was re-initiated with the standard-dose regimen, as previously described. Once adalimumab was discontinued during this hospital stay, his health continued to decline, with worsening of symptoms. Unfortunately, the patient’s condition continued to worsen, increasing his hospital visits for symptom management. On the 8th day of hospitalization, he died due to de-compensated heart failure and septicemia.