A previously healthy 6-year-old girl with no relevant family or consanguineous history presented with a history of hyporexia for 24 months, increased abdominal circumference and recurrent vomiting; in the last 2 months with chest pain and progressive decrease in functional class. She was found with hepatomegaly approximately 6 cm below the costal margin. The initial echocardiogram revealed marked dilatation of the suprahepatic veins and inferior vena cava, with marked biatrial dilatation, diastolic dysfunction with restrictive pattern and indirect signs of pulmonary hypertension. CMR was suspected and treatment with diuretics, carvedilol and enalapril was initiated, with improvement of the functional class.

Studies were requested to clarify the etiology of CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance reported left ventricular hypertracheal with respect to non-compacted region/compacted region of 4:1, systolic dysfunction, significant ventricular cavity hypertracheal, right ventricular dilation with deterioration of systolic function. In addition, a 24-hour Holter ECG described right and left atrial changes and repolarization disorder in precordial leads. Based on the above, the patient was discussed in a cardiology meeting, considering the coexistence of restrictive cardiomyopathy and hypertracheal.

Anti-insufficiency medical treatment was initiated and there was an improvement in the New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification from III to II. However, after a few months, the patient presented clinical worsening, requiring admission to an intensive care unit for refractory heart failure, and a diagnosis of cardiac tamponade was made, requiring a pericardial window, support with extracorporeal mechanical oxygenation and subsequent massive cerebral hemorrhage leading to her death.

Written informed consent was obtained from the minor's legal guardian/next of kin to publish any potentially identifiable images or data in this article. The ethics committee approved the conduct of the study.

Genomics-based assessment
Due to the diagnosis of early onset CMR, the genetic medical team was consulted. Physical examination was normal and there was no family history of cardiomyopathies or sudden cardiac death. After a careful review of the case, a full exome sequencing (WES) was performed.

A new heterozygous missense variant in the FLNC gene (NM_001458.5) was identified: c.7559C>A, p.Thr2520Asn and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. This substitution converts the codon threonine at position 2520 to asparagine, located in the ROD2 domain in which there is a cluster of variants mainly associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This variant has not been reported in population databases or in the current medical literature and is classified as probably pathogenic.

Other genetic variants identified in this case were: a heterozygous frameshift variant in the AGK gene (NM_018238.4): c.675delG, p.Trp225CysfsTer6, classified as pathogenic according to ACMG guidelines; and a heterozygous missense variant in the PKP2 gene (NM_004572.4): c.1163G>A, p.Arg388Gln, classified as a variant of uncertain significance (VSI).

No other genetic variants were identified in this case. The patient's mother (34 years old), father (38 years old), and paternal grandparents (55 and 62 years old) consented to genetic testing, and the father was found to carry the FLNC and AGK variants. He has a normal echocardiogram and is being evaluated by the cardiology team.
