A 12-year-old Turkish girl, born at 38 weeks of gestational age to unrelated healthy parents, was well until 1 year of age, when she developed pustular cutaneous lesions that responded to corticosteroid and antibiotic treatment with healing and scar formation. Various treatments of these lesions had required four hospitalizations during the previous 11 years. No other family member had similar skin conditions. She was hospitalized at the age of 12 years for arthralgia of her knees, elbows, and ankles and arthritis of her left knee, with concomitant pustular cutaneous lesions. She developed septicemia and was admitted to the intensive care unit of a public hospital with respiratory insufficiency during her follow-up. After recovery, she was referred to our pediatric immunology department for further evaluation.
A hyperpigmented scar lesion on the right side of the face; bilateral inguinal, paraumbilical hyperpigmented scar lesions; and paronychia of the thumbs were noted on admission . Additionally, the patient had contracture of the left knee limiting her motion, episcleritis, and failure to thrive [25kg (below third percentile), 132cm (below third percentile)]. The results of her laboratory studies revealed iron deficiency anemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and elevated acute-phase reactants (red blood cell count 4.2 million/mm3, hemoglobin 9.1g/dl, hematocrit 27.8%, mean corpuscular volume 81fl, thrombocytes 254,000/mm3, immunoglobulin G (IgG) 1760mg/dl, IgM 186mg/dl, IgA 195mg/dl, C-reactive protein 6.5mg/dl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 100mm/hr, and serum amyloid A 123mg/L). Total IgE level, eosinophil count, lymphocyte subset levels, and the oxidative burst activity of granulocytes were normal. Autoantibodies (anti-nuclear antibody, anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody, and rheumatic factor) were negative. She was evaluated for tuberculosis and was found to have two bacillus Calmette-Guérin scars, a 12mm tuberculin response, and a negative QuantiFERON® assay result (QIAGEN, Chadstone, Australia). Serologic investigations yielded negative results for cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B and C viruses, syphilis, and HIV. Her blood and urine cultures were negative for bacteria. Splenomegaly was detected by abdominal ultrasonography. Skin biopsy of hyperpigmented lesions demonstrated neutrophil infiltration in epidermis and subepidermal pustular dermatosis. The results of chest radiography and skeletal surveys were normal.
DIRA was clinically suspected on the basis of clinical similarities between our patient and other patients with DIRA described in the literature to date. The resequencing of the entire coding sequence of IL1RN and the flanking splice sites revealed a homozygous mutation (p.R26X) confirming DIRA. Treatment with canakinumab 150mg subcutaneously once every 6 weeks was initiated, and a full response was achieved. She did not experience any cutaneous lesions or arthritis during 12 months of treatment and follow-up. Her inflammatory markers regressed to normal values . She was able to walk independently, and gradual weight gain was observed. Treatment-related adverse events were not detected.