A 39 year-old white female presented to The Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital with worsening pain of the left breast and left chest wall region and a recurrent palpable mass within the inferior aspect of her left breast. She reports having had three separate left breast biopsies in the past (seven years, four years, and one year prior to her current presentation) for a recurring left breast palpable mass in this same location.
Seven years prior to her current presentation, she presented to an outside community hospital with a palpable left breast mass in the inferior lateral aspect of her left breast. She underwent a left breast biopsy at that time that was reported as showing dense fibrous stroma with fibrocystic changes.
Three years later (four years prior to her current presentation), she noticed a recurrent enlarging palpable left breast mass. She underwent a repeat left breast biopsy by the same surgeon and this showed hyperplastic fibrosis, consistent with fibromatosis of the breast. The pathology report clearly stated that the tumor involved the surgical margins. The patient reports that the surgeon told her that this was a benign tumor and that nothing further needed to be done.
Three additional years later (one year prior to her current presentation), she again noticed a recurrent enlarging palpable left breast mass. She again underwent a repeat left breast biopsy by the same surgeon and this again showed findings consistent with fibromatosis of the breast. Again, the pathology report clearly stated that the tumor involved the surgical margins. The patient reports that the surgeon again told her that this was a benign tumor and that nothing further needed to be done.
Since the time of her last left breast biopsy (one year prior to her current presentation), the patient reports persistent and worsening pain and palpable tenderness within the inferior aspect of her left breast and left chest wall region, with an associated increasing sized palpable mass within the same region.
Upon presentation to The Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital, she was found on clinical examination to have volume loss along the entire inferior aspect of her left breast and slight downward tilting of her left nipple and areolar complex. She had three separate well-healed surgical scars along the inferior-lateral aspect of her left inframammary fold . Underneath these scars, she had a firm palpable mass, clinically measuring 6.5 × 3.0 × 2.5 cm in size and which clinically appeared to be adherent to the underlying left chest wall structures. She had no clinically apparent adenopathy in her left axilla.
A mammogram showed scarring and tissue disorganization in the inferior left breast from prior multiple biopsies, but appeared unchanged since a prior mammogram done 13 months previously at an outside community hospital. Magnetic resonance imaging of the left breast showed an intensely enhancing lesion in the inferior-lateral aspect of the left breast, measuring 5.0 × 1.7 cm in size . This lesion appeared to abut the underlying chest wall musculature and appeared to efface the underlying fat plane. Computed tomography scan of the chest showed a 5.2 × 1.6 cm mass within the inferior-lateral aspect of the left chest wall that appeared to be in continuity with the left pectoralis major muscle and left serratus anterior muscle . A core biopsy was performed to the palpable left breast mass that confirmed the diagnosis of fibromatosis.
The patient was taken to the operating room at to The Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and underwent a left total mastectomy, with en bloc resection of the underlying musculature (inferior lateral portion of the left pectoralis major muscle, superior portion of the left abdominal oblique musculature, and anterior portion of the left serratus anterior muscle) and en bloc resection of the underlying chest wall structures (fourth, fifth, and six ribs, intercostals muscles, and parietal pleura). The left chest wall defect was then closed with a 2-mm DualMesh Gore-Tex patch (W. L. Gore & Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, Arizona). The remaining portions of the left pectoralis major muscle was dissected off the underlying left chest wall and its lateral most attachments to the left humerus and superior attachments to the clavicle were divided, allowing it to rotate inferiorly to completely cover the Gore-Tex patch. The left mastectomy site was then closed in the standard fashion. No attempts at cosmetic breast reconstruction with autologous tissue transfer or expander/implant placement were considered at that time. The patient's post-operative course was uneventful and she was discharged to home on post-operative day eight.
Gross pathologic evaluation of the specimen, which overall measured 14.5 × 13.3 × 6.4 cm in size, revealed a 5.2 cm tumor that was grossly invading the underlying attached skeletal muscle to a depth of about 1.2 cm . It could not be definitively determined whether the invasion of the underlying skeletal muscle involved only the superficial muscles resected (consisting of the inferior lateral portion of the left pectoralis major muscle, superior portion of the left abdominal oblique musculature, and anterior portion of the left serratus anterior muscle) or whether skeletal muscle invasion was to the level of the underlying intercostal muscles resected. However, both grossly and microscopically, there was no evidence of invasion into the bony ribs or underlying parietal pleura. Microscopic evaluation revealed a proliferation of relatively evenly spaced plump spindle cells arranged in intersecting fascicles and associated with mild to moderate amounts of collagen and occasional mitotic figures and demonstrated that the spindle cell proliferations invaded into the adjacent skeletal muscle . All surgical margins were negative. On immunohistochemical staining, the spindle cells were negative for S-100 protein, muscle actin (HHF-35), and cytokeratin AE1/AE3. On immunohistochemical staining, less than 5% of the spindle cells were positive for Mib1 (Ki-67). The histology and immunohistochemical staining supported a diagnosis of fibromatosis (desmoid tumor).
The patient is now 22 months out from her previous aggressive operative management of her previous multiple recurrences of her fibromatosis of her left breast and she remains disease free.