A 65-year-old male patient came to our department in August 2013, with varus deformity at the level of middle third and the distal third junction of left forearm. Detailed history revealed that he sustained fracture both bones forearm due to road traffic accident 15 years back, for which he was treated with open reduction and plate osteosynthesis. 6 months after the surgery, the patient fell accidentally and gradually developed deformity of the left forearm, for which the patient did not approach hospital for treatment.
Our examination revealed varus deformity of 90° in the middle third and distal third junction of left forearm, shortening of about 10 cm of left forearm, healed surgical scars over radius and ulna. Furthermore, the patient had inability to move wrist and finger joints, probably due to muscle laxity. No neurovascular deficit was encountered. There was 30° fixed flexion deformity at elbow joint with further range of flexion of 80°. Radiological examination revealed nonunion of fractured both bones forearm with broken dynamic compression plate (DCP) at radius and loosened DCP at ulna, with one screw in the subcutaneous plane. The bones were found to be osteoporotic. Our aim was to correct the deformity, achieve union at the fracture site, restore optimal function of the wrist, hand, and elbow. Our treatment strategy was planned to perform the staged procedure.
Implants were removed, except a screw, which was adherent to the adjacent vascular tissue. Pennig external fixator was applied on radius , and universal mini external fixator was applied on ulna in another surgery. The deformity was corrected by gradually stretching (1 mm/day) the contracted soft tissue over a period of 6 weeks . The neurovascular monitoring done clinically. Then, the external fixator was removed, once full correction was achieved. A long arm slab was applied in fully corrected position for 3 weeks.
Once the soft tissue healed and infection was ruled out, definitive fixation was done for nonunion radius (nonunion in ulna was left undisturbed, since simultaneous fixation of ulna in a scarified tissue would lead to increase in compartment pressure and difficulty in skin closure) using dual onlay fibular cortical strut grafting (procedure is explained below) with cancellous bone grafting. The fracture ends were freshened until fresh bleeding was seen from the bone ends, and medullary canal was opened with 2.5 mm drill bit before fixation was done. A gap of 2.5 cm was present. The fibular graft was harvested from left leg (direct lateral approach, middle third) leaving 6 cms of lower end of fibula for ankle stability. Cancellous bone was harvested from the left iliac crest.
The fibular graft was predrilled (with 2.5 mm drill bit), tapped and then split longitudinally into two halves using saw. The two halves of the graft were placed over the radius spanning the fracture; drilling was done through the previously drilled holes in the near onlay graft and then into host radius, and then into the opposite onlay graft . The onlay graft was secured to host radius with 3.5 mm cortical screws, so as to obtain 4 cortical purchases (with each screw). The cancellous graft was placed into the trough lying between fracture ends and between the two onlay grafts. Nonunion in the ulna was left undisturbed .
The patient was immobilized in long arm cast, in mid prone position, for 6 weeks. Immediate post-operative X-ray shows good deformity correction with graft and implants in situ. After 6 weeks of surgery, the patient underwent protected physiotherapy (with a splint) in the form of active and assisted mobilization of the elbow, wrist, and finger joint. The patient refused another surgery on ulna (because the patient was functionally satisfied and deformity was corrected fully). 1-year follow-up shows union at the graft site.