An 11.7-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital due to headache, vomiting and altered mental status.
Two days before admission, the patient complained of a headache without obvious inducement, accompanied by vomiting 25 times. The headache did not improve with cold medication. He became unconscious 12 h before admission, and relevant tests were completed at a referring hospital. His blood ammonia was > 500 µmol/L. He was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient was the product of a first pregnancy and first birth (G1P1) mother, and delivered by cesarean section at term with a birth weight of 3.0 kg. His perinatal condition was unremarkable, with no history of asphyxia. He was generally healthy and developed normally for a child of the same age. Prior to this episode, the family was not aware that the patient had OTCD.
The patient had no significant family history. No patients in the family had OTCD or symptoms associated with the disease.
On physical examination, he was in a moderate comatose state [Glasgow coma score (GSC) 6] and was unresponsive to sound. His eyes could not be closed, the pupils were equally large and round, about 3 mm in diameter, and light reflex was delayed. There were no significant abnormalities on cardiopulmonary or abdominal examinations. Muscle strength in the limbs could not be tested, muscle tone was normal, and all pathological signs were negative.
Laboratory tests showed a significantly elevated blood ammonia level . Liver function and coagulation times were abnormal. Blood tandem mass spectrometry showed moderately elevated glutamine. Citrulline and arginine were in the normal range. Urine organic acid gas phase mass spectrometry showed that uracil and orotic acid levels were elevated. Blood ammonia levels during the first week of admission are shown in Figure . During the remainder rest of his hospital stay, levels were in the normal range.
Whole exome gene testing revealed the OTC gene exon2 hemizygote variant c.119G > A (p.R40H), inherited from his mother. The missense mutation was located in the well-studied exon functional domain without benign variation [Pathogenic moderate (PM) 1]. The frequencies of all normal population databases (dsSNP, 1000 genomes) were less than 0.0005 (PM2). This is a variant with different amino acid changes at the same locus reported in the literature as pathogenic variants (PM5). Pathogenic missense mutations of this gene are common, and benign missense mutations are rare [Pathogenic supporting (PP) 2]. The literature reported that variant to caused impaired gene function as show by in vitro functional assays [Pathogenic strong (PS) 3]. In summary, according to American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG)guidelines, this variant is likely pathogenic (PM1 + PM2 + PM5 + PP2 + PS3).
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that large patches of symmetrical high signal shadows on T2 weighted imaging (T2WI) and fluid attenuated inversion recovery in the cerebral hemispheres, and diffusion WI (DWI) revealed a significant high signal, more pronounced in the bilateral dorsal thalamus, caudate nucleus, lenticular nucleus, insula, cingulate gyrus and frontal lobe into the cortex at the falx.