A 57-year-old man previously known for type 2 diabetes (T2D) for 3 years, asthma and obstructive sleep apnea was admitted for an aggravation of his dyspnea. Bodyweight was 99 kg, height was 172 cm and body mass index was 33.5 kg/m2.
His T2D was treated only with metformin 500 mg twice daily and his latest Hb1Ac was 6.1%. The patient was not on other regular treatment. In the past 3 weeks, he presented a dry cough that was initially managed with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and clarithromycin for 5 days. At admission, he presented a normal leucocyte count at 4.3 G/l with lymphopenia at 0.39 G/l count and an elevated CRP at 58 mg/l [, ]. Chest CT SCAN showed a bilateral multilobar ground-glass opacification. A nasopharyngeal swab test of SARS-CoV-2 by RT-qPCR was performed the same day in another medical facility and the result was pending.
Twenty-four hours after his admission he presented a worsening of dyspnea, with tachypnea and severe hypoxemia requiring a transfer to the intensive care unit rapidly followed by oro-tracheal intubation for mechanical ventilation support. A vasopressor infusion (norepinephrine) was started. A bronchoalveolar lavage was performed and test of SARS-CoV-2 by RT-qPCR assay was positive. At day 3, he presented a rapidly progressive insulin requirement at a rate of up to 50 units/hour iv of insulin aspart . Despite the high insulin doses, he maintained an elevated plasma glucose level at 270 mg/dL on average.
His extremely high-dose insulin requirement “resolved” at day 9, and the insulin infusion rate was rapidly reduced, avoiding hypoglycemia . He was extubated at day 13 and discharged to an intermediate care unit as a step down approach to pursue a close monitoring and regular respiratory care including continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), and 2 days later he was transferred to regular hospital room due a positive clinical evolution. His insulin treatment was switched to subcutaneous neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) insulin at a total dose of 60 UI per day.