A 50-year-old female presented to the emergency department at the onset of acute severe chest and upper back pain. Her medical history consisted of controlled stage II hypertension, treated with losartan. No other comorbidities were present. Laboratory testing showed normal kidney functions. Blood pressure was 170/90 mmHg at presentation.
Subsequent diagnostic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a type B aortic dissection (TBAD) that extended from the left subclavian artery (LSA) to the right common iliac artery (RCIA) . Only the right renal artery (RRA) originated from the false lumen. The maximum compression was at T5 level, where the true lumen was compressed to less than 10% of the total diameter .
Despite primary medical treatment with intravenous metoprolol and sodium nitroprusside and oral beta blockers controlling the blood pressure, the patient’s symptoms did not improve. Because of her persistent back pain over 4 days, invasive treatment was deemed necessary. Moreover, due to the involvement of the visceral aorta into the dissection, it was deemed necessary to treat the dissected aorta extensively. As the site was located in the Brazilian state of Tocatins, more than 2000 kilometers away from the closest vascular center, the decision was made to treat the patient locally.
The procedure was performed on day 4 after symptoms onset, under local anesthetic and sedation. Unilateral ultrasound-guided right femoral access was obtained by a preclose technique with two Proglide devices (Abbot Vascular, Santa Clara, California). Proper guidewire introduction and advancement in the true lumen was ensured by angiographic guidance. Through a 20 Fr sheath, two overlapping multilayer stents were implanted. To ensure a sufficient healthy landing zone and obtain adequate proximal seal, decision was made to deliver the proximal stent over the aortic arch. The open mesh structure of the multilayer stent made this possible, ensuring preserved perfusion of the supra-aortic branches.
No rapid pacing nor adjunctive procedure were necessary for the deployment of the stents. Angiogram at the end of the procedure showed approximation of the entry tear and total exclusion of the false lumen in front of the entry tear, with patent side branches, particularly the supra-aortic arteries, mesenteric arteries and both renal arteries. Total procedure time was 68 minutes. Less than 100 milliliters of contrast agent were administered.
The patient was completely asymptomatic after the procedure. She remained in the ICU (Intensive Care Unit) for 12 hours postoperatively. There were no signs of stroke or spinal cord ischemia. Postoperative kidney function tests remained normal. The next day she was discharged from the hospital in good health. Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT), i.e., clopidogrel and acetylsalicylic acid, were started as per our site standard practice after endovascular procedures.
At follow-up examinations after 6 and 12 months, the patient remained asymptomatic. Review of the CT scans confirmed that the stent had reopened the true lumen to the original aorta diameter, with stable true and false lumen diameters and volumes between 6 and 12 months. The 12-month follow-up CT scan revealed that the false lumen at the proximal end of dissection completely disappeared . Also, the maximum diameter of the false lumen significantly decreased whereas the true lumen diameter increased . All supra-aortic and visceral branches were patent .