A 41-year-old Asian man was transferred to the Center of Trauma Surgery in our hospital 6 hours after injury for the closure of an open infected wound with a large skin defect in his right lower limb caused by an accidental explosion of 100 pieces of a blasting cap. Hemostasis of the wound was achieved by applying pressure and a total of 2500 ml Ringer's solution, which is a kind of balanced salt solution, was given intravenously during the emergency. He was mildly obese, described himself as quite heathy, and had never been admitted to a hospital previously. He reported no chronic medical history, such as primary hypertension, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, an impaired immune system, malignancies, liver cirrhosis, renal failure, or hemodialysis. He also reported no history of infectious disease, such as tuberculosis, any types of hepatitis, or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). His medical history revealed no trauma, blood transfusion, other surgical procedures, or other serious event. He had not lived in an epidemic area and had no contact history of radioactive exposure. He denied any family history of inherited diseases. He usually did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol and had no other unhealthy behaviors. He was a business executive and he often traveled for business.
His blood pressure at admission was 99/50 mmHg, pulse rate was 102 beats per minutes, and his respiratory rate was 21 breaths per minute. On examination, his mucous membrane was dry and his conjunctivae were pale. No positive signs were found during neurological, cardiopulmonary, and abdominal examinations. There was no pain around the kidney area with percussion or tenderness along the bilateral ureteral approach.
A specialized examination revealed that the wounds were located on his right gluteal and were approximately 40 cm × 35 cm in size with a darkened appearance. The margins of the wounds were 2 cm above the bottom of iliac crest, inferior to the superior segment of back side of his thigh, 3 cm interior of the anal cleft, and external to the lateral thigh (as shown in Fig. ). The wound had hemorrhaged and contained scattered metallic foreign bodies. Most of his gluteus maximus muscle was injured and the motion of his right hip joint was limited.
In addition, related laboratory examinations were conducted. His complete blood count values were as follows: white blood cell count of 10,940 cells/uL, red blood cell count of 3,250,000 cells/uL, hemoglobin of 9.8 g/dL, and platelet count of 153,000 cells/uL. D-Dimer was 5678μg/L. His total protein was 45.7 g/L, among which the albumin and globulin content were 21 g/L and 24.7 g/L, respectively. The results of serology for renal function were normal. Blood and aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures were performed. Microorganisms were not found in the blood cultures. The secretions from injured tissue revealed that a little of the Gram-positive bacteria, Bacillus subtilis, was detected. A diagnosis of explosion injury in left gluteal region and hemorrhagic shock was made.
He underwent aggressive fluid administration, hemodynamic support, and intravenously administered antibiotic therapy. Debridement of his right gluteal was carried out 6 hours after the explosion under general anesthesia. Then, the wound was sutured with VSD and adhesive membrane, which finally was connected to negative pressure drainage equipment. During the operation, 800 ml erythrocytes and 400 ml plasma were infused into our patient. Three days after the first operation, he underwent a second operation. The necrotic muscles were excised and then the wound was closed with interrupted suture to shorten the defect to 12 cm × 40 cm (as shown in Fig. ). The VSD was also connected to the wound as described above.
Nine days after the second treatment, although a few scattered necrotic muscles were located in the wound, the granulation tissues were growing well. The skin around the wound was healthy, with only mild edema and migrated to the wound margins. The pinch test demonstrated that the skin had some mobility, which indicated that it could be sufficiently stretched. Under general anesthesia, the skin margins were minimally free to facilitate the insertion of intradermal needles on both sides of the wound. The wound itself was left undisturbed. Three SSDs (Life Medical Sciences, Inc., Princeton, NJ) were inspected every few hours. The healthy skin was stretched for 4 minutes, followed by 1 minute of relaxation. After stress relaxation had occurred, the tension was adjusted to 3 kg, as indicated by the tension gauge (as shown in Fig. ).
This procedure was repeated five times during the operation until the skin reached approximation to the wound margins. Then, the devices and the intradermal needles were removed from our patient. During this process, the granulation tissues looked good, the wound was thoroughly irrigated, and the stretched skin margins were closed with interrupted suturing to reduce the size of the defect to 5 cm × 38 cm (as shown in Fig. ). After stretching treatment, the VSD was applied again to close the wound as before.
After 9 days, the size of the wound had decreased to 4.5 cm × 35 cm (as shown in Fig. ). The SSD was then applied again as before. During the last operation, the wound was thoroughly irrigated, and the stretched skin margins were closed with interrupted suturing (as shown in Fig. ). Eighteen days after this operation, there were only two small wounds that were approximately 1.0 cm × 0.8 cm without edema or inflammation. The local granulation was healthy (as shown in Fig. ). At that time, our patient was ambulatory. Although he had been in hospital for over 1 month, there was no evidence of damage to the skin margins. The timeline of the patient’s treatment is shown in Table .
At 3 months postoperatively the wound was healing perfectly and our patient could walk freely and do some suitable exercise. At 6 months postoperatively, he returned to business work as usual.