A 33-year-old female, with a medical history of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, presented to our trauma center after being an unrestrained driver in a motor vehicle crash going approximately 50 miles/h. Her accident was a high impact mechanism.
In the trauma bay, the patient complained of the right hip and leg pain and was found to have associated shortening and deformity of the extremity. There was a 2 cm × 1 cm open laceration over the distal tibia with exposed bone fracture fragments. The patient was intubated for airway protection and radiographs were obtained of the right hip, femur, and lower leg demonstrating a right hip fracture dislocation with associated right femoral and tibial shaft fractures (-).
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the pelvis further delineated the posterosuperior hip dislocation with associated fractures of the posterior wall of the acetabulum and femoral head .
Attempts in the emergency department to obtain a closed reduction of the hip dislocation were unsuccessful due to difficulty posed by her femur and tibia fractures. To reduce the hip and minimize the risk of developing AVN, she was taken urgently to the operating room for surgical management. In the operating room, the patient was placed supine on a radiolucent table with a small bump underneath the right buttock. Given the nature of her hip injury, priority was given to the reduction of the hip dislocation. A 5 mm Schanz pin was placed percutaneously along the axis of the femoral neck .
Traction and gentle rotation were applied to reduce the femoral head back into the acetabulum and an inferior infrafoveal femoral head impaction fracture was confirmed.
Next, the open tibia fracture was debrided, closed primarily and both the tibia and femoral shaft fractures were treated with intramedullary nails (-).
Finally, a fluoroscopic dynamic examination under anesthesia, as described by Moed et al., was performed to assess the stability of the posterior wall acetabulum fracture .
The posterior wall of the acetabulum and hip joint was found to be stable in 90° of flexion with internal rotation, adduction and axial loading. The post-operative pelvic CT scan demonstrated a concentric hip reduction with a known femoral head fragment in the inferior portion of the hip joint .
The patient was made toe-touch weight-bearing on the right lower extremity and discharged from the inpatient rehabilitation unit on post-operative day 16. The patient returned to the emergency department approximately 6 weeks later for suture removal, and it was discovered that she was placing full weight on her right lower extremity. Radiographs obtained during this encounter demonstrated maintenance of hip joint congruency and healing femoral and tibial fractures (-).
Despite being given an appointment for follow-up in our orthopedic outpatient center, she was not seen in our clinic again.