A 69-year-old female, who presented with cAVB (, A-1), was referred to our
hospital. Her past medical history was hypertension and dyslipidaemia, and she had
been prescribed calcium channel blocker and statin. This time she had a history of
syncope and exertional dyspnoea. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed
normal cardiac function [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF): 67.2%,
Video ] and no
significant valvular heart disease. Dual-chamber pacemaker (PM) was implanted via
the left subclavian vein (, B-1). She was discharged on Day 8 without any
complications. One and a half months later (on Day 43), she presented with
exacerbation of shortness of breath and orthopnoea. TTE demonstrated akinesis in the
anterior wall, cardiac dyssynchrony, and LVEF at 47.7% (Videos and , Video S). Chest radiography showed mild congestion (, B-2). Laboratory
tests showed increased brain natriuretic protein (BNP) at 3352.3 pg/mL
(reference value 0–18.4 pg/mL) and myocardial deviation enzymes
[creatinine kinase (CK): 639 U/L (reference value
42–135 U/L), CK-MB: 39 U/L (reference value
0–25 U/L), troponin I: 20.58 ng/mL (reference value
0–0.045 ng/mL)], and normal kidney function (estimated glomerular
filtration rate: mL/min/1.73 m2). Acute coronary syndrome was suspected,
and emergent coronary angiography was performed. However, the coronaries had no
significant stenosis, and she was diagnosed with worsening HF and was hospitalized.
Her HF status did not improve after receiving drugs for HF, such as diuretics and
dobutamine. Intra-aortic balloon pump was inserted on Day 48, and TTE demonstrated
worsening LVEF. We considered the possibility of the negative effect of right
ventricular (RV) pacing on cardiac function, hence, on Day 50, her PM was upgraded
to cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT). TTE showed partial resynchronization,
however, her respiratory status worsened mainly because of the fatigue and weakness
of respiratory muscles. On Day 52, she was intubated with mechanical ventilation
support (,
B-3). Tracheostomy was performed on Day 70. On Day 65, EMB was taken from her RV
septum. The specimens demonstrated several giant cells, no granulomas, and diffuse
myocardial interstitial fibrosis . Laboratory test results revealed normal
angiotensin-converting enzyme and lysozyme levels. Her laboratory markers ruled out
some autoimmune disorders (systemic lupus erythematosus, polymyositis,
dermatomyositis, Sjögren’s syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis,
vasculitis, autoimmune thyroid disorder, and myasthenia gravis). Whole-body computed
tomography showed no sign of sarcoidosis, such as hilar lymphadenopathy. Finally,
she was diagnosed with GCM. She was prescribed prednisolone (PSL) 60 mg
daily on Day 71 and ciclosporin 100 mg daily on Day 85. Subsequently, her
BNP decreased . EMB was taken from her RV septum twice more (on Days 86 and
124, three specimens/procedure), and the specimens demonstrated no giant cells and
less apparent myocardial fibrosis . TTE showed no LVEF improvement (modified Simpson
method) (from 37.2% at the beginning of PSL to 28.8% at discharge)
.
However, RV function significantly improved based on fractional area change (FAC)
[from 17.5% at the beginning of PSL to
46.7% at discharge ( and , Videos S3 and S4)].
Intake of PSL was decreased to 30 mg daily upon discharge (tapered speed of
5 mg/week). She has not experienced any exacerbation of HF. Chest
radiography showed no signs of lung congestion (, B-4). She was transferred to a
rehabilitation hospital on Day 141. The maximum values of CK, CK-MB, troponin I, and
BNP during the HF hospitalization were 7444 IU/L (on Day 51),
228 IU/L (on Day 51), 101.33 ng/mL (on Day 56), and
4281.2 pg/mL (on Day 67), respectively. The HF drugs at discharge from our
hospital were carvedilol 7.5 mg daily, perindopril 2 mg daily,
furosemide 30 mg daily, spironolactone 25 mg daily, and tolvaptan
7.5 mg daily. She still continued rehabilitation at the rehabilitation
hospital 3 months after the discharge from our hospital.