A 68-year-old male noticed headaches on July 8, 2012, and then right hemiparesis on July 19 of the same year. The primary care physician diagnosed stroke, and he was admitted to hospital. He had no medical history of head trauma, sinusitis, or diabetes, but he drank 1,800 mL of a distilled spirit (equivalent to 330 g of ethanol) with blue cheese every day, and had alcoholic liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh grade B). He was febrile (39.0℃) and had become progressively paralyzed on the right side of his body. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disclosed several ring-enhancing lesions in the brainstem and cerebral hemispheres. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed pleocytosis, and a blood examination revealed an increased titer of Aspergillus antigen without inflammatory reaction; the (1→3)-β-D-glucan test was negative.
Bacterial cultures taken from two independent vessels grew L. monocytogenes, which led to a diagnosis of multiple brain abscesses due to L. monocytogenes infection. He was treated with ampicillin (ABPC; 2 g every 4 h i.v.) and voriconazole (200 mg/day), but he developed consciousness disturbance and complete right-sided hemiparesis. Follow-up brain MRI disclosed extended lesions, and the patient was transferred to our hospital. Upon admission he had a body temperature of 36.9℃, and a physical examination revealed neither superficial lymphadenopathy nor hepatosplenomegaly. A neurologic examination revealed that he was in a comatose state (score on the Japan Coma Scale of 30-200). Right blepharoptosis and anisocoria (3.0 mm on the right and 4.0 mm on the left) was observed. The left light reflex was attenuated, while that on the right was preserved. His oculocephalic reflex was positive. The right hemiparesis was severe but without muscular waste and fasciculation. The tendon reflexes were exaggerated in the right upper and lower limbs, but without pathologic reflexes. Neither neck stiffness nor Kernig's sign was detected. Laboratory data revealed no inflammatory reaction such as leukocytosis or elevation of C-reactive protein, but pleocytosis was evident in the CSF: 101 cells/mm3 (96.6% monomorphonuclear and 3.4% polymorphonuclear cells); protein, 201 mg/dL; and glucose, 58 mg/dL (plasma glucose, 78 mg/dL). No pathogenic bacteria grew in bacterial cultures of the CSF, blood, urine, and a nasopharyngeal swab.
Brain MRI disclosed several ring-enhancing lesions on the left cerebral hemisphere and brainstem . High-intensity signals were present inside the mass lesions in diffusion-weighted imaging . Susceptibility-weighted imaging disclosed a dual rim sign, defined as two concentric rims at the lesion margins, with the outer rim being hypointense and the inner rim hyperintense relative to the cavity contents . MR spectroscopy revealed no elevation of choline in the lesions. Positron-emission tomography (PET) demonstrated no uptake of 2-[fluorine-18]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose, suggesting the absence of malignancy.
Treatment with ABPC (2 g every 4 h i.v.) and voriconazole (100 mg every 12 h i.v.) was continued. Diagnostic and therapeutic drainage for brainstem lesions is not favored at our neurosurgical department, and so the patient instead underwent HBO therapy (100% O2 at 196.1 kPa abs at 1 h/day, for 25 days) from August 17. After the treatment, his consciousness status and pleocytosis gradually improved. The anisocoria had resolved by August 20, and voluntary movements of the right upper and lower limbs were possible by September 5 . Since the lesions were dramatically ameliorated on follow-up MRI, we terminated the voriconazole and ABPC therapy on October 3 and 10, respectively. The patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on October 17.