A 46-year-old Chinese man complained of four hands 7 d after SCI. The two supernumerary hands were painless but complicated with actual limb pain.
The patient suffered from tetraplegia caused by an accident on April 9, 2018. He underwent major surgery consisting of cervical posterior unilateral open-door expansive laminoplasty on 16 April 2018. Seven days after the accident, the patient felt the presence of an additional pair of hands that originated at the wrist joints and extended medially, with equal length to the paralyzed hands. He complained that he could feel but could not see the additional limbs. According to the patient’s description, the two supernumerary hands that were placed across his abdomen were not painful and persisted throughout the day . However, he felt a burning-like pain on both actual forearms, which measured 7 points (right side) and 5 points (left side) on the visual analogue scale. He experienced a more intense feeling of the existence and movement of the supernumerary hands, and stronger actual limb pain when he tried to control his limbs or someone touched his body.
The patient had no significant medical history, psychiatric history, and history of substance misuse, except for type 2 diabetes mellitus, which was diagnosed 5 years previously and treated with regular injections of insulin.
According to the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) standards for neurological classification of SCI, the patient was classified as having an incomplete lesion (ASIA impairment scale B) with a neurologic level at C4. The ASIA evaluation for neurological function was performed 18 d after injury, and the motor score for the upper and lower limbs was 0, and the total score for light touch and pin prick, for both sides, was 31. Bulbocavernosus reflex was positive.
Computed tomography scan of the cervical spine on the day of the accident did not show vertebral body fracture or SCI. Three days later, magnetic resonance imaging showed an abnormal signal at C3-6 cervical spinal cord on T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging . No concomitant brain injury was observed on head computed tomography scans, and all cognitive evaluations suggested no abnormalities. Follow-up cervical spine X-ray was performed .