A 46-year-old female patient presented at our department to undergo cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) with chief complaints of intra-abdominal recurrence and metastasis of a sigmoid colon tumor.
In the preoperative assessment, the patient’s vital signs were stable and complete blood test results were within the normal range. Further, chest X-ray findings were unremarkable, except for the presence of a chemoport through the right central vein. Meanwhile, electrocardiogram revealed a normal sinus rhythm of 60 beats per minute.
The patient reported that she had undergone laparoscopic anterior resection of the colon 3 years ago. She also reported having the same medical conditions and undergoing CRS and HIPEC 2 years ago.
The patient had no family or genetic history of the disease.
Given that the patient had a chemoport through the right central vein, during anesthesia in the operating room, we decided to insert a central venous catheter through the left internal jugular vein. The location of the left internal jugular vein was confirmed using ultrasound, and the needle was inserted after confirming the course of the vein.
Although the internal jugular vein was distinctly visible on the ultrasound scan, blood reflux was noted when the needle tip was not within the ultrasound field of view. The guide wire was pushed through the needle, and we confirmed that it entered without resistance. Further, a 7-Fr 2-lumen central venous catheter was inserted along the guide wire without resistance. After inserting the catheter up to 15 cm, the guide wire was removed. Then, to remove the air, we regurgitated blood from the catheter and assessed blood reflux. However, after approximately 1 cc of blood was refluxed, we found that when blood reflux was induced, only clear fluid regurgitated from the 16-G distal port of the central venous catheter, but no blood regurgitated from the 18-G proximal port of central venous catheter. Because intravenous fluid administration was not started and no abnormal fluid collection was noted on preoperative chest X-ray, thoracic duct cannulation was suspected. Thus, we determined that central venous catheter could not be used as a central line. Accordingly, we reinserted the central venous catheter through the left subclavian vein under ultrasound guidance. Further, while carefully monitoring the needle tip and guide wire, we easily inserted the central venous catheter . The patient’s vital signs were stable. Meanwhile, the position of the tip of the internal jugular central venous catheter that was initially inserted was unclear. However, we determined that the catheter was unlikely to affect vital signs and that removing it without checking its position could cause problems. Therefore, we decided to leave it in the same position and checked its position after surgery.
Postoperative complete blood test results were within the normal range.
In the recovery room, a chest X-ray was obtained , which revealed an appearance similar to that of the path of the thoracic duct.