An 80-year-old woman presented to the hospital with a two-month history of pain in both legs.
Two months ago, pain initially manifested in both legs during hospitalization for UTI. The pain was vague, heavy and diffuse, ranging from the knee to the pelvis. Because the pain shortly resolved and no abnormalities were observed on physical examination, no further evaluation was performed for the leg pain. She was placed on a 2-wk antibiotic therapy for UTI. Subsequently, she was discharged and the antibiotic was discontinued because of improvements in clinical symptoms (to normal), as demonstrated by laboratory examinations. However, after discharge, the pain recurred and worsened over time.
The patient had a 10-mo history of hypertension with medication.
On admission, the patient’s vital signs were within normal range. She complained of diffuse tenderness in both lower extremities, without definite erythema, warmth, or edema. Muscular strength in both legs was normal, and there were no limitations of movement.
Complete blood count revealed normal white blood cell count (WBC), with a neutrophil percentage slightly elevated at 73.4%. Serum C-reactive protein levels significantly increased to 112.82 mg/L (normal range 0-5 mg/L) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 33 mm/h. Other biochemistries and urinalysis were normal. Knee joint aspiration revealed WBC of 24000/μL [PMN (polymorphonucleocytes) 90%] and RBC of 100/μL.
Physical examination revealed no prominent local inflammation; however the pain did not resolve continuously. So, bone scan was performed, and revealing diffuse increased uptake in the shaft of both femurs (more severe in the left than the right) and the periarticular bones of both knee joints . Because these findings can be equally observed in the context of tumors and osseous infections, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed.
Large intramedullary lesions with diffuse irregular contours were observed in both mid- to distal femurs, both proximal tibiae, and both patellae. Multiple T2 high and T1 low SI fluid collections with peripheral thick enhancement were observed, extending from diaphysis to epiphysis. Diffuse enhancement of surrounding soft tissue was observed along the periosteum with focal cortical disruption in the medial portion of the supra-condyle of the right femur .
An imaging test suspected osseous infection and involvement of the knee joint, we performed joint aspiration and cultures. The joint fluid analysis revealed WBC of 24000/μL (PMN 90%), RBC of 100/μL, and culture-negative. Considering the MRI findings, the possibility of osseous infection was high. Exclusion of bone tumor through histopathological examination was necessary for the following reasons: (1) The involvement of bones other than the lumbar vertebrae is rare in adult osteomyelitis caused by the hematogenous spread of infection; and (2) Increased uptake on bone scan can similarly be observed in bone tumor.
Surgical drainage and biopsy were performed. Gross examination revealed grey colored pus-like discharge and inflammatory tissue in the femoral medulla, and periosteal reactions were observed in the cortex. Extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL)-producing E. coli was observed in tissue- and bone cultures. This bacterium was the previously observed pathogen, which demonstrated same antibiotic sensitivities, as observed in the previous UTI. Similarly, pathological findings indicated acute osteomyelitis.