Over the course of two months, a 75-year-old Caucasian man weighing 45kg who had a history of multiple previous drug overdoses, depression, bulimia and stage 3 chronic kidney disease (creatinine between 160μmol/L and 140μmol/L, that is, estimated glomerular filtration rate, 39ml/min/1.73m2 to 46ml/min/1.73m2) presented on three occasions to St Vincent’s Hospital following aspirin overdoses. During his third admission, he overdosed with aspirin while on the ward recovering from the previous aspirin overdose. His alleged ingested dosages Table were classed as “potentially lethal” in two episodes (>500mg/kg in both) and “serious” in the other two (300mg/kg to 500mg/kg) . However, the peak plasma concentrations indicated a “moderate” severity of poisoning after the first and second overdose and “mild” severity after the other two . The patient was dehydrated upon each admission with mild hyperventilation (respiratory rate around 30 breaths/min), nausea and tinnitus. He had no other neurological symptoms or signs. He was normothermic upon all admissions. In the second and third overdoses, the patient presented with respiratory alkalosis . Raised anion gap levels (that is, anion gap >18mmol/L) were observed upon the first admission (anion gap, 21mmol/L) and the second admission (anion gap, 22mmol/L) and resolved within 24 hours of treatment both times.In each of the four episodes, the patient received intravenous fluids (0.9% saline and/or 4% dextrose diluted 1:5 in saline) with the aim of achieving clinical euvolemia. Potassium supplementation was needed in the first, second and third overdoses. Additionally, sodium bicarbonate was administered after the second, third and fourth overdoses. The bicarbonate therapy led to an increase in urinary pH to between 7.5 and 8 (measured using Siemens Multistix 10 SG (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Tarrytown, NY, USA) (referred to as dipstick below)). Single-dose charcoal was given after the second overdose only. None of the admissions warranted airway support, and there was no incidence of bleeding.
This patient had short high-dependency unit admissions (<48 hours) after the first, second and third overdoses. His fourth overdose was treated in a general ward. Refractory hypokalemia was encountered after the first and second overdoses, taking more than 20 hours to achieve normokalemia . Urinary pH between 7.5 and 8 was observed only when plasma potassium concentration was ≥3.7mmol/L . Subsequently, using urine samples from one healthy volunteer (author DG) across a manipulated pH range of 5.0 to 8.5, dipstick readings were compared to those determined using a pH meter (Mettler Toledo, Columbus, OH, USA). The dipstick readings were consistently lower, by 0.36±0.2 units (based on six readings), than the “gold standard” pH meter readings.
The longest apparent half-life (t1/2) of elimination of salicylate (t1/2 = 30 hours) was seen after the first overdose, when urinary alkalization was not attempted . The most rapid elimination was observed during the second admission (t1/2 = 9.7 hours). On that occasion, compared to the other overdoses, a much greater volume of intravenous fluid was administered, along with bicarbonate therapy and a single dose of charcoal .
The patient’s lengths of stay were 21 days (first overdose), 8 days (second overdose) and 6 days (third and fourth overdoses), respectively.