A thirty-year-old male presented with fever and non-productive cough for 2 weeks with exertional dyspnoea. He had hypertension and renal impairment due to mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis, diagnosed 3 months prior to current presentation, and was on bisoprolol, prazosin and prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg/day). Renal biopsy had not shown evidence of vasculitis.
On examination he was emaciated (BMI 18 kg/m2), febrile (38.2 °C), and had coarse crackles over right upper lung. Other system examinations were unremarkable.
The patient had a pancytopaenia with neutropaenia (neutrophil count 780 / mm3) and dysplastic hypoproliferative bone marrow. Peripheral blood detected cytomegalovirus (29,000 copies per microliter by PCR) and anti-CMV IgM was positive. After 21 days of ganciclovir (100 mg daily IV), CMV viral load became undetectable and pancytopaenia was corrected.
Contrast enhanced CT-chest showed right upper lobe consolidation with cavities . Sputum smear for acid fast bacilli, culture and PCR for mycobacteria (Xpert MTb/RIF) were negative. However, tuberculosis PCR (IS6110 method) performed on his bone marrow aspirate was positive. Therefore, anti tuberculous therapy with isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide were commenced for disseminated tuberculosis. But, the response was poor.. Aspergillus fumigatus was detected on bronchoalveolar lavage wet smear and culture. Both lavage and serum were positive for galactomannan antigen. Therefore voriconazole 500 mg twice daily (oral) was commenced.
On sixth week of voriconazole, the patient developed acute bilateral lower limb ischaemia. Two emboli occluding bilateral popliteal arteries were extracted during emergency embolectomy . Histology of emboli showed fungal filaments and culture isolated Aspergillus fumigatus. Trans-esophageal echocardiogram and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the aorta were normal. However, MRI abdomen incidentally detected a large splenic abscess .
Despite treatment with voriconazole for further 2 weeks, the splenic abscess enlarged and treatment was switched to liposomal amphotericin 3 mg/kg/day intravenously. Four weeks later he developed acute left upper motor neuron type facial nerve palsy. MRI brain showed multiple small focal lesions in capsular and cortical regions suggestive of fungal embolism . The neurological deficit completely resolved within a week.
Percutaneous aspiration under ultrasound guidance and 6 weeks of amphotericin failed to clear the splenic abscess. Therefore the patient underwent elective splenectomy. Histology of the splenic tissue showed fungal filaments within the abscess as well as caseating granulomas suggestive of tuberculosis of spleen .
Post-operative period was complicated with left Lower lobe pneumonia and parapneumonic effusion, from which he recovered with antibiotics and supportive measures. Subsequently, fever resolved and clinical status improved (see Additional file for the timeline of disease evolution).
Due to the unusual constellation of infections (CMV, tuberculosis and aspergillosis) the patient was screened for an immune deficiency state which revealed B cell, IgM and IgA deficiencies and impaired T cell proliferation with concanavalin A . Steroids were tapered and stopped 3 months after the current presentation. Six months later above immune defects returned to normal. Autoantibody profile (ANA, ANCA, rheumatoid factor and extracatable nuclear antibody profile) and HIV screening were negative on two occasions 4 months apart. Repeated imaging, bone marrow trephine and tumor screening with tumor markers did not identify any neoplasms.