The patient was a 48-year-old female with a 20-month history of right-sided orofacial pain. Her main complaint was paroxysmal pain in her auditory canal, pinna, deep in the jaw, and adjacent retromastoid area on the right side. The pain was described as a burning sensation in an area located in the posterior external auditory canal wall and was elicited by chewing, touch, or contact with objects or warm water. It usually lasted for a few seconds to 1–2 min and would remit spontaneously and abruptly. The patient ranked it 10 on the numeric rating scale. She had no odynophagia and was treated with carbamazepine (maximum 1200 mg/day), which proved to be ineffective. Other medications (Sertraline, Amitriptyline, and Pregabalin) also failed to provide clinically significant pain relief. The patient's otoscopic examination was unremarkable bilaterally. There was no sensory loss, facial palsy, or other neurological signs.
The patient underwent preoperative MRI and MRI angiography, including 3D T2-weighted fast spin echo and 3D constructive interference in the steady-state (CISS) sequences. Images showed the right posterior cerebellar artery crossing the cerebello-pontine cistern [arrow in ] in close contact with the right VII and VIII nerves [arrow in ], near the internal auditory canal.
A right-sided suboccipital retrosigmoid craniotomy was performed. The patient was put in a left lateral decubitus position, with the head well rotated and fixed in a Mayfield clamp. The dura was opened. Minimal retraction of the cerebellum was performed to achieve cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage. In the cerebello-pontine angle, as shown in , the loop [arrow-head in ] of the PICA was visualized, as well as the close contact between the vascular structure and the VII-VIII nerves complex [* in ]. Additional exploration did not reveal other areas of neurovascular conflict at the roots of the trigeminal nerve or the lower cranial nerves. The artery's arachnoid attachment was dissected, the artery mobilized, and a small Teflon felt was placed to separate the artery from the nerve. Sectioning of the intermediate nerve or excision of the geniculate ganglion (GG) was not necessary.
Following the decompression, the patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and the pain resolved immediately with no additional neurological deficits, demonstrating that the compression was the only cause of pain. Postoperative CT scans were unremarkable. Medication was tapered off in the first few weeks after surgery. At 6-months’ follow-up, no further paroxysmal pain had occurred.