The 8-year-old girl had complained of intermittent fever for the past year and rashes all over her body that started to appear at about 6 months of age. She experienced an oil massage at the age of 6 months, which resulted in the rapid emergence of well-defined elevated skin rashes across her entire body that vanished in minutes. The rashes began to appear every day. There was no connection between these rashes and the use of oil, no discernible pattern to the rash's onset, no disruption of sleep at night, and no prior history of fever, eczema, food, medication, or insect allergies. The rashes continued to appear without any specific pattern daily. They always resolved within one to 2 h without any medication, and they were not itchy. Their parents expected she would outgrow it with time; thus, no further doctor visits or follow-ups were done. At the age of 7 years, she developed high-grade intermittent fever, for which she required admission. But fever continued to appear often, without any specific pattern. After experiencing on-and-off fever for 4 months, a positive Mantoux test, and a chest X-ray revealing a hilar shadow, she was later started on antitubercular medications. GeneXpert sputum yielded negative results. Fever did not, however, go away entirely. She reported to us at this time that she had a daily history of intermittent fever, with most episodes occurring after dark. She exhibited good activity during the inter-febrile phase and had a healthy appetite. Mother had a history of non-pruritic hives all over her body that were worse during a fever and when her skin was exposed. Hives were more common on exposed bodily parts. Antipyretics were used to treat fever and minor joint pain. There was no prior history of edema, redness, involvement of other joints, involvement of the eyes, or repeated hospitalizations. No significance was found in birth, developmental, or family history. Upon general examination, the patient had pallor and well-defined raised lesions over the body. She measured 125 cm (at the 50th centile) in height and 23 kg (25th to 50th centile). A systemic evaluation revealed no abnormalities. The results of the investigation showed neutrophilic leukocytosis (WBC: 22,740/μL, ANC: 16,470/μL) and iron deficiency anemia (Hb: 8.4 g/dL, serum iron: 30 μg/dL, TIBC: 500 μg/dL, transferrin saturation: 8%, ferritin: 15 ng/mL), high CRP of 70 mg/dL, and raised ESR (25 mm at 1 h). Pure tone audiometry revealed right-sided severe mixed hearing loss. Antineutrophilic antibody (ANA), immunoglobulins, and interleukin levels were all within normal limits. Serum amyloid level was high (295 mg/L). The complaints above of hearing loss, elevated amyloid levels, and inflammatory markers led to the suspicion of Muckle-Wells syndrome. Germline mutations in the NLRP3 gene were detected by Sanger sequencing test. A pediatric rheumatologist advised following up a month after starting Colchicine empirically to prevent amyloidosis. There were fewer events still occurring, so the next plan was to begin Anakinra.