A 63-year-old male visited a nearby hospital with a chief complaint of nausea and epigastric discomfort in March 2009. He consulted our institution in April 2009. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed a type 0–IIc moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the posterior wall of the gastric angle and a tubular adenoma in the greater curvature of the gastric antrum . An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed no lymph node swelling, but a chest CT scan revealed masses of size 5.2 × 4.0 cm in the right upper lung lobe and 2.3 × 2.2 cm in the left upper lung lobe . The pretracheal, subcarinal and hilar lymph nodes were swollen. Transbronchial biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma. An 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan revealed a mass with intense FDG accumulation; the maximal standardized uptake values (SUVmax) were 18.6 in the right upper lung lobe, 22.3 in the left upper lung lobe, and 5.7 in the posterior wall of the gastric angle. The gastric cancer was cT1(SM), cN0, cM0, cStage IA according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma 13th edition . The pulmonary tumors were diagnosed to be right lung cancer with contralateral lung metastasis, staged as cT2, cN2, cM1(PUL), cStage IV according to the General Rule for Clinical and Pathological Record of Lung Cancer 6th edition .
As the lung cancer was advanced and the gastric cancer was early, treatment was focused on the lung cancer. Chemotherapy was administered with four courses of S-1 plus cisplatin, six courses of triweekly docetaxel, three courses of triweekly carboplatin plus paclitaxel, six courses of weekly carboplatin plus paclitaxel with 55 Gy of radiotherapy, and four courses of carboplatin plus gemcitabine. Each chemotherapy regimen was terminated because of progressive disease (PD) of the lung cancer. During this period, EGD was conducted every 3–6 months, and endoscopic stable disease (eSD) was confirmed. During a chemotherapy break between November 2012 and September 2014, PD of the lung cancer and endoscopic PD of the gastric cancer to a type 3 tumor were recognized. Chemotherapy was restarted with six courses of carboplatin plus nab-paclitaxel, then two courses of nab-paclitaxel, four courses of carboplatin plus irinotecan, and 5 months of afatinib. However, these regimens resulted in PD of the lung cancer and eSD of the gastric cancer . Finally, nivolumab as the ninth-line setting was administered in February 2016. After ten courses of biweekly nivolumab (3 mg/kg), a chest CT scan showed shrunken lung consolidations of the bilateral upper lobes . An FDG PET/CT scan indicated that the lung consolidation of the right upper lobe had an SUVmax of 4.09, which could be well explained by atelectasis. EGD showed redness and smooth elevation of the posterior wall of the gastric angle and biopsy revealed no malignancy . From August 2016, he was chemotherapy-free in a good general condition. During this period, chest CT and FDG PET/CT scan showed no progression of the lung cancer. The chemotherapy regimens and the transition of tumor markers including serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) are summarized in Fig. . Transition of cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA) and FDG PET/CT scans are shown elsewhere .
However, the type 0–IIa tumor in the greater curvature of the gastric antrum, which had been pathologically diagnosed as a tubular adenoma, was diagnosed as a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma in August 2017, and a type 0–IIc lesion in the lesser curvature of the gastric angle appeared and was diagnosed as a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma in March 2020 . It seemed that the 0–IIc tumor had not arisen from the epicenter, but from the margin of the primary gastric cancer. An abdominal CT scan did not show wall thickening of the stomach, swollen lymph nodes, or other distant metastases. An FDG PET/CT scan showed no progression, with an SUVmax of 3.89 in the right upper lung lobe.
We diagnosed that the lung cancer was in CR and that the gastric cancer had relapsed after endoscopic CR. Preoperative diagnoses were M, less, Type 0–IIc, ycT1a, ycN0, ycM0 ycStage I and L, Gre, Type 0–IIa, ycT1a, ycN0, ycM0, ycStage I according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma 15th edition . Laparoscopic gastrectomy with D1+ lymphadenectomy and Billroth-I reconstruction was performed. As the intraoperative frozen section revealed a small adenocarcinoma on the posterior wall of the proximal resection line, the stomach was additionally resected to confirm a negative proximal margin . Histopathological examination revealed three carcinoma lesions and a tubular adenoma : [I] M, Less, Type 0–IIc, 15 × 8 mm ; [II] L, Gre, Type 0–IIa, 15 × 12 mm; [III] M, Post, Type 0–IIb, 2 mm; [I–III] tub1, pT1a(M), Ly0, V0, pN0, M0, H0, P0, CY0, pStage IA ; [IV] tubular adenoma, low grade. Other than these tumors, no viable tumor cells or signs of tumor regression, including scars, necrosis, fibrosis, granulation, or mucin lakes, were found in the section of the whole posterior wall of the gastric body and the additionally resected stomach. The postoperative course was uneventful. This patient is doing well 1 month after surgery.