A 73-year-old Japanese woman with a history of hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and malignant lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) presented to our hospital complaining of headache and nausea for 10 days. MALT lymphoma had been treated with chemotherapy 10 years ago and was in complete remission. The patient had no antithrombotic medications. The patient was fully alert and had no neurological deficits on initial physical examination. Brain computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated subacute subcortical hematoma mainly in the left superior to middle frontal gyrus (43 × 18 × 44 mm) with gadolinium enhancement in the perihematoma area and in the genu of the corpus callosum . Cerebral angiography detected neither vascular abnormalities nor feeder-like arteries of tumors in the left ICA, although it revealed an aneurysm in the contralateral ICA. A string of beads appearance was also detected in the bilateral extracranial ICA . Abdominal three-dimensional CT angiography performed for examination of hematuria 10 years previously also revealed a string of beads sign in the right renal artery. These studies indicate that FMD existed in the background. The abnormal vessels explaining the bleeding source were not disclosed on angiography; thus, we could not diagnose the apparent cause of hemorrhage. Craniotomy biopsy and removal of the hematoma were performed for diagnosis and decompressive treatment 10 days after admission. With a left frontal craniotomy, a xanthochromic capsule was observed on the surface of the hematoma. Although no specific findings were observed in the intraoperative frozen section diagnosis, the final permanent pathology specimen revealed FMD predominantly involving small- to mediumsized arteries distributed in the hemorrhagic necrotic brain tissue and overlying meninx. Many of the affected segments had stenoses with obliterations due to fibroplasia spreading into the intima and recanalization was observed in some of the obliterated vessels . In addition, aneurysmal dilatations were formed in the segments with severe medial lesions [ and ]. Immunostaining revealed that the most of the endothelium of thin-walled blood vessels and capillaries due to aneurysm had only CD31 without CD34 [ and ]. The patient was discharged 27 days after surgery. She was followed up in the outpatient clinic, and we recommend intervention for an aneurysm of the right ICA.