41-year-old previously healthy caucasian female patient presented to our emergency department (ED) for severe right upper quadrant (RUQ) abdominal pain that had exacerbated six hours prior to presentation. The pain had started two days prior to presentation for which she visited the ED in a peripheral hospital. There, blood analysis was done and showed neutrophilic shift, elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), and slightly high levels of the transaminases. Abdominal ultrasound (US) was done and showed a mildly distended gallbladder with a wall thickening of 4 mm and the presence of a 10 mm stone. There were no pericholecystic fluid nor dilation of the bile ducts. Sonographic Murphy's sign was negative. The patient was considered to have biliary colic and was offered to be admitted for further evaluation and to undergo laparoscopic cholecystectomy; however, her symptoms decreased in intensity on intravenous analgesics meanwhile, for this reason she refused to be admitted and got discharged. Nevertheless, the next day the pain returned and became severe in intensity, constant in nature, not radiating, post-prandial, and not alleviating by over the counter pain medications for which she presented to our ED. This time, the pain was also associated with four episodes of vomiting which developed over the past two days, and she did report one week history of myalgia, nausea, anorexia, and generalized fatigue. The patient reported no fever or chills and normally consistent and colored bowel movements, but did notice recent urine darkening. To note, the patient takes no medications, has no pertinent past medical family history, is not a smoker, and drinks alcohol occasionally. Moreover, she underwent hysteroscopic myomectomy for uterine fibroids two weeks ago; in addition, open appendectomy, adenoidectomy, and tympanoplasty were done at the age of 14 year old, 15 year old, and 22 year old, respectively. On physical examination, vital signs were normal with a temperature of 37.3 °C, blood pressure of 105/68 mmHg, and heart rate of 73 beat per minute. She was pale but not icteric, and the abdominal examination revealed soft abdomen but with RUQ and epigastric tenderness and with a positive Murphy's sign. Blood test showed normal complete blood count, electrolytes, and lipase with only elevated CRP but lower than the previous value; however, this time, total and direct bilirubin blood tests were also ordered that showed elevated values . Therefore, taking into consideration the patient's persistent severe RUQ pain with positive Murphy's sign, the presence of a 10 mm gallbladder stone in the US done two days ago, and the elevated level of CRP and bilirubin, plan was made to undergo laparoscopic cholecystectomy with intraoperative cholangiography (IOC) and possible bile duct exploration or intraoperative endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) if needed for acute calculus cholecystitis with possible stone migration. Intraoperatively, an inflamed gallbladder was identified, and the smoothly done cholangiogram showed no abnormalities or filling defects in the biliary tree . Furthermore, the cystic duct and artery were clipped and cut and the gallbladder was dissected carefully from the liver bed with no injury; however, when removed and opened, no stones nor sludge were found in the gallbladder. At this stage the etiology of AAC was highly suspected rather than a calculus cholecystitis with a migrated stone. The last is mainly due to the presence of gallbladder inflammation without an obstructing stone and the difficulty of a 10 mm gallbladder stone or any stone large enough to cause cholecystitis to migrate through the common bile duct (CBD) either spontaneously without being stuck or causing bile duct dilatation or during cholangiography without extensive CBD flushing; moreover, when the US done in the peripheral hospital was reassessed at our institution retrospectively, it was found that the suspected reported stone could had been mistaken by a folded gallbladder wall especially due to the absence of a clear posterior shadowing. Post operation day one, while the patient's abdominal pain was already resolved, laboratory tests were ordered including full liver function test for further assessment and monitoring. Laboratory tests showed elevated liver function tests; therefore, taking into consideration this elevation, the presence of acalculous cholecystitis with no clear etiology, and the one week history of fatigue and myalgia, the presence of viral hepatitis was highly suspected. Therefore, complete viral hepatitis workup was ordered that all turned to be negative except for anti-HAV immunoglobulin M which was found to be 8.82 S/Co indicating acute viral hepatitis A. Consequently, the etiology of her previous symptoms were attributed to HAV induced AAC. The patient was maintained on supportive therapy: intravenous hydration, anti-emetics, and low-fat diet. On the second day of hospitalization, the patient's condition was significantly improved and she was discharged home on supportive therapy. To note, the histopathology showed gallbladder with cholesterolosis that is edematous, congested, and with polymorphous leukocytic infiltrates showing signs of cholecystitis and no malignancy.