A previously healthy 18-year-old girl student unintentionally ingested a large dose (60 mg) of metoclopramide (6 tablets of 10 mg), exceeding the typical therapeutic dosage, for the management of nausea and vomiting. Approximately 6 h after the ingestion of the medication, she experienced dizziness, blurred vision, neck dystonia, and upward deviation of the eyes. Seeing these symptoms and worrying about their child’s physical condition, the parents brought her to the medical center. Following an initial examination during which stable vital signs were observed, the patient was diagnosed with extrapyramidal syndrome and administered 5 mg of biperiden ampoules intramuscularly. However, due to a lack of improvement in the patient’s symptoms, she was subsequently referred to the emergency room of a medical center in northern Iran for additional assessment and treatment.

Upon arrival at the emergency room, the patient exhibited a constellation of symptoms, including neck dystonia, upward eye deviation, abdominal and leg muscle spasms. These clinical signs prompted the initiation of treatment with an intravenous infusion of 5 mg midazolam ampoules over a 6-hour period, as well as intravenous administration of 5 mg biperiden ampoules. Based on these initial management measures, the patient was subsequently admitted to the poisoning ward for ongoing monitoring and care.

After a period of 6 h, the patient’s symptoms improved completely, with vital signs remaining stable and all laboratory tests and electrocardiography yielding unremarkable results. To continue treatment and prevent symptom recurrence, 2 mg biperiden oral tablets were prescribed every 12 h. The patient was discharged from the hospital in a good general condition, with instructions to take 2 mg biperiden tablets twice daily for 3 days. One week after discharge, the patient’s follow-up visit revealed that her vital signs and general symptoms remained stable, with no new complaints or adverse events reported. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. This study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki Principles. Also, CARE guidelines and methodology were followed in this study.