A 62-year-old male patient, known to have primary hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus, presented with a brutal onset of loss of consciousness, muscle pain in the upper limbs accompanied by increased movement impairment. In the emergency department a rapid antigen test for SARS-CoV-2 was performed which was found to be positive. The patient had not been vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2. Clinical assessment showed no significant changes: BMI = 32.41 kg/m2; BP = 140/85 mmHg; HR = 95 bpm with normal rhythmic heart beats; SpO2 = 97% (room air); no fever; no pulmonary rales. Initial lab values showed increased inflammation (CRP = 59.5 mg/L), increased values of cardiac enzymes (hsTnI = 8248 ng/L) and possible sepsis (procalcitonin = 68.03 ng/L). The ECG showed no acute ischemic changes. A CT angiography of the pulmonary arteries was performed with the following result: cardiomegaly with contrast refluxed into the hepatic veins, pulmonary arteries with dimensions at the upper limits for normal values, homogeneously opacified, without acute pulmonary lesions. Considering these data, the patient underwent a standard cardiac ultrasound examination revealing concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle, severe hypokinesia of the interventricular septum, of the anterior and antero-lateral wall, and hypokinesia of the inferior and posterior wall with an estimated ejection fraction of the left ventricle to be approximately 34% ; global strain was −7.7% ; systolic pressure in the pulmonary artery was 50 mmHg. Approximately 2 h after admission, the dynamics of myocardial necrosis was entertained, enzymes registered an increasing trend (hsTnI = 9755 ng/mL; CK = 51432 U/L; CK-MB = 189 U/L). As a result of the accumulated data, an acute coronary syndrome without ST segment elevation was suspected. The patient underwent coronary angiography using the right radial artery approach, in which the coronary arteries revealed no significant angiographic lesions. and show the dynamics of hsTnI, CK and CK-MB.
Considering possible sepsis of unknown origin, antibiotics were initiated with ceftriaxone. A sputum culture was positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae spp pneumoniae, and ceftriaxone was continued according to the antibiogram. Blood cultures taken consecutively were negative. During day 3, a thorax CT scan was performed, which showed fine areas of ground glass arranged peripherally and classified as minimal lung damage and small bilateral areas of pleurisy with a maximum thickness of 10 mm in the right costo-phrenic recess. Methylprednisolone was given, with progressive decreasing of the dose over time. Standard medication for heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction was given . The serum level of interleukin-6 was 2.32 pg/mL, which was considered to be normal . The evolution was favorable: cardiac enzymes, inflammatory markers and procalcitonin continued to decrease and eventually were normalized. Kidney function was preserved. The muscle pain in the upper limbs subsided, with full recovery of functionality. Patient tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 infection on day 14 (RT-PCR).
Corroborating the clinical, paraclinical and biological context, the panel of IgG antibodies specific for myositis was observed, with a positive result for anti-PL-7 antibodies. We consider that the episode of myocarditis and extensive myositis was clinically triggered by the SARS-CoV-2 infection, possibly linked to his autoimmune status, which was unknown to the patient.