A 14-year-old girl was admitted to the gynecology outpatient department of Women and Children’s Hospital of Chongqing Medical University in April 2022, with complaints of a small amount of bloody vaginal discharge during the past month. Before this event she reported an average menstrual cycle of 25 days, with her menarche at the age of thirteen, and her periods averaging five days, with normal volume and no dysmenorrhea. In addition, the patient’s past medical history showed no history of infectious or genetic diseases, trauma, surgery, blood transfusion, drug or food allergies. Pelvic color doppler ultrasound scan revealed a mass with cystic and solid components in the left ovary extending upward to the inferior hepatic rim, downward to below the pubic symphysis, and forward to the anterior axillary line. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the abdomen and pelvis showed a large solid cystic mass lesion in the left ovary that measured 6.7 × 18.9 × 29.3 cm, and the contrasted scan showed an enhanced septum and solid component . The liver and intrahepatic ducts, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, both kidneys and ureters were unremarkable. The patient’s pre-operative serum levels showed that carbohydrate antigen (CA-125): 22.3 U/mL (normal: < 35 U/mL), human epididymal protein-4 (HE4): 28.5 pmol/L (normal: < 70 pmoI/L), human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG): < 1.20 mIU/ml (normal: < 5.0 mIU/ml), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP): 3.3 ng/ml (normal: 0–7 ng/ml), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): 2.2 ng/ml (normal: 0–5 ng/ml), carbohydrate antigen 19 − 9 (CA19-9): < 2.0 U/mL (normal: 0–43 U/mL) were within normal limits. The patient, with a height of 155 cm and weight of 45.5 kg (BMI: 18.9), presented no particular concerns regarding nutritional status, general vital signs, psychosocial state, or risk factors for stress-related injuries. The results of complete hemogram ( WBC: 7.5 × 109/L, RBC: 4.2 × 1012/L, PLT: 216 × 109/L, HGB: 127 g/L, et al. ) in addition to liver and kidney function tests ( TBIL:10.5 μm/L, DBIL: 3.4 μm/L, IBIL: 7.1 μm/L, ALB: 45 g/L, GLO: 20 g/L, A/G: 2.3, ALT: 13 U/L, AST: 20 U/L, UREA: 3.25 mmol/L, Cr: 56 umol/L, UA: 323 umol/L, et al. ) and coagulation profile ( APTT: 27.9 s, PT: 12 s, INR: 1.01, TT: 18 s, FIB: 2.7 g/L, FDP: <2 mg/L, D-D: 0.31 mg/L FEU ) were also normal.
After examination, given the patient’s pediatric status and the aim to minimize surgical invasiveness, the patient underwent laparoscopic adnexectomy (single-port surgery) which revealed a large left ovarian tumor measuring 29 × 25 × 15 cm with an intact capsule adhering to the omentum; however, the surrounding peritoneum and the right ovary appeared to be uneventful. A small amount of ascites was found in the abdominal cavity and the peritoneal lavage was sent for cytological examination. A left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed followed by frozen tissue sectioning. Subsequently, the patient underwent appendectomy and omentectomy, and the specimens were sent for routine histopathological examination. As no abnormalities were observed in the right ovary during the laparoscopic exploration, and in an effort to minimize surgical impact on the right ovarian function, we did not remove any part of the right ovary for pathological examination.
Frozen sections revealed an enlarged dissected ovary measuring 15 × 9 × 4 cm, with a cystic cut section and presence of solid areas. Cysts were filled with turbid mucus, and their walls were mostly smooth with a few surface irregularities and a 3 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm pink nodular excrescence in the interior . No significant abnormalities were found in the fallopian tubes.
Microscopically, frozen sectioning followed by routine histological examination revealed a continuum of architectural and cytological atypia that included benign, borderline, and carcinomatous areas. Carcinomas with papillary and cribriform-shaped glands exhibited expansile growth, with anastomosing architecture and minimal or absent stroma; most of the epithelial cells were moderate to severely atypical in their lining, with reduced/absent mucinous differentiation and conspicuous mitoses. Based on these observations on the tissue pathological aspects, a diagnosis of mucinous cystadenocarcinoma with expansile invasion was finally made . The immunohistochemical staining results were as follows: ER-negative, PR-negative, CK7-diffuse positive, CK20-focal positive, CDX2-negative, SATB2-negative, GATA3-negative, Mammaglobin-negative:, GCDFP-15-negative, Pax8-negative, Vimentin-negative, Ki67: about 20% (+), WTI-negative, P53: wild-type expression.
For this patient, the levels of tumor markers, such as carbohydrate antigen (CA-125), human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19 − 9 (CA19-9) and human epididymal protein-4 (HE4) were all within normal limits. The diagnosis of mucinous cystadenocarcinoma with expansile invasion was mainly based on imaging and pathology, especially pathology.
The patient was followed up after surgery every three months with gynecologic ultrasound and analysis of tumor markers (CEA, AFP, CA19-9, CA-125, HE4). Ultrasound results showed no pelvic mass and tumor markers were within normal range. Her current menstrual cycle is about 15 days, with an average period of 3–4 days, low volume, and no dysmenorrhea. The patient has so far shown no signs of recurrence and is still being followed up.