A 65-year-old male presented to the clinic with bilateral knee pain. On clinical examination, he had tenderness restricted to the medial joint line, and a correctible varus deformity. Plain radiographs of bilateral knee joint confirmed the pain to be due to bilateral, severe, and medial compartment osteoarthritis of the knee joint . The patient was on the treatment for hypertension for the past decade.
He underwent bilateral UKR in single sitting. The intraoperative, perioperative, and immediate post-operative period was uneventful. The post-operative radiographs were acceptable, and the patient was discharged in a stable condition .
By 21st post-operative day, he improved to a normal gait with near-complete pain relief. On 8-month post-operative follow-up, he presented with pain in the right knee which was exaggerated on weight bearing, difficulty in bending the knee, and an alteration in the gait was observed . On clinical examination, suprapatellar effusion was found due to a tense suprapatellar pouch and a positive patellar tap test.
Consequently, the collection in the suprapatellar pouch of the affected knee joint was aspirated under all aseptic precautions. 120 cc of bloody aspirate was obtained, suggestive of hemarthrosis. Post-aspiration, the pain subsided, and the patient regained normal gait with no further complaints.
Six months after this (1.5 years postoperatively), the patient presented with the same complaints in the same knee. Repeat aspiration of the suprapatellar pouch was done, and around 110 cc with bloody aspirate was noted. This time, the condition recurred after a mere 3 days, raising the suspicion of a pseudoaneurysm formation in the mind of the chief surgeon, due to the nature and the frequency of complaints. The patient was advised dynamic magnetic resonance angiography of his right lower limb. The diagnosis was confirmed to be a pseudoaneurysm of the right lateral genicular artery of the knee joint.
The patient was referred to an interventional radiologist and he was advised angiography-guided embolization of the lateral genicular artery using polyvinyl alcohol particles .
Post-embolization, the recurrence of hemarthrosis stopped, and the patient was mobilized immediately. Over a year since then, the patient has had no recurrence and has achieved complete clinical and functional normalcy in terms of gait, range of motion, and return to activities of daily life.