A 55-year-old man was admitted to a provincial hospital with fecal occult blood. Colonoscopy revealed a submucosal tumor with depression in the anterior wall of the distal rectum . The tumor was diagnosed as a rectal NET following pathological examination of the biopsy specimen, and he was referred to our hospital for further examination. Endorectal endoscopic ultrasound revealed a 14-mm oval tumor with deep invasion to the submucosa layer. The tumor was located at 1.8 cm from the anal verge. Systematic computed tomography (CT) revealed no evidence of regional lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis such as that to the liver or lung. On the basis of these findings, we performed laparoscopic subtotal and D2 lymph node dissection with diverting stoma. The macroscopic finding of the resected specimen revealed an oval-shaped tumor with depression. Pathological examination with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining showed the tumor cells spreading in a rosette-like pattern. Immunohistochemical staining revealed the tumor cells to be positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin, with a Ki-67 labeling index of 3% . Pathological diagnosis was NET of the rectum, G2, T1b (invasion to submucosa), N0, Stage I without lymphovascular invasion. Diverting stoma closure was performed 6 months after the initial operation. A follow-up abdominopelvic CT scan at 12 months after surgery detected a 4-mm mass in the left internal iliac region . The mass was followed with abdominopelvic CT every 6 months and occasional positron emission tomography (PET)-CT. At 54 months after surgery, the mass had enlarged to 20 mm , but PET-CT did not show abnormal uptake in the tumor or in other distant organs. Because the mass had enlarged over time, we suspected it to be a single lateral lymph node recurrence, and we performed left lateral lymph node dissection. The resected specimen was again an oval-shaped mass of 14 mm in size . The finding from HE staining was similar to that in the specimen resected at the primary surgery . Immunohistochemical staining again revealed the same findings as in the previous resected specimen, i.e., cells positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin positive, but now the Ki-67 labeling index had increased slightly to 5% . On the basis of these findings, the pathological diagnosis was lateral lymph node recurrence. The patient was followed up with CT every 6 months and colonoscopy annually. At 42 months after the second surgery, the patient has shown no evidence of recurrence.