A 65-year-old man was referred to our hospital in October 2006 with a huge abdominal tumor. A firm mass was palpated extending from the epigastrium to the left hypogastrium. There were no laboratory abnormalities, except a slight elevation of the total bilirubin (1.3 mg/dl) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH: 217 IU/L) levels in the serum. The tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA19-9) were within the normal range. Ultrasonography showed that the mass occupied almost the entire upper abdomen anterior to the bowel loops. On computed tomography (CT), a mass behind the left hepatic lobe showed heterogeneous low density with faint enhancement . Abdominal angiography revealed that the tumor was vascularized mainly from the right epigastric artery . We suspected liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, mesothelioma, or gastric GIST. At laparotomy on October 2006, a well-encapsulated tumor was found in the greater omentum. There was no adhesion to adjacent organs and structures but a pinpoint adhesion to the stomach. The right gastroepiploic artery and vein were prominent and stretched by the tumor, and a major supply vessel diverged from it in one stalk . There was no evidence of metastasis in the abdominal cavity. Grossly, a well-demarcated reddish-gray solid tumor, 20 × 17 × 6 cm in size, showed irregular modularity . The cut surfaces were tan-colored and contained focally necrotic areas and a cystic nodule. Histopathologically, the tumor was composed of proliferating epithelioid cells and myxoid cells with an interlacing bundle pattern . The cellularity was relatively high and the frequency of mitotic figures was 2 of 50 high power fields (HPF). The MIB-1 index was 4.4% . The tumor cells were diffusely immunoreactive for myeloid stem cell antigen (CD34), weakly or focally positive for c-kit proto-oncogene protein product (CD117) and slightly positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE). However, there was no staining for cytokeratin (CK), alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA) or S-100 protein. Direct sequencing demonstrated mutations in the platelet-derived growth factor alpha (PDGFRA) gene exon 12, codon 561, encoding a thymine to adenine substitution . These findings were consistent with a myxoid epithelioid GIST lacking myogenic features and neural attributes. The patient had a complete tumor resection and an uneventful postoperative course. He was treated by per os administration of Glevec® 300 mg/day as an adjuvant postoperative molecular targeting chemotherapy and has been living disease-free for 6 months.