A 48-year-old woman (III-8, a sister of the proband from this HLRCC family) underwent abdominal ultrasonography annually at a local clinic after 2007, and presented with a left renal mass detected by an ultrasonography and was introduced to our hospital in March 2013 (Additional file : Figure S1).
She had undergone enucleation myomectomy for uterine leiomyomatosis at the age of 29 years at another hospital, while hysterectomy had been performed for recurrence large uterine leiomyomatosis at the age of 39 years at other hospital. In 2007 (when she was 40), her sister was diagnosed with HLRCC having a novel FH mutation at 241,671,938 bp (C574T) by direct sequencing of the FH gene from leukocyte DNA. Her sister subsequently died of HLRC-associated advanced renal cancer. In 2007, sequencing of DNA extracted from blood cells of this patient confirmed that she also had the same FH mutation as her sister . After 2007, we recommended that 13 members of this family with the FH mutation should receive active surveillance by annual imaging (abdominal plain computed tomography (CT) or ultrasonography) at a convenient clinic .
Laboratory tests revealed moderate anemia (hemoglobin: 9.3 g/dl) and elevation of serum C-reactive protein (CRP: 3.19, normal < 0.3 mg/dl). Karnofsky performance status (KPS) was 100 %. Plain CT scans obtained at our hospital showed a left renal tumor with a diameter of 7 cm and involvement of multiple regional para-aortic lymph nodes, but no distant metastases (cT3aN1M0) . Positron emission tomography (PET) showed fluorine-18-deoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in the renal tumor and the metastatic lymph node and the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) was 15.3 and 7.5, respectively .
Her risk classification for renal cancer was intermediate risk according to the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) criteria. However, the prognosis of patients with HLRCC-associated renal cancer, in particular those with extrarenal involvement, is extremely poor. Furthermore, her tumors showed a different imaging pattern from that of typical clear cell RCC (Additional file : Figure S1), and the histology of the renal cancers in her relatives was non-clear cell RCC (undifferentiated RCC in her mother, pRCC2 in both her sister and maternal cousin). Thus, the tumor of this patient seemed likely to be non-clear cell carcinoma, but we did not perform needle biopsy to avoid dissemination of cancer cells.
In order to decrease the tumor burden and improve the feasibility of surgery, we selected preoperative treatment with a multi-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). In comparison to first-generation TKIs targeting the VEGFR, axitinib is a potent second-generation inhibitor of VEGFRs with a higher affinity for tyrosine kinase and achieves stronger inhibition of kinase activity with fewer adverse effects such as thrombocytopenia. Additionally, first-generation inhibitors block other targets, such as PDGF receptors (PDGFR), KIT (cluster of differentiation 117: CD117), b-rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma (RAF), and Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT-3), which are not substantially inhibited by axitinib. These off-target activities might contribute to the adverse effects of the first-generation inhibitors, suggesting that more specific inhibitors of VEGFR such as axitinib might have an enhanced therapeutic window. We recently successfully treated a patient who had a large right RCC showing sarcomatoid differentiation that directly invaded the duodenum and inferior vena cava with regional lymph node involvement. In this patient, radical right nephrectomy, cavotomy with thrombectomy, and pancreatoduodenectomy were successfully performed after administration of axitinib as first-line neoadjuvant therapy without severe toxicity .
We selected axitinib as preoperative molecular-targeting therapy to decrease the tumor size before surgery with good tolerability. Administration of axitinib starting at 5 mg/day was scheduled for four to six weeks before radical surgery involving left nephrectomy and extended retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (para-aortic and aorto-caval nodes). After 1 week, the dose of axitinib was increased to 14 mg/day. After four weeks of total dose of axitinib of 329 mg (5 mg/day for continuous 7 days and 14 mg/day for following continuous 21 days), there were no apparent adverse events of > grade 3, excluding headache and hypertension (systolic blood pressure > 200 mmHg). Tumor shrinkage and a decrease of SUVmax were observed . Subsequently, we successfully carried out radical left nephrectomy and extended retroperitoneal lymph node dissection (para-aortic and aorto-caval nodes). Macroscopically, the tumor was an invasive whitish-yellowish mass with partial necrosis. Pathological examination confirmed pRCC2 with Fuhrman grade 3 differentiation (pT3apN1M0). The pathological effect of axitinib was grade 2 (i.e., two-thirds necrosis of the tumor). The patient has been receiving axitinib at 5 mg/day in the manner of one cycle of one week (5 days on - 2 days off) as adjuvant therapy for 33 months, and remains well with no evidence of recurrence at 33 months after the operation.