A 77-year-old man of the Han nationality complained of numbness of his lower limbs for more than 5 years. In addition, his walking distance was less than 100 meters. A neurological examination suggested tenderness in the area of the lumbosacral spinous processes and bilateral paravertebral muscle. The feeling of numbness on the superficial skin of his bilateral lower limbs decreased. His Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) score was 24 and his Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) score was 5 before the operation. He had no history of hypertension, diabetes, or surgery. He also had no tobacco smoking or alcohol history. He took celecoxib orally, twice a day, one tablet a time; his pain was obviously not relieved. Before the operation, the white blood cell of our patient was 5.5 × 109/L, the red blood cell was 4.26 × 1012/L, the hemoglobin (HGB) was 129 g/L, and the platelets (PLT) was 170 × 109/L. As for his liver and renal functions, his alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 11 U/L and his aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 2211 U/L. His urea was 6.07 mmol/L and his creatinine was 71.9 umol/L. The tests of urine analysis, serology, and microbiology were normal.
Lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated that the spinal canal of L4/5 was extremely narrow. He was diagnosed as having spondylolisthesis and lumbar spinal stenosis and was ready for stand-alone OLIF surgery in terms of clinical manifestations and imaging examinations. Unlike most other people, in this case, his IVC was discovered to be left-sided from the MRI image. In addition, we confirmed that he had a left-sided IVC with reconstruction computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the retroperitoneal vessels and lumbar vertebrae . Finally, he underwent L4/5 stand-alone OLIF surgery under general anesthesia in the left lateral decubitus position. In the left lateral position, a transverse skin incision of 5 cm was made at the area of the right side of his abdomen, which was in the same horizontal plane as the L4/5 intervertebral disc . His abdominal wall muscles were bluntly separated. The retroperitoneum was entered via blunt separation with the fingers; then, the psoas muscle was retracted posteriorly, and the abdominal vessels were retracted anteriorly. A guidewire was inserted in the middle of the target intervertebral disc with the help of a C-arm. Sequential dilators were placed over the guidewire; then, a lighted retractor was placed over the dilators and fixed to the vertebral body with a pin, and the operation field was exposed. The annulus fibrosus and the nucleus pulposus were removed with a nucleus pulposus clamp. Then, the cartilage endplates were resected for exposure of the bony endplates. A wide and lordotic intervertebral fusion cage of 14 × 55 × 6 mm (Medtronic Clydesdale, Memphis, Tennessee) packed with allograft bone was inserted into the L4/5 disc with the guidance of the C-arm. Then, the incision was closed layer by layer. The blood loss was approximately 30 ml.
Our patient began to practice walking the day after the operation with waist protection, and his symptoms improved. A lumbar X-ray after the surgery showed that the cage was located in the center, and he was discharged from our hospital 2 days after the surgery. After 3 months, the symptoms of lumbar and leg pain were significantly alleviated, and his ODI and VAS scores were 20 and 3, respectively. A lumbar X-ray also indicated that the location of the cage was perfect . Half a year after the surgery, our patient did not complain of low back and leg pain. In addition, his ODI score was 19 and his VAS score was 2.