This is the case of a 54-year-old male patient who received a kidney transplant from a living donor, his wife, in December 2014. His underlying nephropathy was a focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis, presumed secondary to a genetic mutation since he had a strong family history of kidney disease, even though no genetic testing was performed. He had been on hemodialysis for 6 months before transplantation. He had no previous blood transfusions, his panel reactive antibodies (PRAs) was negative and he had 5 mismatches in class I and was fully matched in class II. He received an induction therapy with Basiliximab and was maintained on tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), and low- dose steroids. His immediate post-operative period was uneventful with a serum creatinine of 1.1 mg/dl upon discharge. He continued his regular out-patient follow-up, with no major events, a stable kidney function, and no proteinuria up until August 2020. In September 2020, he presented with fatigue, fever and tested positive with COVID-19 infection. His respiratory symptoms were mild with no oxygen requirements; therefore, he was treated with acetaminophen and oral hydration. His low-grade fever persisted for more than one week, so a chest CT was ordered and showed multiple well-defined ground-glass opacities in both lungs consistent with COVID-19 infection. A blood test was done then and showed a c-reactive protein of 14 mg/l, white blood cells of 5.3 × 109/L with 70% neutrophils and 20% lymphocytes, and a serum creatinine level of 1.4 mg/dl. Since the patient presented with a mild case of COVID-19 he was not treated with dexamethasone, monoclonal antibodies or any other medications. His MMF was decreased from 1500 to 1000 mg per day for a total of 10 days, and his tacrolimus trough levels were kept within target range (6.8 ng/ml). His serum creatinine returned to its baseline of 1.2 mg/dl after resolution of the infection. Later on, it started to fluctuate on higher values reaching 1.6 mg/dl in April 2021, with no evident explanation. There was no introduction of new medications, no intercurrent infections, and again a stable tacrolimus trough level. He was therefore admitted for a kidney biopsy.
Light microscopy showed histological evidence of global glomerulitis (g2), moderate capillaritis (ptc2) and thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) affecting arterioles and glomeruli . A single focus of tubulitis was noted (t0). These histopathological findings were consistent with an active AMR. Interestingly, there was no C4d staining of peritubular capillaries or vasa recta upon immunohistochemistry (C4d0). Only focal interstitial inflammation (i0, < 10% of unscarred cortical parenchyma) was noted with CD3 and CD20 immunostaining. Capillaries contained mainly CD3+ and CD4+ T-cells, with some CD56+ cells . Direct immunofluorescence studies showed IgM, C3, and C1q deposition in a segmental distribution in the lesioned glomeruli, consistent with focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis. Some podocytes protein resorption droplets were highlighted by IgA, Kappa, and Lambda. There was no significant IgG deposition nor mesangial IgA deposits. Donor-specific antibodies came back positive for class I, HLA-Cw17, with an MFI of 6689 confirming the diagnosis of late active c4d negative AMR.
The patient was also tested for killer cell Ig-like receptors (KIRs) genotyping using the KIR SSO Genotyping Test (One Lambda) which applies Luminex® technology, and came back positive for the expression of KIR2DS1.
The patient was treated with pulse steroids, five sessions of plasma exchange and IVIG with a total dose of 2 g/kg, with a good response to treatment and a creatinine at 1.3 mg/dl upon discharge. His DSA decreased three months later to an MFI of 2710, with a delta MFI of 60%.