A 71-year-old Japanese man with end-stage renal disease due to diabetic nephropathy was emergently admitted to our hospital because of uremia with fatigue, pulmonary edema, and hyperkalemia. Therefore, hemodialysis was initiated using a temporary blood access catheter on the same day. He gradually recovered his health, and we planned to create an AVF.
He was right-handed. Preoperative ultrasonography of the left upper extremity showed good continuity and patency of the cutaneous vein from the wrist to the upper arm. However, the cephalic vein near the wrist was of a poor quality. Moreover, the internal diameter of the radial artery was approximately 2.0 mm in the FIS, and the second dorsal metacarpal vein (SDMV) was approximately 2.3 mm under avascularization. Therefore, we decided to create an RSDAVF in the FIS of the left dorsal hand. Thirteen days after his admission, the operation was successfully performed (A–D).
The radial artery, SDMV, tendonof the extensor pollicis longus, and skin incision line were preoperatively indicated using markers (A). The procedure was performed under local anesthesia (1% lidocaine) following a single dose of prophylactic antibiotic (cefazolin 1 g, intravenous), routine disinfection and aseptic shield.
First, a longitudinal 1.5-cm skin incision was made along the slight ulnar side of the artery over the FIS. Next, an approximately 3-cm segment of the vein was dissociated to reach and anastomose with the artery, and an approximately 2-cm segment of the artery was dissociated (B).
After 2000 units of heparin were administered and allowed to circulate for 5 min, the distal part of the vein was ligated and transected proximal to the ligation (C). The vein with visible blood reflux was flushed using a 10-ml syringe connected to a 5-Fr × 45-cm catheter, and by injecting 20–50 ml heparinized saline into the vascular lumen, we confirmed a good thrill. An end-to-side AVF whose anastomotic diameter was approximately 8 mm was then created using continuous 7/0 polypropylene sutures (D), and a good thrill was confirmed.
Finally, the wound was closed with 4/0 Nylon after we confirmed that no active bleeding was detected in the operative field.
The puncture of the RSDAVF was initiated 13 days after the operation. The AVF had developed sufficiently (A), and the blood flow rate during hemodialysis (QB) exceeded 300 mL/min. In addition, not only the superficial veins of the dorsal hand and forearm but also the cephalic and basilic veins in the forearm and upper arm had developed. He was able to receive hemodialysis without problems. The venipuncture sites are shown in B–C, and a schematic illustration of the AVF in the patient’s left hand and forearm is shown in D.
About six months later, he needed percutaneous transluminal angioplasty due to VA stenosis. It was successfully performed, and he has been on hemodialysis for seven months without additional VA interventions.