A 54-year-old man was referred to the outpatient clinic of our Division for surgical resection of giant emphysematous bullae. He had no smoking history, and he had previous pneumonia episodes and recently experienced intermittent shortness of breath associated with presyncope episodes. Seven days previously, dyspnea worsened (MRC Grade IV) . On general inspection, the patient was alert and stable. A review of his medical record showed a progressive decline in lung function with forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) that was 65% of the value predicted 6 months previously and FEV1 of 1.19 L that was 50% of that predicted 6 months previously. Arterial blood gas showed a pH of 7.41, partial pressure of CO2 (PCO2) of 43 mmHg, and partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) of 69 mmHg. The left hemithorax was hyperresonant to percussion, and decreased breath sounds were apparent upon auscultation. The chest radiography showed progressive enlargement of the bulla in the left lung of over 10 years (A). A CT scan obtained during the current admission revealed a giant bulla with a diameter of 10.5 × 11 cm in the left lobe, causing significant compression of fairly normal lung parenchyma (B).
Surgical criteria for resecting bullae are generally based on symptoms, particularly poor pulmonary function, inducing dyspnea. Moreover, the grade of dyspnea was previously classified : grade I is minimal dyspnea on running or on exerting more than an ordinary effort, grade II is dyspnea on ordinary effort, grade III is considerable dyspnea on exerting less than an ordinary effort, and grade IV is dyspnea at rest. In our case, the patient was of grade II.
The patient underwent surgical resection of the bulla firstly by VATS approach, converted after 30 min into a left thoracotomy for dense pleural adhesions (A and B). The bulla presented as a sessile plant 8–10 cm in length from the apical segment of the upper lobe to the lower lobe of the lung, and it appeared to be of normal consistency. We proceeded to deflate and mobilize the bulla from the parietal pleura and mediastinal adhesions. Bullectomy section was performed by GIA Stapler-75 and reinforced with interrupted sutures of Vycril 2/0 (A). Lysis of the pulmonary ligament was performed. The patient did well postoperatively. Air leakage from the left chest tube stopped on the 3rd postoperative day, and the chest tube was removed. The follow-up chest X-ray showed no pneumothorax, and the patient was discharged in good general clinical condition on the sixth day (B).