A 33-year-old male presented to our institute with pain in the left elbow on extending the elbow. He had limited extension of 10–15 degrees. Patient had developed painful elbow on throwing the cricket ball from the periphery of the ground. This pain started to increase on repeated throws. He had conservative treatment for the same. Over the span of 18 months, he developed loss of terminal extension.
On clinical examination, he had tenderness in the posterior aspect of elbow along with crepitus and extension lag of 15 degrees and painful passive and active terminal extension. He did not have any instability of the medial and lateral ulnar collateral ligament.
Roentgenogram showed no radiological abnormality. Magnetic resonance imaging MRI revealed posterior fat pad hypertrophy withimpingement between olecranon and olecranon fossa whichwas the primary cause of pain and extension lag. After getting informed consent patient was posted for arthroscopic excision of posterior fat pad. Patient positioned in right lateral position and left elbow scrubbed, painted, and draped under aseptic precautions. Standard anterolateral portal was made and the anterior joint was visualized. Later on standard posterior and posterolateral portals were made revealing posterior fat pad hypertrophy locked and preventing complete olecranon extension.
The fat pad was shaved off using 3.5 mm shaver and no impingement of soft-tissue was evident. An incidental finding of small foramen was found in the olecranon fossa. It was found that the rent in the olecranon fossa got the fat pad locked into it, causing impingement on elbow extension.
Portals were closed and postoperatively dressings were changed and active complete elbow mobilization was started on post-operative day 1and 2,respectively. Patient was advised against heavy usage of elbow such as lifting heavy objects for 3 weeks. Patient was on regular follow-up and was symptom free. He got back to contact sports in 1 month duration. His last visit was 1year following surgery; he was comfortable with full range of movements.