A 60-year-old Caucasian male from Austria presented with dyspnoea, intermitted claudication and fatigue. In the last 2 months he noticed an unvoluntary weight loss of 15 kg. Physical examination showed an indolent resistance on the right flank. Blood sample in a peripheral vein showed results within normal ranges (haemoglobin 13.1 g/dl, white blood cell count 6.7 G/l; polymorphonuclear cells 63.5%, lymphocytes 13.5%, monocytes 9.0%, eosinophils 13.0%, basophils 0.5%, platelet count 158 G/l; serum creatinine 1.16 mg/dl), whereas urinary analysis showed microhaematuria and proteinuria.
An ultrasound (US) examination (Acuson Sequoia, California, USA) of the abdomen and pelvis showed a large and hypoechoic retroperitoneal mass surrounding the right kidney with extension into the right renal hilum and no evidence of urinary obstruction. The contralateral kidney appeared to be normal.
A 4-row helical CT examination (4 Volume Zoom, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) of the whole body with a standard examination protocol showed a retroperitoneal mass (with 14.8 × 11.5 cm size) from the right kidney and infiltrating Gerota’s fascia (see ). Lymphadenopathy was detected in the lower part of mediastinum and in the retroperitoneal space with borderline size values. Beside infitrative destruction of the flanking right rip no further infiltration of other organs or metastasis was found. The volume of liver and spleen was within normal range.
Scintigraphically, a radioisotope Tc-99m bone scan showed no suspicious lesions.
US guided percutaneous biopsy of the retroperitoneal mass was performed under local anaesthesia. Immunohistochemical stains were positive for bcl-2, bcl-6, CD10, CD20 and negative for CD 5, CD23, Cyklin D1. The histological diagnosis was a grad 2 low proliferating follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Chemotherapy was started according to the CHOP scheme. The tumor responded well to the chemotherapy and about 70% of regression was achieved after six courses of chemotherapy. Thereafter a nephrectomy with complete lymph node dissection and dissection of the retroperitoneal mass has been performed. Final diagnosis was a primary renal non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).