A 77-year-old female, known to have Parkinson’s disease, diabetes Mellitus, and coronary artery disease. She presented with dizziness followed by a fall that was not witnessed. She lost consciousness for two minutes. There was no history of seizures or sudden, severe headaches. The patient was diagnosed with Parkinson’s Disease more than 10 years ago and was controlled on Carbidopa/Levodopa (Stage 3 on HOEHN AND YAHR classification).

Upon examination, she was vitally stable with a GCS of 15/15. Her speech and language were intact. Pupils were 3 mm reactive to light bilaterally. Motor power was 4 + in both upper and lower limbs with normal reflexes. Her muscle tone was hypertonic, especially in the right upper limb with cogwheel rigidity. Neck pain was noted but negative for the Kerning and Brudzinski signs, and there was no photophobia. Venous blood gases and electrolytes were in the normal range.

Brain CT showed diffuse subarachnoid hemorrhage over the bilateral cerebral hemispheres with extra-axial hematoma, more predominant over the frontal lobes. Therefore, dual antiplatelet for her coronary artery disease (Aspirin and Ticagrelor) were held.

Considering the extensive traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage and the high likelihood of epileptogenic hemorrhage, the patient was started on Levetiracetam for seizure prophylaxis. Four days after, the patient dropped GCS to 9. She was having quadriparesis, progressive hypertonicity, right-sided resting tremor, and hyperreflexia all over. There were no recent febrile illness or recent seizures. EEG showed no epileptiform discharges. Repeated neuroradiological imaging, including CT and MRI, showed stable previous findings.

After ruling out all possible causes of Parkinson’s exacerbation, Levetiracetam was gradually weaned until it was discontinued. Consequently, the patient had significant clinical improvement after discontinuation of Levetiracetam. Her improvement was gradual over 3 days. Her hypertonicity, tremors, and sensorium have all resolved. She was discharged with neuroradiological follow-up at Neurosurgery and Neurology clinics.