The subject described in this case report is a 21-year-old male who suffered a concussion 356 days prior to the physical therapy evaluation. The injury occurred during a fall out of a moving golf cart onto his left shoulder/neck region. The subject reported loss of consciousness and post-traumatic amnesia following the injury. The subject was taken to a local emergency department and CT scan results appeared negative for cerebral bleeding but identified a left temporal bone fracture not requiring medical intervention. The subject received no education on symptomology or symptom duration, and no referral or follow-up was scheduled at the time of discharge. The subject reported a history of four previous concussions, three of which were sport-related, but otherwise had no co-morbidities or significant past medical history. Only minor residual symptoms from his previous concussions were reported that all gradually resolved. The subject had constant, persistent symptoms since the injury that impaired his abilities in school as well as his social life and had restricted athletic or recreational activities, reducing his overall quality of life. The subject visited his primary physician a few weeks prior to evaluation; his cervical spine was cleared via radiographs, and he was referred to a metropolitan outpatient physical therapy clinic.
The subject was given the Rivermead Post-Concussion Questionnaire (RPQ) to assess symptomology. The RPQ is a subjective, self-report measure that encompasses 16 items, each of which is scored from 0-4 in increasing severity, assessing separate cognitive, emotional, and somatic physical factors. The RPQ demonstrates high test-retest and inter-rater reliability for both total score and individual items via spearman rank correlation coefficients (r = 0.91, r = 0.87 respectively). The subject’s chief reported symptoms during the initial evaluation were neck pain and stiffness, bilateral radicular symptoms that were worse in the left shoulder and upper extremity, lightheadedness, nausea, dizziness, blurred vision and diplopia, sensitivity to light, impaired balance, slurred speech, trouble sleeping, fatigue, slower thinking, and frustration. The subject’s primary complaint was his headache symptoms, which the subject reported were brought on by reading, scanning, driving, or cervical movements. The subject also reported a period of gradual worsening during the weeks and months following his injury. The subject’s goals for physical therapy were to reduce the severity of symptoms experienced since the injury, primarily concerning his headache, fatigue, and neck pain symptomology, as he reported these symptoms have impacted his abilities as a college student and decreased his participation in his social life.
The subject described in this case report provided informed consent for the study and was informed that the data collected would be used for publication. This study has been approved by the Mercer University Institutional Review Board and Office of Research Compliance. The primary author providing patient care and clinical decision making was a student physical therapist at the time of subject interaction and was supervised by a licensed physical therapist.