A 35-year-old Han Chinese male football player presented with abnormal ECGs for 8 years without any evident subjective discomfort. The patient recently complained about slight exertional dyspnea with reduced sport/physical tolerance and was admitted to our hospital. This patient had been employed as a professional football player from the age of 10 years and had been a physical education teacher from the age of 26 years. He was a longtime local resident and never went to any affected areas (areas with high prevalence of infectious diseases). He reported being formerly healthy without any medical histories or current comorbidities, and he reported taking no medications. He has smoked 20 cigarettes per day for 7 years and consumed alcohol for 10 years at 100 to 250 g per day. His parents were healthy, and his family history was unremarkable. His physical examination revealed no abnormal findings. His body temperature was 36.5 °C, blood pressure was 121/73 mmHg, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, pulse was 69/min, heart rate was 70 beats/min, and reflexes were normal. He had no pathology reflex, and his body mass index was 22.81 kg/m2. Laboratory evaluation revealed slightly elevated cardiac troponin T level of 0.017 ng/ml, N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide level of 291.80 pg/ml, and C-reactive protein level of 0.40 mg/L. The patient’s blood lipid levels, liver function, and renal function were within the normal range with glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase level of 23 U/L, glutamic-pyruvic transaminase level of 31 U/L, alkaline phosphatase level of 84 U/L, total protein level of 67.9 g/L, albumin level of 41 g/L, globulin level of 26.9 g/L, total cholesterol level of 4.01 mmol/L, triglyceride level of 1.42 mmol/L, high-density lipoprotein level of 1.08 mmol/L, low-density lipoprotein level of 2.14 mmol/L, uric acid level of 353 μmol/L, epidermal growth factor receptor level of 105.48 ml/min/1.73 m2; serum K+ level of 4.05 mmol/L, serum Ca2+ level of 2.16 mmol/L, serum Mg2+ level of 0.88 mmol/L, and serum Na+ level of 141 mmol/L. The results of routine blood test and urinalysis were negative, thyroid function was normal, and microorganisms were not detected. Chest radiography showed an apparently normal morphology of the heart and lungs . ECGs revealed progressively deepened and widened Q waves on the II, III, and avF leads and contiguous TWIs on the I and avL leads . Echocardiography revealed an increasingly thickened interventricular septum from 10 mm to 13 mm, an enlarged left atrium and ventricle, and a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction from 73% to 63% . Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed and showed no distinct stenosis. Emission computed tomography (ECT) revealed mild myocardial ischemia of the left ventricular inferior wall . All of these clinical tests supported the diagnosis of HCM, which became gradually evident with time. For further identification, we proposed other examination techniques for this patient, including cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) to better evaluate the left ventricular wall thickness and to identify potential areas of myocardial fibrosis, Holter monitor recordings and an exercise test to evaluate possible “dynamic” changes of repolarization abnormalities, as well as genetic testing. However, the patient refused all of these suggestions and was discharged. In the subsequent follow-up visits at 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months after discharge, the patient showed poor compliance and was eventually lost to follow-up.