A 38-year-old male with no past medical history asked a bystander to call emergency medical services (EMS) after he had fallen 12 feet off a fire escape and landed on his right ankle. An Advanced Life Support ambulance was dispatched and, upon arrival, paramedics found the patient on the ground and unable to ambulate. He complained of 8/10 pain to his right ankle. Airway, breathing, and circulation to all four extremities were intact, and initial vital signs were heart rate (HR) of 100 beats per minute, blood pressure (BP) of 142/76 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), respiratory rate (RR) of 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 98%. Physical exam was notable for a right ankle deformity.
Paramedics on scene immobilized the patient’s leg in a splint, after which they contacted their online medical control (OLMC) center to discuss options for analgesia. The OLMC physician authorized the delivery of a dose of nebulized ketamine via BAN at 0.75 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) mixed with three milliliters (mL) of normal saline. During administration, the patient reported dizziness, which was rated one on a scale from zero to four using the Side Effects Rating Scale of Dissociative Anesthetics. This is a scoring system used to grade severity of medication side effects where zero represents “no change” in symptoms and four represents “very bothersome” symptoms. He did not become agitated, dissociated, or sedated.
Thirty minutes after the start of nebulization, pain was measured at 3/10. Repeat vitals at this time were HR 103 beats per minute, BP 128/79 mm Hg, RR 18 breaths per minute, and SpO2 97%. In the ED, at one hour after administration of nebulized ketamine, the patient reported a return of his pain, and was given a dose of four mg IV morphine. Radiograph revealed a right tibial pilon fracture. He was placed in a posterior short leg splint and admitted to the orthopedic service; he was operated on the next day for open reduction and internal fixation of the right ankle joint. He was subsequently discharged post-procedure with orthopedic follow-up.