A 74-year-old Turkish man was referred to our out-patient clinic because of right hip pain without a history of trauma. He had experienced severe pain in the groin on weight bearing, with variable degree of pain at rest, over the last 45 days. He was able to walk only with the assistance of crutches. His medical history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, he was afebrile and had a blood pressure of 120/80mmHg. His active ranges of motion (ROM) for both hips were restricted in all directions and the passive ROM of right hip was painful in flexion, abduction and internal rotation. The result of a Thomas test was positive for the right hip.
Antero-posterior and frog-leg pelvis radiographs showed lucent and sclerotic regions in both the femur and acetabulum with loss of articular joint distance and flattening especially in the right femoral head, which indicated severe degenerative coxarthrosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans revealed a cystic lesion located on the medial side of the iliac bone, which had a uniformly bounded capsule and contained serpentine-like structures . On an axial MRI image , the cystic lesion was seen to reach antero-medially to the hip joint and had eroded the adjacent acetabulum. The results of an abdomino-pelvic ultrasound indicated a grade I hepatosteatosis and 40mm calcified cortical cyst located on the upper pole of the right kidney. The results of standard laboratory tests revealed a normal level of hemoglobin (13.1g/dL), hematocrit (38) and white blood cell (6.48mm3/μL) counts. The results of functional tests for the kidney and liver, as well as other biochemical blood analyses, were normal.
Surgery for excision of the cystic lesion was recommended, and was performed under general anesthesia. Our patient lay in a supine position and an anterior ilioinguinal incision was made in the right hip. The interval between the tensor fascia lata and sartorius muscle was identified. The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve was retracted laterally. The dissection was extended proximally to expose the medial surface of the iliac bone. The rectus femoris muscle was not incised from its attachment to the upper part of the acetabular rim, but was instead retracted laterally. The iliacus muscle was identified and stripped from the medial surface of the iliac bone. The cystic lesion was identified. There were no adhesions between the cyst membrane and surrounding soft tissue. However, it was associated with the antero-medial acetabular wall and had eroded the adjacent acetabulum. The cystic lesion was resected en bloc and examined in the operating room on the surgical table. Calcified necrotic material was exposed in the cyst.
Our patient had an uneventful post-operative course with no complications. Post-operative prophylaxis of intravenous antibiotics, consisting of a first-generation cephalosporin (cefazolin, 1g every eight hours) and an aminoglycoside (gentamycin 5mg/kg/day) were continued 48 hours after the surgery and low-molecular-weight heparin prophylaxis was administered for 10 days. Active and passive hip ROM exercises were started on the second day post-operatively with mobilizing on crutches, and he was discharged from hospital on the third post-operative day. Full weight bearing without support was allowed at the third post-operative week. The histopathological results of tissue samples were found to be consistent with an osteoarthritic cyst that contained degenerative calcified and necrotic chondroid tissue and bone trabeculae .
There were no complications such as infection and skin necrosis during the follow-up period. At the final follow-up (4 months post-operatively), our patient was assessed clinically. The active ROM for both hips were restricted as had been the case pre-operatively. However, he had only slight pain in his right hip and was able to walk without support. Primary total hip replacement surgery for both hips was recommended in view of the radiological findings.