An eighty-four year old man attended our accident and emergency department with a severe headache, runny nose and confusion. Detailed history taking was not initially possible at first, but with the arrival of the patient’s relatives, we were able to elucidate further details of his history. The patient’s illness had started two weeks ago with symptoms of sinusitis. He was diagnosed with an upper respiratory tract infection by his general practitioner, and treated with oral antibiotics. We were informed by the relatives that the patient had been “blowing his nose” with increasing frequency over the last two weeks and had not responded to the treatment given by his general practitioner. His rhinorrhoea got much worse, and he then developed a severe headache with worsening confusion over the 24 hours preceding admission. He had sustained severe craniofacial fractures 43 years ago after a serious fall.
He had undergone neurosurgery for this, but the precise details of the procedures performed were not clear although he had been left with a large scar on the right side of his forehead and an oculomotor nerve palsy. He had otherwise made an excellent recovery from this operation, and had a normal quality of life in full employment until retirement at the usual age. On examination, the patient was very confused. There have been no signs of recent trauma or head injury. Clinical examination revealed neck stiffness and photophobia. His white blood cell count (WBC) and C-reactive protein (CRP) slightly elevated. His chest radiograph was normal. Laboratory testing of the fluid from his nose confirmed it to be CSF; positive for glucose and beta 2-transferrin. The patient was confused and would not allow a lumbar puncture to be performed. Apart from confusion, system examination did not reveal any signs of focal neurological deficit.
An urgent CT head was performed which showed a pneumocranium and fractures of the frontal bone to the right side of the frontal sinus, involving the superior and medial orbital walls . It was initially thought that the patient had an acute head injury, but the absence of physical signs on examination made us question this diagnosis.
Urgent neurosurgical advice was sought. The skull fractures were considered to be old injuries on review of the scans and a diagnosis of occult dural injury with endocranial complications was made.
We were advised to treat the patient conservatively with intravenous antibiotics and admission. He recovered rapidly and was discharged after three weeks with advice to avoid straining and maneuvers which could acutely raise intra-abdominal and intrathoracic pressure. He remains well on review 1 year later.