A 25-years-old male of Afghani origin with a history of recurrent acute pancreatitis was referred to the intensive care unit of the Jena University Hospital in November 2019.
Abdominal pain debuted two years ago when the patient was 23 years old. The family history revealed that the patient’s brother and sister similarly suffer from abdominal pain and have been hospitalized several times. His niece died at the age of three due to acute pancreatitis. The patient’s whole family resides in Afghanistan, so neither clinical nor genetic investigation of relatives was possible in our clinic.
On physical examination, the patient’s BMI was 23.4 kg/m2, blood pressure, and heart rate were 146/83 mm Hg and 95/min, respectively. He showed no xanthomas but did have lipemia retinalis on retinal examination. Examination of the abdomen revealed pain in the upper left area and an enlarged spleen. No other abnormalities were observed.
TG levels were at 29 mmol/L, and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) cholesterol were within reference ranges. According to the previous records, TGs were as high as 82 mmol/L in the past. Inflammation markers (C-reactive protein and white blood cells) were remarkably elevated. There were no clinical symptoms or laboratory indicators of secondary (pancreoprivic) diabetes mellitus (HbA1c 5.1%, blood glucose 5.8 mmol/L). Other laboratory parameters are shown in Table .
Abdominal computer tomography demonstrated edematous pancreatitis, most prominently within the corpus pancreaticus with surrounding fat tissue fibrosis and splenomegaly. There were no signs of choledocholithiasis.
A panel screening for HTG-related genes (Additional file ) was performed. The sequencing was performed using the next-generation sequencing on Illumina-Sequencer (NextSeq500/NovaSeq6000) with a > 98% coverage of regions of interest. The analysis revealed homozygosity for a frameshift mutation of APOA5 (c427delC, p.Arg143Alafs*57) with a minor allele frequency of 0.006%. This mutation causes an alteration in the translational reading frame and results in a premature stop of protein synthesis due to the introduction of a stop codon at position 57. The patient was also a homozygous carrier of haplotype APOA5*2.
Acute pancreatitis was treated with aggressive fluid resuscitation and therapeutic plasma exchange (Spectra Optia, Terumo BCT, Inc. Lakewood USA). The patient was then put on a low-fat diet and a combination of ezetimibe (10 mg daily) and fenofibrate (160 mg micronized daily). Shortly after the discharge, another episode of acute pancreatitis occurred. The patient was prescribed omega-3 fatty acids; however, the inability to obtain reimbursement for omega-3 fatty acids in Germany hindered their usage. The patient was regularly followed up at our outpatient clinic. A satisfactory range of TG, between 9.2 and 11.2 mmol/L , was maintained through a combination of stringent dietary measures and consistent intake of fibrates. After two years, another episode of pancreatitis occurred, with TG elevation up to 18.8 mmol/L. The patient was started on weekly injections of volanesorsen. On this regimen, TG levels were stably under 4 mmol/L . The platelet count decreased from 201,000 to 114,000/µL. Therefore, according to recommendations, we switched to biweekly administrations. As a result, the platelet count stabilized (at ~ 150,000/µL). The patient had no episodes of bleeding. Volanesorsen therapy was continued with regular assessment of platelet count.