A 48-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of a palpable mass in the lower abdomen.
She denied the presence of abdominal pain, abdominal distention, diarrhea, or dyspepsia without weight loss. Her appetite was not affected.
She denied any history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, diabetes, or coronary heart disease. She reported no history of smoking, alcohol intake, or a hereditary disorder.
Abdominal examination showed that her abdomen was diffusely soft, with no distention or tenderness. No other positive sign was observed.
Upon admission, her routine blood test results and blood biochemical parameters were normal. Her serum carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 level was 251 U/mL, and her serum CA125 level was 412 U/mL. The levels of other tumor markers, including CA242, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and CA724, were within the normal ranges.
Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a low-density lesion measuring 5.9 cm × 4.6 cm with a poorly defined margin and an irregular contour in the tail of the pancreas. The lesion was hypo-enhanced in the pancreatic parenchyma phase, with progressive delayed enhancement; this possibly indicated a pancreatic tumor . Additionally, a cystic-solid mass measuring 15.1 cm × 12.0 cm in the right ovary and a cystic mass measuring 5.7 cm × 4.3 cm in the left ovary were detected in the pelvic cavity. Both masses were thin-walled and had multiple enhancing septa. There was no evidence of liver or peritoneal metastases .
The initial diagnosis was uncertain, but the focus was on pancreatic or ovarian cancer. Therefore, she underwent fine-needle biopsy of lesions after a consultation of doctors. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle (22 gauge) biopsies of the lesion in the pancreatic tail revealed that there was an infiltrative heterogenic glandular growth in the fibrous tissue. And the ultrasound-guided biopsy of the ovary indicated the mass was likely to be metastatic. Immunohistochemistry showed the following findings: CK20 (+), CK7 (+), CDX2 (-), ER (-), and PR (-). The multidisciplinary team considered this pancreatic tumor to be possibly resectable or borderline resectable with ovarian metastases.