A 55-year-old man, with body mass index (BMI) of 18.36 kg/m2, was admitted into our hospital for left hip pain for 6 months. The symptom started with moderate pain after walking. Over the last few days, the pain got worsen with no remission after rest. The patient denied any history of trauma, glucocorticoid hormone consumption or radiotherapy. Examinations before admission revealed old fracture on the left femoral neck and an increase in blood uric acid. After admission, the function evaluations of his bilateral hip joint were summarized as follows: Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) score was 4, Harris score was 23 in the left hip joint, while VAS score was 0, Harris score was 90 in the right hip joint. The imaging examinations of the pelvis, including radiographs , CT and MRI scan , confirmed the existence of bilateral femoral neck fractures, with fracture nonunion and femoral neck shortening in his left femoral neck and double fracture lines in his right femoral neck. The Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) examination of the lumbar spine showed reduced bone mineral density (BMD) and severe osteoporosis (L1–L4: BMD0.514 g/cm2, T score = − 4.6). In addition, tumor markers, tuberculosis antibodies, alkaline phosphatase and parathyroid hormone levels were found to be normal.
We recommended a left cementless THA, and a cannulated screws fixation on the right side. And the uric acid lowering treatment was performed on the patient. However, the patient only agreed to the left THA, while on the right side, conservative treatment was selected for patient because of financial reasons. The left THA through the lateral approach was performed for the patient under general anesthesia . During the surgery, we found sclerosis, fatty degeneration and necrosis of the fracture end of the left femoral neck . We used impactive bone grafting to strengthen the acetabular on the fracture region .
After the operation, the patient was treated with 20 U Elcatonin injection (Sidinuo®, Shangdong Luye Pharmaceutical Co.LTD, Yantai, China) once a week, and 1 tablet of Calcium Carbonate D3 Granules (Langdi®, Beijing Kangyuan Pharmaceutical CO.LTD, Beijing, China) containing calcium carbonate (500 mg) and vitamin D (200 IU), twice a day. Meanwhile, He was required to exercise his quadriceps and calf muscle on bed, move with the help of wheelchairs, and avoid walking on crutches. The postoperative histological examination, as showed in Fig. , revealed that the left fracture gap was filled with fibrous tissues, with few new bone tissues and a large amount of necrotic bone tissue observed. Meanwhile, the plain radiograph of the pelvis one day after surgery revealed that the total hip replacement arthroplasty was very successful . Generally, the patient recovered well during the hospitalization and was successively discharged home.
Four months after discharge, the radiograph image showed no signs of implant loosening or infection in his left hip . It was worth noting that CT images revealed fracture union of the right femoral neck, as shown in Fig. b and Fig. c. In addition, function evaluations of his bilateral hips at four months after surgery was satisfactory and summarized as follows: VAS score was 0, Harris score was 98 in the left hip joint and VAS score was 0, Harris score was 95 in the right hip joint.