We report on a fifty-year-old man who had been suffering from increasing neck pain, burning, and stinging since he was 18 years old. Rotation of the cervical spine to the left or right increased the pain up to a peak level of 6 on the Visual Analog Scale (VAS). Sitting (at the computer) was worst.
The patient had been given chiropractic therapy, physiotherapy, and non-steroidal antirheumatics (diclofenac) without success. There was no other illness known, and he did not take any other medication. In this situation, the patient was referred to our pain center by his family doctor.
All movements of the cervical spine were limited between 10 and 30°, and at the maximum of the movements, the pain increased. The muscles were in higher tension (especially the levator scapulae and the splenius capitis muscle on both sides). We also found myofascial trigger points in these muscles on both sides. Clinical neurological findings were symmetrical and in order.
The X-ray showed a light generalized spondylosis and spondylarthrosis as well as a light chondrosis C5/C6 (that could not explain his pain). Laboratory findings showed no signs of a general inflammation or of any disease.
In the first session, we treated the myofascial trigger points and the increased tonus of the muscles mentioned with a well-directed injection of LA procaine 1% (according to neural therapy). These local interventions were not successful. As a routine in such cases, we ordered an orthopantomogram of the teeth, although the patient had no tooth pain. We found 3 M with a space problem at positions 2.8 and 3.8 (ascending mandibular ramus), and an impacted tooth with perifocal inflammation at 4.8 . As a diagnostic test (with the question of an influence on the neck pain, see Discussion), we infiltrated the periodontal tissue of these three teeth with LA procaine 1%. Minutes after these interventions, the patient was nearly free of pain in the neck for the first time since many years. After 1 week, the pain in the neck appeared again, reaching the same level.
With this “positive” test, we made the indication for extraction of the teeth 2.8, 3.8, and 4.8. Afterward, the patient was nearly pain free in the neck. Half a year later, his neck pain appeared again to a slight degree (VAS 2–3). Subsequently, we infiltrated the scars of the teeth extractions with procaine 1% in the regions 2.8, 3.8, and 4.8. After this last intervention, the patient was pain free, and he showed almost normal mobility of the cervical spine without increased muscle tone. The freedom from neck pain has lasted for over 3 years.