A seventy-eight year-old man, without previous skin lesions or skin scars
consistent with tegumentary leishmaniasis (TL), evolved during the last
year with volume increase in the nasal pyramid to the right side, nasal obstruction,
epistaxis to manipulation of nasal cavities, crusting and occasional cacosmia. He
also had 117 mg/dL glucose; 48 mg/dL urea; 1.5 mg/dL creatinine; 78
mg/dL amylase; 22 U/L AST; 30 U/L ALT; 74 U/L ALP. Systemic
arterial hypertension was treated with 25 mg/day hydrochlorothiazide 20
mg/day nifedipine, 2 mg/day doxazosin mesylate, besides 50 mg SOS sodium
diclofenac, due to chronic muscle pain. He reported bilateral hearing loss for the
last seven years, but he denied tinnitus, dizziness, noise exposure or family
history of auditory and/or vestibular symptoms. Otoscopy was normal and the
endoscopic examination of the upper aero-digestive tract presented infiltration of
the right nasal wing and the entire mucosa of the right nasal cavity, preventing
progression of optics. There was also infiltration of the vestibular region,
anterior nasal septum and head of the left inferior turbinate, with discrete crusts,
as well as absence of mucosal lesions in the pharynx and larynx. Syphilis and fungal
serologies were negative. TL serologies performed were: 1:40 indirect
immunofluorescence technique and ELISA reactor. A nasal biopsy was performed.
Fragment cultures were negative to Leishmania, mycobacteria and
fungus. The histopathological examination revealed chronic granulomatous
inflammation with necrosis. The immunohistochemistry with
anti-Leishmania serum showed occasional amastigote forms and
polymerase chain reaction was positive to Leishmania. A
pre-treatment audiometric study showed mild to severe sensorineural hearing loss,
tritone mean at 500-1000-2000 Hz of 53dB and 62dB, in the right and left ears,
respectively. Additionally, he presented bilateral type A tympanogram and
bilaterally absent distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAE).
Treatment with meglumine antimoniate (MA) (Glucantime® from
Sanofi Aventis) was initiated at a maximum daily dose of three ampoules
(weight 72 kg; dose 16.9 mgSb+5/kg/day) for 30
days.
On the twelfth day of treatment, the patient returned with herpes zoster
in the buttock (dermatome S1) and myalgia, and acyclovir cream, urea cream
and 50 mg of sodium diclofenac if pain were prescribed. He was asymptomatic from the
cochlea-vestibular point of view, but presented a 10 dB increase of the auditory
threshold at 6 kHz and a 15 dB increase at 8 kHz in the left ear (LE). On
the twenty-sixth day, treatment was discontinued due to cutaneous rash, scaling of
lower limbs, difficulty in walking, arthralgia, myalgia, hand tremor, dry oral
mucosa, anorexia and loss of weight (-3 kg). He also presented frequent
severe rotatory dizziness lasting some minutes with no associated vagal symptoms,
without worsening of hearing complaints previously reported. VENG was normal and the
audiometry showed a 20 dB increase at 6 KHz and a 25 dB increase at 8 KHz in the LE.
He also had 153 mg/dL glucose; 83 mg/dL urea; 322 mg/dL amylase; 181
U/L AST; 174 U/L ALT; 112 U/L ALP; 175 U/L GGT) and QTc
0.46. Sixteen days after the treatment was discontinued, he maintained rare
non-rotatory dizziness lasting seconds, without objective worsening of hearing
complaints, but with tinnitus, and he had fallen two days before. Pure tone
audiometry presented severe worsening of LE auditory thresholds (10 dB increase
at 250 Hz; 10 dB increase at 500 Hz; 15 dB increase at 1 KHz; 25 dB increase at 2
KHz; 30 dB increase at 3 KHz; 15 dB increase at 6 KHz; and 45 dB increase at 8
KHz) and VENG was within the normal range, although with reduction of more than
50% of the previous value of Angular Velocity of the Slow Component of
Nystagmus in degrees per second (AVSC°/s) at 18 °C. He had
118 mg/dL glucose; 30 mg/dL urea; 90 mg/dL amylase; 41 U/L AST;
71 U/L ALT; 155 U/L ALP; 128 U/L GGT) and QTc 0.33. Twenty-eight
days after treatment interruption, he no longer had tinnitus and dizziness remained
of mild intensity and lasting seconds. He walked adequately and myalgia and tremors
had improved. Pure audiometry showed no more increments consistent with ototoxicity
criterion. He had 110 mg/dL glucose; 1.4 mg/dL creatinine; 105 mg/dL
amylase; 371 mg/dL lypase; 34 U/L AST; 43 U/L ALT; 115 U/L ALP;
80 U/L GGT) and QTc 0.33. As the patient still presented mucosa lesions 90
days after treatment interruption, he was successfully treated with 150 mg/day
(2.2 mg/kg/day) liposomal amphotericin B, up to an accumulated
dose of 1800 mg, when it was discontinued due to serum creatinine value of 1.6
mg/dL, without worsening of hearing and/or dizziness complaints. A year
and four months later, he did not present worsening of hearing complaints when
compared to the beginning of treatment with MA, neither tinnitus nor dizziness, and
the audiometry was not consistent with ototoxicity criterion and VENG was within the
normal range, with AVSC in the LE at 18 °C returning to values similar to the
beginning of symptomatology. The DPOAE examination remained absent during the entire
monitoring. (Pure tone audiometry through air conduction of the left ear of
a patient during the monitoring process, IPEC, FioCruz, Rio de Janeiro, 2011)
and 2 (Variations of Angular Velocity of the Slow Component of Nystagmus in
degrees per second (AVSC °/s) of the patient during the
monitoring process - IPEC, FioCruz, Rio de Janeiro, 2011) show the variations
in pure tone audiometry and of the angular velocity of the slow component of
nystagmus, during the patient's follow-up.