A 79-year-old Japanese woman with a leg oedema visited her primary care physician, 3 months before being admitted to our hospital. Outpatient treatment with diuretics was initiated, but the oedema did not improve. Three days before admission, she experienced palpitations and fatigue, prompting her to again visit her primary care physician. Her laboratory data showed severe anaemia (haemoglobin [Hb], 58 g/L). Hence, she was subsequently admitted to our hospital.
She had no specific medical or any family history of renal disease. Physical examination revealed moderate leg oedema and kyphosis and no other indications of amyloidosis, such as numbness or signs consistent with polyneuropathy, gastrointestinal symptoms, macroglossia, orthostatic hypotension, purpura, or any changes to the skin. Laboratory data revealed microcytic anaemia (Hb, 50 g/L; mean corpuscular volume, 85.9 fL), hypoalbuminemia (albumin, 2.8 g/dL), and a possible slight decline in kidney function (serum creatinine, 0.64 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate, 66.9 mL/min/1.73 m2). Serum IgG, IgA, and IgM levels were 794 mg/dL, 1006 mg/dL, and 48 mg/dL, respectively. The serum free light chain (FLC) level for kappa and lambda was 77.4 mg/L and 15.2 mg/L, respectively, and the FLC ratio was 5.09. The brain natriuretic peptide level was 72.7 pg/mL. She also had iron and zinc deficiency. Serum and urine electrophoresis revealed the presence of IgA-kappa type M proteins (immunofixation method; Fig. ). Serum β2-microglobulin was 4.6 mg/L. Bone marrow aspiration revealed a slight proliferation of plasma cells (6.8%). Urinalysis revealed an occult haematuria (1 +) and moderate proteinuria (1.34 g/gCr). Electrocardiography and cardiac ultrasound did not show any changes consistent with cardiomyopathy associated with amyloidosis, such as low voltage, thickening of the ventricular wall, or granular sparkling appearance. The chest radiograph revealed a slight bilateral pleural effusion, and the cardiothoracic rate was deemed to be 56.5%. For treating severe anaemia, red blood cell transfusion was administered in conjunction with iron and zinc supplementation, resulting in an improvement in anaemia (Hb 95 g/L) and her subsequent discharge. After discharge, her urinary protein increased to 5.7 g/gCr, and serum albumin decreased to 2.8 g/dL. The patient was then diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome and a renal biopsy was performed.
Light microscopy revealed methenamine-positive deposits in the mesangial and paramesangial regions . Some glomeruli were accompanied by segmental sclerosis caused by the deposits. Interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy were mild. Immunofluorescence staining was positive for IgA and kappa chains in the expanded mesangial area . The tubular basement membrane was partly granular and positive for kappa chains. Additional Congo red staining showed mild positivity in the glomerular deposits, but only faint birefringence. Immunohistochemical staining of the kappa chains was mildly positive . Furthermore, electron microscopy was conducted with formalin-fixed specimen to evaluate glomerular deposits, which revealed unbranched fibrils in glomerular deposits measuring 10–15 nm .
LMD-LC–MS/MS revealed that the deposits consisted significant amounts of the kappa constant region of immunoglobulin. Additionally, a small amount of the alpha-1 constant region was also detected along with amyloid-associated proteins . Details of the detected protein and an illustration of globulin are presented in Fig. . The emPAI (exponentially modified protein abundance index) is often used as an index for estimating protein abundance during proteomic analyses using mass-spectrometry. The emPAI value represents the relative amount of each protein contained within the sample . Therefore, a higher value emPAI is indicative of a larger amount of protein, compared to the other proteins in the sample.
Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with LHCDD and focal amyloid deposition. Skin biopsy did not show amyloid deposition, while gastrointestinal biopsy revealed faint birefringence, suggesting that the patient had systemic amyloidosis. Bone marrow aspiration was repeated, which revealed an increase in the plasma cell population (14.4%). The increase in plasma cell population and a concurrent anaemia indicated multiple myeloma . She did not however present any other myeloma-defining events, such as hypercalcemia, decline in renal function, and bone legions. We started cyclophosphamide 300 mg/m2/day, bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2, and dexamethasone treatment 20 mg/week followed by weekly administration of daratumumab (1, 800 mg/week). After 9 months of treatment, proteinuria improved from 8.0 to approximately 5.0 g/gCr in the absence of decrease in eGFR, indicating a renal response . Serum albumin concentration also gradually increased, leading to a reduction in leg oedema. The reduction in serum M-protein (IgA 467 mg/dL) and the difference between involved and uninvolved FLC (dFLC; 20.8 mg/L) was greater than 50%, but less than 90% (haematological partial response ).