The patient was a 60-year-old male who presented to the emergency department (ED) for a syncopal episode in the setting of ventricular tachycardia while at his cardiologist’s outpatient office. The patient has a past medical history of late presentation anterior ST-segment elevation MI 6 weeks prior to this event. During that time, he reported 1 week of anginal symptoms before his MI. He received two drug-eluting stents in the non-culprit right coronary artery and one in the culprit proximal left anterior descending artery. At time of his prior hospital discharge, echocardiogram demonstrated a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40–45% and an apical thrombus. He received antiplatelet therapy with aspirin 81 mg daily and ticagrelor 90 mg twice daily, as well as rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily for the apical thrombus.
On admission following his syncopal event, the patient was haemodynamically stable in normal sinus rhythm on an amiodarone infusion. A physical exam was significant for a prominent and laterally displaced point of maximal impulse, the presence of hepatojugular reflux, and muffled heart sounds.
Laboratory findings were significant for a haemoglobin of 11.9 g/dL (normal range is 13.5–17.5 g/dL), an NT-pro BNP of 2549 pg/mL (normal value is <300 pg/mL), and a high sensitivity troponin T of 26 ng/L (normal value is <59 ng/L). Initial renal function, electrolytes, and liver function testing were within normal limits. Chest radiography showed an enlarged cardiac silhouette. Electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus rhythm with pathologic Q waves in inferior and anteroseptal leads along with low-voltage QRS complexes with an amplitude <5 mm in the limb leads and 10 mm in the chest leads (see , ). An urgent TTE showed a large circumferential pericardial effusion, severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction with an LVEF of <15%, and a large apical LVA with pathologic thinning and diastolic deformity ( and , ).
The patient was initiated on intravenous amiodarone, and anticoagulation was held in the setting of the pericardial effusion with associated LVA. Urgent diagnostic and therapeutic pericardiocentesis was completed with the removal of 600 mL of sanguineous fluid. Incomplete effusion drainage was noted following the procedure suggesting loculated characteristics of the haemopericardium. Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted given the concern for contained LVA or pseudoaneurysm rupture as the underlying aetiology.
Subsequent computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest showed a moderate volume pericardial effusion and a large lobulated LVA measuring 74 mm × 84 mm × 79 mm without signs of active contrast extravasation into the pericardial space . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) was suspicious for contained ruptured LVA; it showed striking dilation of the mid to distal LV wall with severe myocardial thinning and difficulty identifying myocardium at the apex ( and , ). Interval development of a large, mobile LV thrombus was also noted. Left heart catheterization revealed patency of all previously placed drug-eluting stents (see , ).
During his hospitalization, the patient remained in the medical intensive care unit for bed rest and haemodynamic monitoring. Cardiothoracic surgery performed excision and repair of the LVA with placement of an LV endovascular patch (see , ). Intraoperative findings include the presence of a small rent at the apex of the aneurysm, which was tightly adhered to the overlying pericardium. Pathology reports confirm partially granular myocardial tissue composition of the specimen.
Post-operative TTE was notable for an improved LVEF of 61% with continued apical akinesis and small aneurysm with possible small associated thrombus ( and , ). CTA revealed post-surgical changes with resolution of the pericardial effusion without evidence of an LV thrombus . Guideline-directed medical therapy was initiated with metoprolol succinate 25 mg daily, losartan 25 mg daily, and spironolactone 25 mg daily; statin was initially held due to reported intolerance. Oral amiodarone 200 mg daily was continued for 1 month for arrhythmia management. Antithrombic therapy with aspirin 81 mg daily and clopidogrel 75 mg daily was started. Anticoagulation was held in the setting of completed left atrial appendage ligation and without signs of further thrombus.
The patient was clinically well without further symptomatic concerns of haemopericardium or heart failure 1 month post-operatively. The patient continued to participate well in his cardiac rehabilitation program and was cleared to return to work.