A 73 years old caucasian male patient came to the authors' attention while they were providing an emergency first aid service; the patient presented hypertension on treatment with ACE-inhibitors, chronic atrial fibrillation on treatment with oral anticoagulants, and diabetes mellitus on treatment with biguanides: the clinical manifestation was bleeding, probably deriving from the tongue-bite injuries.
The patient had been complaining of dyspnea for 48 hours, caused by macroglossia.
The clinical documentation that the patient provided, allowed the Authors to identify the following clinical history: in the previous month, following the progressive volumetric increase of the tongue, he had undergone neck CT scan with contrast agents, that showed a volumetric increase of the tongue, which was occupied by a solid lesion of around 6 cm, contiguous to the muscles of the oral floor. In the submandibular and laterocervical area, there were also some lymph nodes of 15 mm in diameter at the most.
The patient referred that he had previously undergone surgery, which was planned by another clinician, as inferred from the discharge form.
In general anesthesia together with an infiltration of local anesthetic, the clinician performed a losangic biopsy (4 × 4 cm), an extemporary histological exam and suture: the intraoperatory examination showed extensive lymphoid proliferation, composed of cells of big and middle size, also affecting the skeletal muscle. The medical report indicated an extensive NHL.
In order to make an accurate diagnosis, the patient received:
- CT scans of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis, reporting enlarged lymph nodes of 10 mm in diameter in the subcarinal area and in the right pulmonary hilum;
- Hematologic consultation and osteomedullary biopsy.
After about 30 days since the first surgical removal of the tongue lesion, the patient came back at our clinic complaining severe dyspneic symptoms. Therefore the patient was immediately received by the Authors, who suspected a possible relapse of the primary lesion.
The extraoral exam revealed a hard tumefaction of a normal color in the left submandibular region .
The intraoral exam revealed a considerable volumetric increase of the tongue , which was of a red-violet color, with well-delimited necrotic-ulcerative areas at the level of the left margin and left region, and with bleeding probably caused by the tongue-bite injury.
The tongue was painful and woody to palpation.
72 hours later, a fiber-scopic examination of the larynx showed ab-extrinsic compression of the posterior wall of the trachea, with reduction of the tracheal lumen; after the worsening of breathing, other colleagues performed an emergency inferior tracheostomy and provided medical advice.