A 59-year-old Japanese man complained of pain in his lower right leg. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a right pelvic tumor compatible with histological findings of non-Hodgkin diffuse B-cell lymphoma. CODOX-M/IVAC (CODOX-M: cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and high-dose MTX; IVAC: ifosfamide, etoposide, and high-dose cytarabine) was started, and shrinkage of the tumor was achieved. At 5 months after CODOX-M/IVAC therapy, he complained of dysesthesia of his bilateral feet. He began taking methylcobalamin, but there was no improvement. Spinal MRI revealed another mass anterior to the 2nd to 3rd sacral vertebral bodies. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology showed malignant findings after 20Gy radiation therapy. CODOX-M/IVAC was administered a second time, and two administrations of intrathecal MTX (15mg) were started, with the addition of calcium folinate. Because flaccid paresis of his lower limbs and fecal and urinary incontinence appeared 1 month later, he was referred to our department.
His blood pressure was 102/72mmHg and body temperature was 36.7°C. A neurological examination revealed that he was alert and well oriented. His mental status was normal, and his cranial nerves appeared intact. He showed flaccid paresis of his lower limbs with an absence of tendon reflexes and both fecal and urinary incontinence. Extensor plantar responses were noted on the left side. Pinprick, light touch, vibration, and proprioception sensations were impaired below the Th10 dermatome level. Cerebellar ataxia was not observed.
Laboratory results revealed normocytic anemia. His serum vitamin B12 levels were 2788pg/mL and all other tests showed unremarkable results (copper, 132μg/dL; total homocysteine, 8.7nmol/mL; and folic acid, 7.6ng/dL). A CSF examination showed cytoalbuminic dissociation (mononuclear cells, 1/mm3; protein, 123mg/dL) and a glucose level of 47mg/dL (blood sugar, 98mg/dL). Myelin basic protein levels were 3087pg/mL and his CSF homocysteine levels were 1.2nmol/mL. Negative results were obtained for CSF oligoclonal bands, soluble interleukin-2 receptor, CSF cytology, and polymerase chain reaction testing for various viruses. Our patient denied all genetic analysis including homocysteine metabolism.
Findings from brain MRI were unremarkable, but spinal MRI revealed signal hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging in the posterior funiculus of his cervical spinal cord and in the lateral and posterior funiculi of his thoracic spinal cord .
Leucovorin calcium at 60mg/day and high-dose vitamin B12 replacement therapy were administered for 2 weeks, but no improvements were observed. He died 3 months later due to progression of the primary disease.