A 47-year-old woman presented with decreased visual acuity associated with white retinal lesions in both eyes. A history of pneumonia of unknown aetiology closely preceded the deterioration of vision. Five years previously the patient was diagnosed with follicular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (December, 2004). She underwent eight cycles of combination chemotherapy that included cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, vincristine and prednisone with later addition of the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab. The patient was in remission for 19 months. Following a relapse with involvement of the retroperitoneal lymph nodes (February, 2007), rituximab and 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan were administered. A second relapse occurred 22 months post radioimmunotherapy (April, 2009). Four combination cycles of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and mitoxantrone were then undertaken leading to partial remission. Subsequent therapy included rituximab administered once per month for four months and once every third month thereafter. No further relapses were experienced from April, 2009 to April, 2010.
At presentation (April, 2010), her best-corrected Snellen visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/12 in the right eye and 6/9 in the left eye. There were large keratic precipitates and a mild anterior chamber cellular reaction present in both eyes . Examination of the fundus revealed bilateral findings of moderate vitreous opacities, pale optic discs, retinal necrosis with retinal infiltrates, several hemorrhages in the posterior pole and areas of peripheral retinal atrophy. Some vessels displayed extensive white sheathing providing them with the appearance of frosted branch angiitis . Despite prophylactic antiviral therapy (valganciclovir 900 mg twice per day and valaciclovir 500 mg once per day) and maintenance treatment with rituximab (800 mg once per three months), the most likely diagnoses were CMV retinitis or intraocular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Blood tests revealed neutropenia (0.9 × 109/L) with a normal lymphocyte count of 1.2 × 109/L. Serology was negative for HIV.
Pars plana vitrectomy was performed in the right eye for both - diagnostic as well as therapeutic purposes (June, 2010). Vitreous fluid analysis confirmed CMV by means of PCR testing. Furthermore, cytologic examination revealed atypical lymphocytes with lobulated nuclei and basophilic cytoplasma on a background of lytic cells. Two specialists confirmed the finding of highly suspicious malignant elements in the vitreous fluid. Treatment with intravenous foscarnet was given continually for three weeks followed by oral valganciclovir given in a dose of 900 mg twice per day. Rituximab therapy was also maintained and administered every three months. The diagnosis of intraocular lymphoma is usually an indication for intravitreal treatment with methotrexate in addition to systemic therapy. Intavenous methotrexate therapy was not considered in this case as PCR testing confirmed infectious uveitis of cytomegalovirus aetiology. In such infectious cases, methotrexate could probably worsen the course of ocular disease.
Retinal findings responded well to treatment and retinitis regressed. However, BCVA decreased to 6/24 in the right eye and 6/12 in the left eye, perimetry revealed scotomas and moderate vitreous haze persisted in the left eye . The main cause of visual impairment was most likely pallor of the optic disc.
A relapse of retinitis in the three weeks following discontinuation of foscarnet treatment necessitated its reinduction and administration once again continually for three weeks (August, 2010). BCVA reduced to hand movements in the right eye and 6/18 in the left eye and further progression of visual field defects was demonstrated . A further recurrence developed within one week of cessation of this therapy. Consequently, the patient was retreated with foscarnet administered as a bolus three times per week (September, 2010). This therapeutic regime proved to be insufficient as retinal lesions once again showed signs of reactivation. Moreover, an increase in plasmatic CMV DNA copies was detected . The patient was admitted to a hematologic clinic and treatment with intravenous foscarnet was administered continually for further three weeks (October, 2010). Systemic examination for restaging of the follicular lymphoma was also undertaken. An MRI of the brain showed no signs of lymphoma. Cerebrospinal fluid was negative for CMV. No pathological changes were revealed by immunophenotyping and cytologic examination of cerebrospinal fluid.
Retinal lesions were in regression, but plasma CMV DNA copies were still positive giving rise to consideration of cidofovir therapy. The patient declined this treatment. Maintenance therapy with rituximab was also discontinued.
Two months after the most recent foscarnet therapy (December, 2010), negativity of CMV DNA copies in the plasma was detected. However, BCVA had decreased to hand movements in the right eye and 1/60 in the left eye due to a combination of optic disc atrophy and progression of cataract.
Patient follow-up was scheduled for every 8-10 weeks as retinal lesions were inactive . Nevertheless, moderate vitreous haze remained in the left eye resembling that which occurs in patients with intraocular lymphoma. It is therefore believed that both CMV retinitis and intraocular lymphoma contributed to the intraocular findings. This opinion was strongly supported in the results of vitreous fluid analysis of the right eye. Undertaking diagnostic-therapeutic pars plana vitrectomy in the left eye imposed a high risk and the patient declined this surgical procedure.
In August 2011, trepanobiopsy confirmed a transformation of follicular lymphoma into secondary acute myeloid leukemia. Palliative treatment was indicated for this disease.
At the last follow-up in March 2012, no visual acuity was recordable in the right eye (blind eye) and hand movements in the left eye. Bilateral progression of cataract prevented good fundal views although some white retinal lesions were apparent.
The patient died in another hospital in June 2012 where unfortunately no post-mortem examination was performed.