A previously healthy 24-year-old male (A) presented at the emergency department (ED) with chest pain and diarrhoea. The chest pain began 2 h prior to hospital admission and was described as a constant light chest pressure without correlation to breathing or body position. 3 days earlier, the patient and a friend had had chicken in a restaurant before boarding a flight to Sweden. One hour after arrival in Sweden the patient experienced sudden abdominal pain, chills and diarrhoea. During the following three days the patient had 6 diarrhoeas per day, mucous but no visible blood. The patient was diagnosed with C jejuni gastroenteritis after stool culture at a primary care facility, no antibiotics were given. Upon admission to the ED the abdominal pain had subsided, the patient was afebrile (37 °C or 98.6 °F) but still experiencing diarrhoea. Upon examination the patient had normal circulatory and respiratory parameters. Heart auscultation: regular rhythm (RR), no murmurs or extra sounds. Lung and abdominal examinations were normal. Laboratory examinations showed C-reactive protein (CRP) at 89.1 (normal range <10 mg/L), leukocyte count (LC) at 11.3 (normal range 4-12 × 109/L) and high-sensitive Troponin T (hsTnT) at 108 (normal range <14 ng/L) ECG showed regular sinus rhythm, 64/min and general 1 mm ST-elevation . The patient was treated with Brufen 200 mg (tid), Omeprazol 20 mg (qd) and Loperamid 2 mg and admitted to a cardiac care unit (CCU) for cardiac monitoring.
During the following 4 days the hsTnT reached a maximum value of 504 and then dropped to 46. Stool culture confirmed the diagnosis of C jejuni. Blood cultures were negative. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed normal right and left ventricle function, ejection fraction (EF) 60–65 %, normal valvular structure and function, no hypokinesia or pericardial effusion. After on day the ECG-changes had resolved. The patient was started on ciprofloxacin but developed urticarial rashes and severe itching and the treatment was discontinued. The chest pain subsided after 2 days and the patient left the hospital after 4 days. The patient was given a 10 day prescription of Azithromycin 500 mg (qd) upon hospital release. The diagnosis was determined to be C jejuni-associated perimyocarditis (CPM). At follow-up visit 4 weeks after discharge the patient was without complaints, physical examination was normal and both ECG and TTE were normal.