We report a case of 52-year-old white woman living in southwest Pennsylvania with a medical history significant for well-controlled hypertension (HTN), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) without oxygen supplementation, and chronic back pain following multiple surgical interventions, currently managed with a spinal pain pump, presenting to an outside facility with exertional dyspnea. The patient reported subjective fever, chills, generalized fatigue, and polyarthralgia. She also reported persistent dizziness and occasional pre-syncope. Notably, she denied palpitations, chest pain, or skin rash, and she did not recall recent tick bites, but mentioned her dog’s diagnosis of Lyme disease following deer tick infestation a few months prior. Her vital signs revealed tachypnea and hypoxemia necessitating the initiation of 2 L of oxygen via nasal cannula.

Clinical Course
An electrocardiogram (EKG) displayed T-wave flattening in the anterolateral pre-cordial leads. Initial investigations included a chest X-ray, indicating pulmonary edema and inter-stitial infiltrates. Laboratory analysis revealed a significantly elevated B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) of around 2800 pg/mL, along with mildly elevated troponins (128 ng/L). Consequently, the patient received ceftriaxone and doxycycline for presumed pneumonia, as well as intravenous furosemide therapy for acute heart failure exacerbation. Additionally, a 48-hour heparin infusion was initiated due to concerns regarding underlying acute coronary syndrome (NSTEMI). Subsequently, she was transferred to our hospital for further management.

Upon arrival, her condition had stabilized, with the resolution of supplemental oxygen requirement and improvement in exertional dyspnea following diuretic therapy. However, she exhibited gradually worsening sinus bradycardia, with a heart rate in the 50s and significant hypotension (systolic blood pressure consistently below 90 mmHg). Telemetry monitoring and EKGs throughout the hospitalization revealed absence of AV block. Importantly, she continued to deny chest pain, shortness of breath, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. She did not show signs of end-organ dysfunction evidenced by normal mental status, lactate levels, urine output, renal, and liver functions. Her thyroid-stimulating hormone and 8 a.m. cortisol profiles were also normal (0.039 uIU/ml and 17.1 ug/dL, respectively). The respiratory viral panel result was unremarkable. Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) of the heart revealed a hypokinetic anterior left ventricular (LV) wall and mildly reduced ejection fraction by visual estimation, while the inferior vena cava (IVC) parameters were within the normal range and showed respiratory variation. Of note, her prior EKGs and echocardiograms were normal. Lyme serologies were ordered a few days after presentation due to the unclear etiology of new heart failure and in the setting of this persistent bradycardia.

Due to persistent hypotension, reaching a nadir of 76/50 mmHg (MAP of 59), she was transferred to the Cardiovascular Intensive Care Unit (CVICU) for monitoring and potential pressor support. Lyme IgM and IgG titers followed by Western blot returned positive, leading to the continuation of ceftriaxone therapy for Lyme carditis. Formal echocardiography demonstrated mildly depressed LV systolic function with an ejection fraction of 50% and akinetic anteroseptal, anterolateral, and anterior LV walls. A coronary computed tomography angiogram (CTA) ruled out an ischemic etiology and coronary artery disease, revealing a coronary calcium score of 0. Over the following days, the patient’s condition gradually improved, with stabilization of blood pressure and heart rate, leading to her discharge on an extended course of intravenous ceftriaxone therapy (28 days) for the treatment of Lyme cardiac disease, manifested as myocarditis and cardiomyopathy. Cardiac MRI or endomyocardial biopsy were not pursued given the patient’s remarkably good clinical response to treatment. She was discharged on 14-day Holter monitor, showing absence of AV block.