A 54-year-old Caucasian woman, without any relevant medical history and no gynecological aftercare, was admitted to our hospital emergency room with dyspnea that had progressed over 10 days and was worsening. Upon admission, we noted blood oxygen saturation of 89%, tachycardia (125 beats per minute) and hyperthermia (38.9°C). Her blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia and echocardiography revealed severe pericardial effusion with a swinging heart. An emergency subxiphoid incision with pericardial drainage was performed through a pericardial window, which permitted draining of 700 mL of bloody fluid and a pericardial biopsy. Cytological examination of the fluid revealed atypical cells, and the biopsy specimen showed tumor emboli suggestive of adenocarcinoma. Immunostaining indicated elevated levels of tumor marker, cytokeratin 7 (CK7). Her blood concentrations of carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125 and CA 15.3 were 4667 IU/L and 451 IU/L, respectively, suggesting ovarian malignancy.
When stabilized, our patient was transferred to our department for further investigations. A gynecological examination only found a large uterus. A physical examination of her cervix was normal. An ultrasound examination showed uterine myomatosis, but no endometrial abnormality. Her ovaries were not seen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 35 mm cervical lesion indicative of an endocervical tumor . A thoracic tomodensitometry and liver ultrasound were normal. Exploratory laparoscopy found normal ovaries, with no ascites, but diffuse peritoneal lesions suggestive of carcinosis. A bilateral adnexectomy and multiple peritoneal biopsies were performed. Endocervical curettage revealed necrotic tumor tissue. Cervical biopsies were performed. Histological examination showed a poorly differentiated micropapillary adenocarcinoma of her cervix with peritoneal and ovarian involvement . Immunostaining showed that the tumor cells were strongly positive for CA 125, Kit-ligand-1, Ki67, and CK7. Three weeks after this surgical procedure, intravenous chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel was initiated. Our patient's progression was unfavorable; three days after the first course of chemotherapy she was admitted to our intensive care unit and given thrombolytic therapy for severe pulmonary embolism with no sign of pericardial effusion recurrence. She died due to heart failure after three days in a context of severe pulmonary arterial hypertension.