A 35-year-old woman presented with five days of nightly accentuated burning pain in both legs leading to massive sleep disturbance. The pain was predominantly located in the dorsal thighs and radiated to the calves. She reported some relief through walking around at night and showering her legs with hot water. Back pain, gait or sensory disturbances and bladder dysfunction were denied. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs did not alleviate pain, neither did pramipexole, which had been prescribed for suspected restless leg syndrome. One week before she had had a sore throat and had been clinically diagnosed for streptococcal tonsillitis and treated empirically with penicillin. Her past medical and family history was unremarkable. Clinical examination revealed no focal-neurologic signs. There were no sensory deficits and deep tendon reflexes were symmetrically normoactive. Furthermore, we found no palpable lymph node swelling and no signs of pharyngitis. Motor and sensory nerve conduction studies were normal, as were F-responses of the tibial nerve. Abdominal Ultrasound demonstrated a slightly enlarged spleen. Blood sampling showed relative lymphocytosis, and elevated liver enzymes. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed 18 white blood cells/μl (90% lymphocytes, 10% monocytes), 83mg/dl protein, and blood–brain-barrier dysfunction (albumin CSF/serum quotient 12.5 × 10-3) without intrathecal immunoglobulin synthesis. Virological studies detected EBV VCA IgG and IgM in serum, whereas EBV EBNA-1 IgG was negative. Moreover, EBV-PCR (RealStar® EBV PCR Kit 1.0, altona Diagnostics GmbH, Germany) was positive in blood and CSF (1000 copies/ml each) suggesting primary EBV infection involving the nervous system. Further laboratory investigations were not indicative for infections with streptococcus, borrelia, syphilis, HIV, hepatitis virus A, B or C (serological tests in blood, borrelia and syphilis additionally in CSF), VZV, HSV or enteroviruses (VZV- and HSV-IgG-specificity-indices and PCR in CSF). Under initially started empiric therapy with intravenous acyclovir for possible VZV or HSV radiculitis and analgesic treatment with oral tramadol the patient completely recovered within a few days. After receiving negative results for VZV and HSV, acyclovir was ceased on day six.