The patient, a 5-month-old boy, was delivered full-term and vaginally without complications. The neonatal course was uneventful. At discharge, he was exclusively breastfed and his weight and length were in the 50th percentile.
A family history revealed consanguineous parents coming from Northern Africa; the mother had a history of two miscarriages before the birth of his older siblings. His elder brother had asthma and presented with abnormalities of the rib cage, while his sister underwent surgical treatment for transposition of the great vessels.
At age 3 months, after a chickenpox infection, he experienced his first respiratory exacerbation followed by recurrent wheezing associated with airway infections, that required frequent admissions to the emergency room and treatment with inhaled beta2-adrenergic drugs, antibiotics and oral steroids. The child had received all of the mandatory and recommended vaccines for his age; he had no allergies and no history of apparent prior failure to thrive. At the age of 5 months, he was admitted to our Pediatric Unit for acute respiratory distress in a framework of suspected viral bronchiolitis. He presented with tachypnea (103/min), retractions, and hypoxemia (oxygen saturation on room air at 88 % at rest), requiring oxygen supplementation. Expiratory wheezing and crackling were the main respiratory auscultation findings. A clinical examination also revealed a significant reduction in growth velocity (both weight and length from the 50th to 10th percentile). Blood gas analysis revealed a respiratory acidosis (pH: 7,30; PaCO2: 48 mmHg; HCO3: 19 mmol/l). A chest radiograph revealed over-inflation of the lungs with some interstitial markings in the pulmonary hilum and right upper lobe. Nasal secretions were analyzed for respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovirus, influenza virus, parainfluenza virus and adenovirus; all resulted negative. After a first therapeutic trial with nebulized β2-adrenergic agonists without improvement of symptoms, he was treated with respiratory support in combination with appropriate fluid and nutrition management.
Considering the persistent hypoxemia, despite supplemental oxygen support together with the associated pronounced respiratory distress and the clinical and radiological findings, the bronchiolitis diagnosis was determined to be misleading and an extensive diagnostic workup was performed. Complete blood count and measurement of serum immunoglobulin levels were normal; sweat test, serological tests for bacterial infections (Chlamydia and Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Bordetella pertussis), echocardiography and intraluminal impedance pH monitoring were negative. Assessment of the ciliary ultrastructure, beat frequency and pattern from a brush biopsy of the nasal epithelium excluded the diagnosis of primary ciliary dyskinesia. Subsequently, genetic testing for all exons encoding the ABCA3 surfactant gene (ATP-binding cassette 3) and the SFTPC gene (surfactant protein C) was carried out for suspected genetic surfactant disorders, with negative results. A diagnostic bronchoscopy excluded airway malacia and a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) revealed the high prevalence of neutrophils and the presence of slightly enlarged lymphocyte aggregates and macrophages with intracellular lipids. Microbiological examination of the BAL fluid showed an important colonization by Streptococcus pneumnoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Rhinovirus and Adenovirus. Meanwhile, high-resolution chest computed tomography (HRCT) showed air trapping in the left upper lobe and both lower lobes, and ground-glass opacities of the middle-upper lobes and of the lingula . This typical radiological pattern raised the possibility of neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy (NEHI). In order to complete the diagnostic workup, an open lung biopsy performed at 9 months of age showed the presence of areas characterized by macrophage alveolitis associated with neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of the small airways. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated a significant number of bombesin-positive cells in the small airways walls . Finally, NEHI was diagnosed on the basis of radiological and histopathological findings typical of NEHI, while pulmonary interstitial glycogenosis was excluded with the biopsy findings. The infant was initially treated with oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg daily); afterwards, he required long-term oxygen and nutritional supplementation.
At follow up visits he exhibited gradual clinical improvement. At 12 months of age, oxygen support was administered only at night. At the age of 18 months, his respiratory rate improved and his growth values were back within the normal range (50th percentile). At this time, the daily dose of steroids was stopped. Currently, at age 2 years, he only requires symptomatic treatment of any respiratory infection.