A 46-year-old Sri Lankan man presented to our institution with high-grade fever associated with severe retro-ocular pain, photophobia, bone pain and severe body aches of three days’ duration. He was a recipient of an ABO-compatible cadaveric LT 26 months previously for treatment of end-stage cryptogenic cirrhosis. The immediate post-transplant period had been complicated by acute rejection, but he made a full recovery with an allograft. He was maintained on prednisolone 5mg daily and tacrolimus 3mg twice daily. He had developed diabetes after the third month post-LT. His two sons had had a febrile illness, diagnosed as DF, one week before coming to our institution. He did not complain of respiratory, urinary or bowel symptoms or a rash. An examination did not reveal jaundice, rashes or neck stiffness, but demonstrated a fine tremor in outstretched hands. His right frontal sinus was tender on palpation.
His initial full blood count revealed thrombocytopenia (90,000/μL), and, with a suggestive clinical picture, a provisional diagnosis of DF was made. His skull X-ray demonstrated a fluid level in the right frontal sinus confirming acute sinusitis, which was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone 1g twice daily. Over the next few days, his white cell count and platelet count gradually dropped, reaching a nadir by day 4 of the illness. Dengue NS1 antigen was detected in his day 3 serum sample, confirming the diagnosis of DF. His liver enzymes rose sharply until day 7 before starting to recover. His bilirubin levels and coagulation profile were normal. He entered the leakage (critical) phase on day 6 of his illness, and he recovered by day 8 without any complications with standard supportive DF management. DNA detection of cytomegalovirus was negative, and his blood cultures were sterile. However, liver enzyme normalization took more than two weeks. Throughout his hospital stay, his serum creatinine was around 140μmol/L and, together with fine tremors, was suggestive of tacrolimus toxicity (T0 = 13.4ng/dL). Tacrolimus was reduced to 4mg daily as a result. His creatinine levels dropped to 104μmol/L by the time of discharge. The day 7 and day 14 dengue immunoglobulin M (IgM) titers showed an eightfold increase. Figure shows the changes in parameters over time.