A 23-year-old woman was referred to the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Service of
Associação Paulista de Cirurgiões-Dentistas 30 days after accidental extraction of a
mandibular second molar during extraction of a third molar on the left side. and show the panoramic radiographs taken before and after extractions, respectively. The
patient also reported that the surgeon had considerable difficulty during the surgical
procedure, which imposed an extensive period of time with the mouth opened. She reported
severe joint pain on the right side soon after surgery, accompanied by difficulty in
mouth opening and a deviation to the opposite side of the extractions.
Clinical examination also revealed 23-mm mouth opening , with normal eccentric movement to the ipsilateral side and
restriction of eccentric movement to the contralateral side . The following hypotheses were considered: permanent trismus,
mandibular fracture or ADDWoR on the right side of the TMJ. Patient denied having
history of symptoms related to TMD before surgery. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
confirmed ADDWoR on the right side of the TMJ .
The patient was advised to try to reduce deviation by performing lateral movements, as
much as possible, to the contralateral side of displacement, and, from this position,
try to reach maximum mouth opening. At that time, no increase in mandibular opening and
laterality was observed. Thus, two attempts of manual manipulation were performed within
the period of one week. In the first attempt, we chose to test mandibular reduction
using extraoral anesthesia alone. Due to failure and patient's discomfort, we decided to
wait a week before making a new attempt. At this time, we applied the same type of
extraoral anesthesia associated with intravenous sedation, thus contributing to
successful reduction of disc displacement.
Extraoral anesthesia was applied by blocking the auriculotemporal nerve with 1.8 ml of
2% lidocaine hydrochloride associated with norepinephrine 1:200,000, followed by
anesthesia of masseteric and posterior deep temporal nerves with the same amount of
anesthetics. With a view to providing the patient with greater comfort, an intravenous
injection of 2 g midazolam hydrochloride was administered ten minutes before the manual
reduction procedure . Thus, 40-mm mouth
opening and immediate improvement of mandibular functions were achieved .
Minagi et al's technique for mandibular
manipulation was used. It assists patients in performing maximum lateral excursive jaw
movements to the nonaffected side with teeth slightly occluded, and in making maximal
jaw opening movements through lateral border movements, as follows: 1) Place the thumb
and forefinger on the maxillary canine on the nonaffected side and the mandibular canine
on the affected side. Hold the gonion with the forefinger and middle finger of the other
hand. 2) Instruct the patient to make maximal lateral gliding excursive jaw movements to
the nonaffected side with teeth slightly occluded. Support movement with fingers and
ensure that lateral excursive position is maximal. Lateral excursion with the jaw
protruding is not adequate for this procedure. 3) Subsequently, instruct the patient to
make jaw opening movements through the lateral border path on the nonaffected side.
Support this opening movement with assisting fingers. 4) Continue to support voluntary
mouth opening up to the maximal opening position.
The patient received a prescription of anti-inflammatory drugs (100 mg of nimesulide,
12/12 hours, orally) during five days, and also was advised not to force mandibular
movements after reduction. The patient was instructed to use a stabilizer plate
immediately after correct manipulation, so as to avoid a new disc displacement and
reduce muscle hyperactivity. There were no complications after the manipulation
maneuver, and an immediate 40-mm mouth opening was achieved after manual manipulation
. The patient was followed-up on a
weekly basis in the first month and every two weeks until the third month, showing no
episodes of TMD within this period. and show MRI sagittal slices of the right TMJ
with closed mouth presenting disc displacement and in maximum mouth opening movement,
evincing reduction of TMJ articular disc.