A 35-year-old G2P0010 Cameroonian student at 39-weeks pregnancy was referred to the surgical unit of the Yaounde Gynaeco-Obstetrics and Paediatric Hospital for the management of a strangulated umbilical hernia. She had a sudden onset of localized umbilical pain three hours prior to consultation. The pain was of moderate intensity, crampy in character, aggravated by walking, without any change in bowel movement and no vomiting. An abdominal ultrasound scan revealed a parietal defect of the umbilicus measuring 55 mm in diameter with a poorly vascularised hypoechoic mass (doppler scan) measuring 50 × 30 × 37 mm, 29.6 ml in volume. In addition, the foetus was viable with a normal biophysical score and a good concordance between clinical and sonographic dating of gestational age. Hence, she was referred for surgical management of a strangulated umbilical hernia in a term pregnancy.
An episode of severe malaria during her previous pregnancy was at the origin of a spontaneous abortion at 10 weeks of gestation. Her current pregnancy was being followed at the Efoulan District hospital in Yaounde where she had attended six antenatal clinics. A urine dipstick at 24 weeks of gestation revealed a proteinuria of 600 mg/l coupled with an increase blood pressure to 152/98 mmHg and the development of lower limb oedema. She was diagnosed with pre-ecclampsia and placed on alphamethyldopa 250 mg twice daily. A second trimester ultrasound revealed the presence of two anterior and posterior interstitial myomatous nuclei, of 51 mm and 73 mm long axis respectively.
On physical examination, the patient was in severe pain (visual analogue scale of 9/10 cm) with a temperature of 38.1 °C, pulse rate of 112 beats per minutes, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minutes and blood pressure of 170/118 mmHg. Abdominal examination showed a gravid uterus with a uterine fundal height of 38 cm. There was a tender, non-reducible umbilical swelling , with no cough impulse. There was no sign of peritoneal irritation. She had no costovertebral angle tenderness. Bowel sounds were present and normal. Her digital rectal examination was unremarkable. The foetus had a longitudinal lie, cephalic presentation, right-occipito anterior position and a fetal heart rate of 140 beats per minute. On vaginal examination, the cervix was posterior, non-effaced and closed. She had a bilateral pitting lower limb oedema extending to both knees. In view of this clinical picture, we thought of a strangulated umbilical hernia. All of these on a probable background of severe pre-eclampsia. The laboratory panel requested on admission is illustrated in Table .
A multidisciplinary team involving general surgeons, obstetricians and anaesthesiologists decided on a two-in one intervention wherby an emergency ceaseraean section with indication severe pre-ecclampsia, and a herniorraphy with indication strangulated umbilical hernia will be carried out within the same operation. Preoperative management consisted of placing two peripheral venous lines of large bore needle with infusion of 1000 ml of normal saline, parenteral administration of an analgesic (paracetamol 1 g), an antihypertensive drug (nicardipine 2 mg bolus) and anticonvulsant (magnesium sulphate 5 g intravenously followed by 4 g intramuscularly in each gluteus muscles). A Pfannenstiel incision performed five hours after admission permitted the extraction of a life female baby who weighed 3300 g at birth with an APGAR score of 8 and 10 at the first and fifth minutes respectively. Intraoperative findings of an anterior and posterior sub-serosal leiomyomas both measuring about 50 mm ; anterior fibroid had an axis pointing to the umbilical ring, with irregular contours and a heterogeneous center, strongly suggestive of aseptic necrobiosis. In addition, the uterus also had several interstitial myomas. The uterine adnexae and the appendix were macroscopically normal. The herniated omentum was not necrosed. No intestines necrosis was observed. Both sub-serosal leiomyomas were surgically excised and sent for histo-pathological evaluation. A separate arciform infra-umbilical incision permitted repair of the umbilical hernia.
Histopathological analysis of the leiomyoma samples was consistent with red degeneration (aseptic necrobiosis) of the excised uterine fibroid . The postoperative outcome was uneventful for both the mother and the baby, with the former resuming progressive oral feeding on the first postoperative day. She was discharged five days later in a good clinical condition. Her follow-up at six weeks postoperatively was uneventful.. The six-month postoperative course was also normal.