A 29-year-old man presented to his local emergency department due to an increasingly severe headache for the past 2 weeks, and new-onset neurological symptoms. A CT scan of the head revealed three right-sided supratentorial lesions . He received betamethasone and was emergently transferred to the neurosurgical unit at Linköping University Hospital. The following morning a head magnetic resonance imaging was performed and confirmed intracerebral abscesses. He was started on metronidazole and cefotaxime for empiric antibiotic coverage, and the lesions were drained. Blood, urine, and abscess material were collected for culture. Aggregatibacter Aphrophilus and Eikenella Corrodens, two bacteria commonly found in the normal bacterial flora of the oral cavity were isolated from the abscess cultures.
The patient’s past medical history was insignificant. He had not used recreational drugs and did not abuse alcohol. He was a non-smoker but used nicotine pouches. He was of normal weight (body mass index 23.1 kg/m2) and physically fit. He worked as a serviceman for the army and was in active service. On cardiac review, he had never experienced chest pain, palpitations, decreased effort tolerance, cyanosis, or syncopal episodes. There was no recent travelling history. Family history revealed premature coronary heart disease but no sudden death or CHD. His mother had not used medications during pregnancy.
The patient remained afebrile, with normal pulse variability, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation on room air during the entire hospital stay. He displayed no signs of skin, ENT, dental, lung, or GI infection. The patient confirmed a visit to his dentist for scaling 1 week before the onset of the headache. Cardiac auscultation revealed regular rhythm without gallops or rubs. There was a Grade II/VI pan systolic murmur along the left sternal border increasing with inspiration. No significant jugular distension, hepatomegaly, or hepatojugular reflux was evident. Electrocardiogram (ECG) was normal .
As routine screening, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was conducted. The investigation revealed a dilated CS and atypical appearance of the tricuspid valve with moderate insufficiency. To rule out endocarditis or shunt, transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was scheduled along with an agitated saline study.
The TOE ruled out valvular vegetation, and no shunt was evident utilizing colour Doppler. Agitated saline was injected via the central venous catheter located in the right internal jugular vein; contrast appeared in LA first with a short delay before evident in the RA. To obtain a wider field of observation, the investigation was converted from TOE to TTE (Video 1). The finding raised suspicion of an extracardiac R–L shunt with a simultaneous intracardiac shunt. The same result occurred when utilizing the right cubital vein for injection. However, when agitated saline was injected via a venous line on the dorsum of the right foot, the contrast was only observed in the RA (Video 2). To further evaluate the shunt, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and magnetic resonance angiography were scheduled.
Cardiac magnetic resonance confirmed normal cardiac size and function. The tricuspid valve was found to have an atypical appearance presenting elongated leaflets; however, it did not display tethering of the septal leaflet or displacement associated with Ebstein’s anomaly, or any other diagnostic pathology. Increased trabeculation of the right ventricle was observed but was non-diagnostic for non-compaction cardiomyopathy.
Magnetic resonance angiography confirmed the presence of a bilateral superior vena caval system without a bridging vein. The PLSVC connected to the CS which drained in the RA. The RSVC presented an anomalous trajectory directly to the LA . An intracardiac connection between the RSVC and the RA could not be identified utilizing this modality and no CS defect was evident (, ) An R–L shunt involving the venous drainage of the right upper extremity and right-sided neck veins was confirmed.
As the extracardiac shunt in isolation could not explain the findings of the agitated saline study, the patient was scheduled to return for an ECG-gated cardiac CT (CCT) with angiography after a prolonged course of I.V. antibiotic therapy at his local hospital.
Upon return, the CCT uncovered a 5-mm vessel branching off of the RSVC to form a connection with the RA revealing the extracardiac sinus venosus defect .