A male, 71 years old, a retired teacher, did not have previous history of diseases, including hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic lung disease, kidney disease, and liver disease. He had a long history of smoking with 20 cigarettes per day. On August 24 2018, he got a fever with the heat peak at 40.0 °C without known causes and heat type, accompanied by chills, dizziness, abdominal pain, cough, and by a lot of yellow purulent sputum which was occasionally bloody. These symptoms appeared mainly in the morning and night, accompanied by right chest pain, aggravating when coughing, and difficulty in breathing. After an ineffective antibiotic treatment in the local hospital, he was then transferred to our hospital on September 2nd, 2018. The Computed Tomography (CT) results showed a large consolidation, grinding glass shadow, honeycomb changes, lung balloon formation in the right lung, and a newly-discovered solid patch and grinding glass shadow in the left, as well as bilateral pleural effusion . These indicate: 1. Double lung infection, interstitial pneumonia (mainly right lung), left emphysema, pneumatocele in the upper lobe of left lung; 2. Bilateral pleural effusion, mainly in the right lung; Laboratory analysis and display: Blood analysis: white blood cells 17.34 × 109 / L, neutrophil count 15.52 × 109 / L, neutrophil ratio 89.5%, lymphocyte count 0.83 × 109 / L, lymphocyte ratio 4.8%, platelets 102 × 109 / L. Abnormal test results in liver function: Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 709 U/L, Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 474 U/L, Cholinesterase (CHE) 2789 U/L, Total bilirubin (TB) 25.6umol/L, Direct Bilirubin (DB) 23.3umol/L, Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 758 U / L; Abnormal test results in renal function: Blood urine nitrogen (BUN) 10.10 mmol / L, Creatinine (Cr) 122umol / L; Hypersensitivity C reactive protein (Hs-CRP) 17.49 mg / dl. Abnormal test results in coagulation function: Prothrombin time (PT) 17.40, international normalized ratio (PT-INR) 1.52, D-dimer (DD) 2.37 mg/L; sputum anti-acid staining (−), T-SPOT (−), HIV antibody (HIV-Ab) (−); The patient was diagnosed to be severe pneumonia with multiple organ dysfunction. According to the initial experience, caspofungin (CAS) combined with imipenem, moxifloxacin and oseltamivir were given to resist infection; At 7 days later, the re-examination of chest CT plain scan showed that the pulmonary lesion did not change much in comparison with the previous symptom, showing that the treatment was ineffective, and the clinical symptoms did not improve.
Mycelia and spores were found frequently in the sputum samples of the lower respiratory tract by Gram staining and methylenol lactate microscopic examination. Colonies could be observed in fungal culture: the Sabourauds Agar (SDA) and Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) showed rapid growth at 25 °C, 35 °C and 42 °C, especially on the SDA, with colonies of a gray front and a black reversed. It was dark grayish brown on the PDA. The characteristics of colonies on various substrate were shown in Fig. . Microscope: the hyphae was light brown, 1.5–3.5 μm wide, straight, separated, and unbranched. Erected or slightly curved conidiophores stretch out from the top or side of the hyphae. The tip was tapered; the base was slightly enlarged with a bottle-shaped stalk; the long and narrow neck was similar to the tubular of the Paecilomyces, appearing transparent, and smooth. An array of oval or round conidium was produced from the top of or directly from the end or side of conidiophores arranged in chain. Elliptical conidial was a unicellular microorgnism, which was straight or slightly curved, tapered to the top, transparent, smooth, 4–9 μm long, 2–6 wide micron with a smooth fine spiral strip pattern. The various staining and morphological features under microscopy were shown in Fig. .
For further identification, a single colony on the SDA purification plate was selected, and the general primers for ITS1 and ITS4 of fungi were used. By amplying the region of the internal transcriptional interval region, the sequencing results were analyzed by BLAST comparison. The homology to the Acrophialophora levis sequence in the gene bank was 99%, and the NCBI number referenced was KM995879. We have also submitted the sequence data to GenBank (Accession number is MN461541).
After that, sensitivity to antifungal drugs was further tested by colorimetric microdilution method recommended by CLSI M61 version 2018. The tested antifungal drugs were amphotericin B (AMB), 5-flucytosine (5-FC), anidulafungin (AND), CAS, micafungin (MF), fluconazole (FLU), itraconazole (ITR), posaconazole (PSC), and voriconazole (VRC). Until now, the in vitro sensitivity information of Acrophialophora had not been reported. Among them, AMB (≤0.12 μg/ml) had the best anti-fungal activity against A. levis in vitro, following by the activity of VRC (0.12 μg/ml), ITR (0.12 μg/ml), and PSC (0.25 μg/ml) in vitro. The activity of 5-FC (≥64 μg/ml), AND (≥8 μg/ml), CAS (≥8 μg/ml), MF (≥8 μg/ml), and FLU (16 μg/ml) were poor. Drug sensitivity results confirmed that the original drug, CAS, was not effective. Then liposomal amphotericin B was used for suppressing infection. After that, the fever of patient declined with fluctuations from 36.5 to 37.8 °C. He had reduced sputum volume, cough, sputum blood in phlegm, but still had the white phlegm, with oxygen 5 L/min and blood oxygen saturation by more than 95%. The re-examination of chest CT plain scan at 17 days after the change of anti-infection program indicated that the upper left pneumonia sites were more reduced than before, and the pleural effusion was less severe than before. The next day, the patient was asked to go back to the local hospital for treatment. The treatment was discontinued because liposomal amphotericin B was not available in the local hospital, and this patient died of respiratory failure at 2 days later. The imaging data were shown in Fig. .