A 29 year old male visited the fertility center of Sree Avittom Thirunal Hospital of Government Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram for fertility treatment. Consent was taken from the patient before the study. The present finding of unexpected association between DSD and infertility in Kerala population was observed on 1st March 2018 at Sree Avittom Thirunal Hospital of Government Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India during karyotyping and molecular characterization of azoospermic male patients.
Physical examination and medical history showed that the patient having height of 170 cm and weight of 75 Kg had no history of smoking, alcohol consumption and tobacco chewing. He has been using modern electronic gadget (Mobile phone) for the last five years and did not have any history of orchitis, STDs, psychological and endocrine disorders. Clinical findings revealed that the subject did not have palpation of testis, cryptorchidism, testicular torsion and changes in his extremities. Family history of patient did not show any infertility related problems. The study subject showed normal male secondary sex characters, penile length and androgenic hair pattern and no erection problem, gynecomastia and hypospadias were observed. The testis volume was <2 ml and both testicles were soft and atrophic. Major noticeable changes observed during clinical evaluation were small sized testis and ejaculatory dysfunction. Semen analysis was done on sample collected after 3 days of abstinence and the results confirmed non obstructive azoospermia on repeated analysis. Volume was 2 ml, pH=7.4, liquefaction time 15 min, WBC 0–1 pc/ml and fructose was present. Percutaneous Epididymal Sperm Aspiration (PESA) was done on both sides and sperm could not be retrieved. The couples opted for artificial insemination by donor (AID). Ultrasonography (USG) of scrotum showed right testis to be 1.2 cm × 1.8 cm × 1.4 cm in size with normal echotexture. Epididymis was normal with dimensions of 1 cm × 0.7 cm. Left testis measured 1.3 cm × 1.7 cm × 0.9 cm in size with no indication of varicocele. Transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) showed prostate with 38 mm X 35 mm × 20 mm size. No lesions were observed in any of the transrectal components. Urinary bladder was normal with no dilation in the seminal vesicles and ejaculatory ducts. Hormonal analysis showed an increase in Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) to 35 mIU/ml (1–12 mIU/ml) and Luteinizing Hormone (LH) to 19.9 mIU/ml (1.5–10 mIU/ml) whereas testosterone to 3.2 ng/ml (2.45–10 ng/ml) and prolactin to 6.7 ng/ml (3.1–16.5 ng/ml) which were within the limit of reference range.
Chromosomal analyses of peripheral lymphocytes were used for identifying the numerical and structural aberrations of chromosomes. GTG banding was done for karyotyping. A total of 30 metaphase chromosomes were analyzed and the results showed that the patient had 46 XX karyotype known as de la Chapelle syndrome with no evidence of other structural/numerical chromosomal abnormalities including mosaicism.
Molecular analysis of the Y-chromosome specific STS region by real time PCR and Uniplex PCR amplification of Y chromosome specific six sequence tagged sites (STS) primers were used for identifying AZF gene microdeletion . The primers were designed based on EMQN guidelines . Primers against SRY gene and a unique fragment in X chromosomes and ZFX gene were used as internal controls. Real time PCR analysis showed absence of entire AZFa, AZFb and AZFc region but the presence of SRY gene was confirmed as shown in . All STS primers were amplified in the male positive control. The female genomic DNA failed to amplify in any of the STS primers and the SRY gene, however, showed amplification of the ZFX gene. These findings confirmed that the patient is 46 XX male with the presence of SRY gene.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was performed on metaphase chromosomes from cultured peripheral lymphocytes to confirm the 46 XX male condition using LSI SRY/CEPX probe (Vysis Inc., USA) localized on Yp11.3 and p11.1-q11.1 of X chromosome. The probe hybridization showed two signals for CEPX (Green) at the centromeric region of both the X chromosome and one signal for SRY (Red) on terminal region of one X chromosome in all the metaphases analyzed . This finding confirmed the 46 XX karyotype, a case of DSD.