A 33-year-old Bangladeshi woman with hypertension and diabetes had initially presented to a different hospital with intermittent episodes of palpitations for 2 years, with documented electrocardiographic (ECG) evidence of AF during the episodes. She had previously been on oral propafenone, amiodarone, and metoprolol, at separate times, but continued to experience paroxysmal AF.
She had a 2-year history of hypertension that was well controlled with metoprolol 50 mg twice daily and ramipril 5 mg once daily. She had type 2 diabetes mellitus, diagnosed 3 years previously, that was well controlled with metformin 500 mg twice daily. There was no evidence of diabetic nephropathy or microalbuminuria. Furthermore, other etiologies of AF, such as thyrotoxicosis, were excluded by her thyroid profile, which comprised normal levels of TSH, free triiodothyronine, and free thyroxine. Ischemic heart disease was excluded by a CT coronary angiogram, which revealed normal epicardial coronary arteries.
Given the indication of drug-refractory AF, our patient had undergone EPS at a different hospital from which she had been discharged 24 hours after the procedure. The EPS has comprised right femoral venous catheterization followed by the insertion of three venous sheaths into her femoral vein.
Because an inducible arrhythmia could not be reproduced, her pulmonary vein (PV) potentials were mapped and complete PV isolation was planned. But, because there was difficulty in isolating some of the PVs along with an extended procedural time, the procedure was abandoned. A plan was made to identify all PVs more specifically using other imaging techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), prior to attempting the procedure again.
She presented to our hospital 48 hours after the EPS with shortness of breath and chest heaviness, associated with palpitations and recurrent episodes of syncope. When queried, she confirmed that these symptoms were not like those she had previously experienced during her paroxysms of AF, and reiterated that they only developed after the EPS.
She had no prior history of thromboembolic events, long flights, prolonged immobilization, or oral contraceptive use, and she denied any family history of thrombophilia. There was no evidence of either hypertensive or diabetic nephropathy. A urine dipstick test was negative for protein. A thrombophilia work-up revealed normal levels for protein C and S, antinuclear antibody, and anticardiolipin antibody, thus eliminating other causes of hypercoagulability as possible etiologies of thrombosis.
On examination, she was hemodynamically stable and heart and lung auscultation was unremarkable. There was no unilateral leg swelling. An ECG showed T inversions in leads III, aVF, and V1–4. It also revealed mild tricuspid regurgitation and a pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) of 50 mmHg. Her right ventricle (RV) was dilated, with diameters measuring 38 mm at the basal level and 40 mm at mid-level, with a longitudinal measurement of 90 mm on the apical 4 chamber view. Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) was measured at 12 mm. Her left atrium (LA) was of normal size and measured 33 mm. Qualitative assessment revealed that right atrium was larger than her LA. There was no evidence of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy. Her LV ejection fraction (EF) was 65 % and there were no regional wall motion abnormalities of her LV. There was no evidence of thrombus in any of the cardiac chambers.
A CT coronary and pulmonary angiogram revealed normal coronaries with filling defects in the descending branch of her left pulmonary artery extending into the segmental arteries, suggesting thrombus .
Subsequently, a duplex ultrasound study of her lower limb venous system showed absent blood flow in her right external and common femoral veins, confirming acute DVT affecting her right ilio-femoral segment without signs of recanalization .
Given the sequence of events and their temporal relationship with the EPS, and in the absence of other risk factors for DVT, it was established that the acute DVT occurred as a consequence of the femoral vein catheterization and multiple venous sheaths inserted for EPS, subsequently leading to PE. She was treated with subcutaneous enoxaparin 60 mg twice daily for 5 days along with the administration of oral warfarin. She continued taking the warfarin for 6 months, with a target therapeutic international normalized ratio of 2.5–3. She was asymptomatic at follow-up at six months, and, due to the resolution of the DVT, oral anticoagulation was discontinued.