A 32-year-old Chinese female was admitted to Sichuan University West China Hospital with a 6-month history of upper abdominal pain. She denied previous radiotherapy or industrial chemical exposure. She had one previous pregnancy and and gave birth to a boy. In addition, she denied previous hormonal treatments and contraceptives. She was found to have viral hepatitis B for 6 years and had not received any treatment. Besides, she was healthy with no relevant medical or family history of diseases, such as hypertension or diabetes, and no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. Physical examination was unremarkable. A blood count showed Hb 14.2 g/dl (13–17.5), white blood cells 7.12×109/L (3.5-9.5), platelets 249×109/L (100–300), total bilirubin 12.5 umol/L (5.0-28), and AST 35 IU/L (<50). Serological testing for tumor marker of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 5.54 ng/ml (CEA ≥ 3.4 ng/ml was defined as abnormal) and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) was positive. The hepatitis B virus DNA (HBV-DNA) was less than 1×102 IU/ml (HBV-DNA ≥ 1×102 IU/ml was defined as HBV infection active), suggesting that HBV infection was inactive. The cancer antigen19-9 (CA19-9 ≥ 30 U/ml was defined as abnormal), CA125 (CA125 ≥ 24 U/ml was defined as abnormal) and α-fetoprotein (AFP≥ 7 ng/ml was defined as abnormal) was 25.6 U/ml, 13.3U/ml and 3.37, respectively. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed the lesion in the left lobe of liver was detected, and no tumor was detected in any other organs . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper abdomen was performed in our hospital for further diagnosis. The MRI showed a 1.1×1.3 cm lesion in the left lobe of liver, appearing low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images . Due to the similar appearance, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was considered for preoperative diagnosis. The patient eventually underwent a laparoscopic liver resection of the left lobe. Macroscopically, the tumor was a yellowish solid mass with a diameter of 12mm. Microscopically, the lesion composed of undifferentiated epithelial cells with some atypical glands, and significant lymphocytic infiltration . The epithelial tumor cells were featured by eosinophilic cytoplasm with large nuclei and prominent nucleoli. EBVencoded RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization was positive in tumor tissues. In addition, immunohistochemical analysis showed the lymphatic tissue positive for CD20 (B-cells, ), CD3 (T-cells, ), Ki-67 and negative for IgG4. Meanwhile, tumor cells positive for CK7 , and negative for CK20, supporting the diagnosis of LEL-ICC.
Post-operative recovery of the patient was well. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5 with good general condition. The laboratory parameters were normal and we recommended regular follow-up in the outpatient clinic.
Patients monitored the disease progression at the outpatient of our hospital every 3 months in the first two years after surgery and every 6 months thereafter via blood examination, ultrasonography (US), CT, and MRI. The systematic update of patients’survival information was performed once a year. The last outpatient follow-up was in August 2022, and the tumor markers were normal. The patient was free from tumor recurrence after a 28 months follow-up .