A 34-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to the department of dermatology for evaluation of recurrent and diffuse tinea corporis and recalcitrant crusted scabies. All studies of human subjects were approved by the Institutional Review Board of University Hospitals Case Medical Center (Cleveland, OH, USA) and the patient provided written informed consent. Earlier treatments included topical ketoconazole 2% cream, oxiconazole nitrate 1% cream, and permethrin 5% cream. The patient reported that her skin problems had been intermittent over the preceding 3 years. The medical history of this patient revealed end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis, obesity, non-insulin-dependent diabetes, hypertension, recurrent cellulitis, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Recently, prior to our consultation, she was diagnosed with bilateral cataracts and mild sensorineural hearing loss in one ear. Diabetes and hypertension were coincidentally diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome at age 29 during an acute illness, and she subsequently began hemodialysis. The patient had frequent admissions thereafter for dialysis catheter site cellulitis and methicillin-resistant S. aureus bacteremia secondary to catheter line infections. The patient has lived with her maternal grandmother since birth and was reportedly in good health until age 29 with no evidence of childhood infections other than the infrequent “cold”. The patient had no known siblings and the father was unknown to the family; the mother reportedly suffered from chronic pain related to an injury and died from a prescription narcotic overdose at age 29. There was no evidence of birth defects or immunodeficiency in the maternal family.
Physical examination revealed a woman appearing much older than her chronological age would suggest. The patient exhibited coarse facial features with a prominent brow ridge, midface hypoplasia, prognathia, and slight down slanting of palpebral fissures . The skin examination was significant for thick, hyperkeratotic, white, and flaking plaques on the palms, soles, digits, and under the distal nails . Moist erosions and bright erythema along many of the proximal nail folds were noted. The nail plates appeared normal except distal onycholysis overlying the plaques. There were crusted papules and erosions diffusely scattered on the face, ears, trunk, and extremities consistent with excoriations. There was no evidence of active tinea at the time of the patient visit. Earlier mineral oil scrapings had revealed multiple live mites and exam was consistent with crusted scabies. A fungal culture from the nail fold grew unidentified, non-Candida yeast. It was recommended to the referring dermatologist that the patient continues topical antifungal treatment as needed and to begin oral ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg daily on days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, 22, and 29. An undiagnosed immune syndrome with cutaneous-specific immunodeficiency was suspected, so we referred the patient to medical genetics for evaluation. The laboratory results and hospital admission notes from her community physician were reviewed. Importantly, the patient was HIV negative, had a normal serum protein electrophoresis interpretation, and was negative for antinuclear antibodies. Electrolyte panels were consistent with renal failure and routine dialysis, but no renal biopsy had been performed. Although the white blood cell count would fluctuate between admissions, the patient’s lymphocyte count was consistently within normal limits. The scabies infection resolved after 3 months using routine maintenance doses of ivermectin. The tinea corporis infection resolved using the daily application of topical antifungal creams.