M.C.L.M., 16 years old, reported a history of productive cough for 7 days, with fever and progressive respiratory discomfort for 4 days. She had a history of asthma without follow-up, with the last crisis 1 year ago. She denied other comorbidities, allergies, surgeries or previous hospitalizations. Her parents were healthy, and there were no sick contacts.

She sought emergency care at the beginning of the condition and was prescribed azithromycin. On the seventh day of symptoms, she went to emergency care again due to a significant worsening of dyspnea and a drop in saturation. Measures were taken for bronchospasm, and she was connected to non-invasive ventilation, without response, and required ventilatory support. A sepsis protocol was opened, and the patient received ceftriaxone (2g intravenous - IV - every 12 hours) and oseltamivir (75mg orally - VO - every 12 hours). A panel of respiratory viruses, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19), cultures and laboratory and imaging tests were collected. The patient was transferred on the same day to a paediatric intensive care unit.

The next day, she tested positive for Influenza B and negative for the other agents. She tolerated weaning from the ventilator and was extubated in 2 days. She required noradrenaline for 1 day due to hypotension and haemodynamic instability. On the third day of ceftriaxone, she had a fever, and oxacillin (2g EV every 4 hours) was associated to extend antibiotic coverage. On the eighth day of admission, despite progressing with improvement of the general state, she had a fever for 11 days, when she started laminar desquamation in hand, feet and inguinal region and raspberry tongue. She had bilateral conjunctivitis since admission, in addition to cervical lymph node on the left (5cm), closing criteria for DK. She received acetylsalicylic acid (AAS) 200mg once a day and gamma globulin 80g EV single dose, according to the protocol. Initial and control echocardiogram (ECO) was performed, without alteration of coronary arteries (initial ECO: right coronary artery: 2.9mm and z-score -0.57; left coronary artery: 3.3mm and z-score -0.49; descending anterior artery: 3.2mm and z-score +1.0).

As she had tachypnea with worsening of the chest radiograph image, in addition to the need for supplemental oxygen, an angiotomy was performed, showing pulmonary thromboembolism, small bilateral pleural effusion and pulmonary infiltrate compatible with the current pulmonary disease, and enoxaparin 40 mg subcutaneously was prescribed every 12 hours. Investigation for systemic lupus erythematosus and serologies (cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis and Epstein-Barr) were negative. On the 18th febrile day, prednisolone (60 mg, oral, once daily) was introduced due to the persistence of fever, which ceased 24 hours after the introduction of corticoid. Due to pulmonary thromboembolism, coagulopathies were investigated, with the presence of heterozygous mutation of factor V Leiden. She was discharged with the use of acetylsalicylic acid (AAS, 200 mg, oral, once daily) and warfarin (10 mg, oral, once daily) with ambulatory follow-up. During the follow-up, she collected serology for COVID-19, after more than 1 month from the onset of symptoms, presenting negative immunoglobulin G (IgG) and M (IgM).
