A 47-year-old Caucasian man with a past medical history significant for noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, hepatitis C, past alcohol abuse and cirrhosis was admitted to our medical intensive care unit with an upper gastrointestinal bleed. On presentation, his blood pressure was 104/70mmHg, heart rate 137 beats per minute, temperature 37.2°C and respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute. On examination, he was pale and icteric, and had a mildly distended abdomen with no discernable organomegaly. Cardio-respiratory examination was normal. He was confused and agitated with no focal neurological signs. His white blood count was elevated at 23.7 × 109//L with 24% bands, with a hemoglobin of 78g/L and platelets of 83 × 109/L. Albumin was 19g/dl (normal 32 to 49g/L), total bilirubin 83.3μmol/L (normal 3.4 to 20.4μmol/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 32 IU/L (normal 7 to 42 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 35 IU/L (normal 1 to 45 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 32 IU/L (normal 25 to 120 IU/L), international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.84, arterial ammonia 151μmol/L (normal 11 to 35μmol/L) and lactate of 6.1mmol/L (normal 0.6 to 1.7mmol/L). His blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine were 9mmol/L and 124μmol/L, respectively.
The patient was electively intubated for airway protection and to facilitate endoscopy. He was resuscitated with crystalloids, 5% albumin, packed cells and fresh frozen plasma and treated with vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam for presumed sepsis. Ultrasound and Doppler of his upper quadrants was consistent with cirrhosis with normal blood flow and splenomegaly. An upper endoscopy revealed grade 4 esophageal varices with no active bleed. Over the next few days, the patient became progressively unresponsive (off sedation) with his ammonia level rising above 200μmol/L despite aggressive treatment with lactulose and rifaximin. Neurologic assessment revealed posturing to painful stimuli with a poorly reactive pupillary reflex. Computed tomography of the head revealed diffuse white matter edema prominent in the posterior temporal, parietal and occipital lobes. Brain MRI confirmed diffuse white matter edema with temporal and occipital lobe predominance consistent with the diagnostic pattern for PRES . His course was complicated by the development of tonic-clonic seizures which were controlled with intravenous levetiracetam. His pupils became fixed and non-responsive. Transcranial Dopplers (TCD) of the middle and posterior cerebral arteries demonstrated a marked reduction in cerebral blood velocity consistent with severely increased intracerebral pressure (ICP). As an extraordinary salvage method to control the patient's severe ICP, we lowered his core body temperature to 32°C with the addition of propofol and mannitol, titrated to keep serum osmolarity < 310mmol/L. Induced hypothermia was maintained for 48 hours during which time he regained normal pupillary reflexes with marked improvement in TCD velocities. During the passive rewarming phase, the patient developed massive hematemesis. He required massive transfusion and Minnesota tube placement as attempted banding via endoscopy was unsuccessful. The patient underwent an emergency transjugular intrahepatic portocaval shunt (TIPS) placement followed by repeat induced hypothermia (32 to 34°C). Due to the anticipated increase in the serum ammonia level following the massive gastrointestinal hemorrhage, we initiated high-flow continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVHD) to facilitate ammonia removal. The CVVHD was associated with a fall in the ammonia level . At this time, the patient was again passively rewarmed and the propofol discontinued. His neurological status improved slowly over the following week becoming more alert and responsive and allowing extubation. A repeat MRI of the brain showed interval improvement in extensive white matter signal abnormality most consistent with resolving PRES. He was discharged home with no neurological sequela apart from amnesia for the entire hospital stay. The patient has returned to work part-time and is currently listed for liver transplantation.