A 15-year-old boy was diagnosed with spastic diplegia cerebral palsy, Gross Motor Function Classification System level IV, knee flexion contracture, equinus foot, and paralysis of right upper extremity with adduction contracture. His height was 160.0 cm and his weight was 50.2 kg. He underwent tendon fractional release of the bilateral tendons of the semitendinosus muscle, semimembranosus muscle, and biceps femoris muscle. Achilles tendon lengthening was performed on the right equinus foot using Vulpius elongation. His lower limbs were fixed with above knee plaster splints in the knee extended position and intermediate ankle position 2 weeks after surgery, and he subsequently used short leg braces. Preoperative passive range of joint motion values were as follows: right knee 35–130/left knee 20–130, ankle dorsiflexion with knee extension (DKE) 15/15, and ankle dorsiflexion with knee flexion (DKF) 35/35. At 6 postoperative months, range of joint motion was right knee 15–130/left knee 10–130, DKE 15/10, and DKF 25/20. Knee extension range and DKF improved postoperatively. Preoperative manual muscle testing showed the following: knee extension 3/3, knee flexion 4/4, ankle dorsiflexion 1/1, and ankle plantar flexion 1/1. Before surgery, he had begun crawling in the house. Before HAL intervention, he could not move with crawling because of postoperative muscle weakness. It was thought that muscle weakness was due to disuse muscle atrophy after surgery.
Hybrid Assistive Limb intervention was administered twice during postoperative months 10 and 11 in an outpatient department. Normal outpatient physical therapy was carried out in combination. The patient used the HAL for clinical study type S size (target 145–165 cm). A walking device (All-in-One Walking Trainer; Healthcare Lifting Specialist, Denmark) with a harness was used for safety, and the HAL intervention consisted of walking with the assistance of two physical therapists (Additional files and ). The HAL intervention session lasted 60 min, including rests (10 min) and time for attachment/detachment (20 min). The HAL suit has a hybrid control system comprising the CVC and CAC. The CVC mode of the HAL suit can support the patient’s voluntary motion by providing assistive torque to each joint according to voluntary muscle activity. This study used the CVC mode, which allows the operator to adjust the degree of physical support to the patient’s comfort and gradually reduce support as training progresses. Functional ambulation was assessed with the 10 m-walk test without wearing HAL and video analysis preoperatively and pre- and post- each HAL intervention (Additional files and ). We analyzed one gait cycle of the patient with Dartfish. Walking speed, stride, and cadence in the 10 m-walk test were analyzed. We took a walking video from the sagittal plane and analyzed the video in slow motion, pausing the image to measure the joint angle using the Dartfish Team Pro ver5.5. The angle of the hip, knee, ankle, and trunk in walking and in the gait cycle was analyzed using video. Video images were played back frame by frame, and the phase at the beginning of each gait cycle was confirmed. One gait cycle is defined as the movement starting from initial contact on one side till the next initial contact on the same side. The beginning of the loading response phase is defined as the initial contact, the beginning of mid stance is defined as opposite side toe off, the beginning of terminal stance is defined as heel off, the beginning of pre swing is defined as opposite side initial contact, the beginning of initial swing is defined as toe off, the beginning of the mid swing is defined as intersection of the feet, and the beginning of the terminal stance is defined as the vertical lower leg.
In the 10 m-walk test, the patient used ankle foot orthosis preoperatively, and did not use orthosis pre- and post-HAL intervention. He used the walker as a walking aid.
Table shows the results of the 10 m-walk test. Speed, stride, and cadence for walking were almost the same preoperatively and pre-HAL intervention. Post-first HAL intervention, speed, stride, and cadence were increased compared to pre-HAL intervention. This was maintained until the next HAL intervention and further improved after the second HAL intervention. HAL intervention increased walking speed from 21.7 to 32.1 m/min, stride from 0.40 to 0.47 m, and cadence from 54.23 to 68.9 steps/min.
Ankle angle during walking showed little change because he wore a short leg brace while walking preoperatively. Pre-HAL intervention, the dorsiflexion angle was large in the terminal stance and pre-swing, the plantar flexion angle was large in the initial swing, and there was a large difference between the right and left ankle angle . Post-HAL intervention, range of movement of the ankle joint became more narrow, left-right symmetry increased , and extension angles of the knee in the stance phase increased . Excessive dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the ankle joint disappeared due to extension of the angle of the knee . His extension angle of the hip did not increase and the trunk was leaning forward . Flexion of the upper limbs was strong due to spastic diplegia; therefore, he walked with the head bent forward. Because of the anteversion position, his hip joint did not show extension in walking . Although the horizontal plane and the hip joint were examined, extension of the hip angle in the pre-swing phase was increased . In the gait cycle, asymmetry between the left and right was prominent preoperatively . Comparing pre- and post-HAL, the proportion of terminal stance in the stance phase and swing phase was increased. Since the length of stride was expanded due to increased extension angles of the knee and hip, the ratio of terminal stance and terminal swing increased .
After HAL intervention, he was able to crawl and gained the ability to move within his house, similar to his status before operation. There was no adverse event such as fall or fractures during the HAL intervention. The patient was able to walk easily while wearing HAL, and he actively participated in HAL intervention.