A 7-year-old boy was referred to our center due to headache and left limb weakness. Craniocerebral magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple patchy abnormal signals in the bilateral paraventricular basal ganglia area and the right half oval center. Softening lesions were considered, and no notable abnormalities were observed in the cerebral blood vessels . Transthoracic echocardiography indicated a right to left shunt signal with a width of ~2.5 mm in the middle of the atrial septum. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a fissure-like echo at the foramen ovale of the atrial septum, with a width of ~2.2 mm and a length of ~15 mm . Right ventricular contrast-enhanced ultrasound indicates that a large amount of microbubble echoes were observed in the second cardiac cycle of the left heart in a resting state. During the Valsalva maneuver, a large amount of microbubble echoes were observed in the first cardiac cycle of the left heart (, Left). The transcranial doppler (TCD) foaming experiment indicated that there was no microbubble echo in the resting state, and a large number of microbubble echoes were observed within 10 s during the Valsalva maneuver. Bilateral lower limb venous ultrasound showed no obvious thrombosis or plaque formation. The laboratory examination (included D-dimer) and electrocardiogram (ECG) showed no abnormalities. Inquire about the patient's medical history. The patient has no family history of coagulation disorders. A detailed medical history inquiry revealed that at the age of 2 years, the child experienced headaches, unclear language, and left limb weakness. Emergency cranial magnetic resonance imaging showed patchy and slightly longer T1 and T2 signal shadows in the bilateral basal ganglia area, with a larger range on the right side and a maximum cross-sectional size of approximately 1.5 × 1.2 cm. Bilateral abnormal signals in the basal ganglia area were observed, indicating demyelination changes. The relationship between recurrent cerebral infarction and abnormal shunting caused by PFO is considered in patients. The PFO closure decision was adopted after a detailed discussion. This procedure was performed under local anesthesia with the implantation of an 18 mm Amplatzer PFO device . The patient was discharged the next day. Antiplatelet therapy was administered 6 months after PFO closure. Follow-up after 1 year did not reveal any further symptoms of headache or limb weakness. After PFO closure, no new infarct was found on cranial MRI. The right ventricular contrast-enhanced ultrasound was negative, and the TCD foaming test was negative (, Right).