A 64-year-old man underwent video-assisted thoracic surgery, right upper lobectomy combined with bronchoplasty, and SVC plasty for right lung cancer. General anesthesia was induced and maintained with propofol and remifentanil combined with paravertebral nerve block. After induction of anesthesia, propofol was administered at 2.5 μg/mL with a target-controlled infusion system (TCI pump TE-371TM; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), and remifentanil was administered at 0.4 mg/h. Before clamping the SVC, the state entropy remained around 50 . Because the tumor had invaded the SVC, it was necessary to clamp the SVC for resection. After administration of 3000 units of heparin, the SVC was clamped on the cranial and caudal sides of the tumor, and the invading tumor was excised simultaneously with the SVC. Immediately after clamping, the mean arterial pressure (MAP) dropped from 60 to 50 mmHg. Blood pressure quickly recovered to its previous level after administration of 4 mg of ephedrine. State entropy rose temporarily for 4 min after clamping and then steeply slowed down to a value less than 10, and the burst suppression ratio (BSR) increased from 0 to 93% . The flattening of EEG was thought to be caused by cerebral congestion and reduced cerebral perfusion; however, the clamp could not be released because the SVC was already incised. We performed phlebotomy by releasing the clamp on the cranial side to relieve SVC congestion. Time course of an increase of MAP, phlebotomy, increase of state entropy (SE), and decrease of BSR should be correctly described. SE increased after declamping SVC . We performed phlebotomy with reference to the improvement in entropy EEG. Phlebotomies were performed twice during a total SVC clamping time of 21 min, for a total volume of 600 mL. State entropy gradually increased after SVC declamping and fully recovered 30 min after declamping . After the surgery time of 7 h and 12 min, he awakened from anesthesia and was extubated in the operating room. The patient was discharged without neurological sequelae.