A 59- year-old female was admitted at our Unit of Neurosurgery with a 4-month history of progressive and severe dorsal back pain without neurological signs. The patient had been previously surgically treated in 2007, 2011, and 2013 for a recidivated MCC in the occipital region, firstly mistaken for a basal cell carcinoma. The resection had been followed by several cycles of chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil and cisplatin) and local radiotherapy. In the last surgical excision, a lateral cervical lymph node dissection had been performed. The patient had no other comorbidities or any other cancer and she was not immunocompromised. Two years later, the patient complained the onset of progressive pain in the dorsal region. After the admission at our Unit, a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) with gadolinium contrast medium of the dorsal spine was performed. A neoplastic involvement of two vertebral bodies (T7 and T8) was visible on the contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images , a local cord impingement and a segmental local kyphosis were visible on T2-weighted images , while and an osteolytic shape was visible on Short-T1 Inversion Recovery (STIR) sequence . A total body computed tomography (CT) showed several lungs and liver metastases. Neurologic examination was unremarkable. A multidisciplinary consultation was performed, a palliative surgery was decided and the patient was operated employing a posterior dorsal approach based on the use of radiofrequency (RF) thermoablation (MetaSTAR, Dfine, San Jose, USA), followed by the injection of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) in T7 and T8 vertebral body and a transpedicle fixation T5-T9. The histopathological analysis of the vertebral body biopsy confirmed that the metastasis is derived from the MCC. Postoperative MRI showed a reduction of the neoplastic volume in both involved vertebral bodies (T7 and T8) [Figure and ], while a thoracic CT scan revealed the improvement of the segmental thoracic curvature with correct pedicle fixation and a partial vertebral augmentation [Figure and ]. The postoperative course was uneventful and there was a significant reduction of dorsal pain. The patient is still alive after 8 months, in good general conditions and is going through chemo and radiotherapy.