A male patient, 2 years old, was admitted to the hospital on May 21, 2018 due a sustained fever of over 6 consecutive days, with his highest body temperature reaching 39.0 °C, which peaked once or twice per day, accompanied by coughing, phlegm, and shortness of breath. His local hospital diagnosed him with “acute upper respiratory tract infection” and prescribed him 5 days of Chinese herb medicine; however, his temperature was not alleviated. After entering our hospital, his chest X-ray showed that both of his lungs had an increased thickened texture. With possible inflammation suspected, the boy was then admitted as a pneumonia patient. Prior to the onset of the illness, the child’s spirit was normal, with no irritability or fatigue. His dietary intake was also normal, with normal appearing defecation. His medical history showed that he was a rather healthy baby, G1P1 (Gravida 1, Para 1) full-term delivery. He was breastfed and had normal growth and development for his age, and his parents were also healthy. As a child, he had no history of food or drug allergies reported, and no oral diuretics or catharsis drugs were taken previously. However, the child had a history of spontaneous night-sweats and enuresis according to his parents.
Body temperature 37.0 °C, pulse 125 beats/min, breathing 25 breaths/min, blood pressure 95/65 mmHg, weight 10.5 kg, height 92 cm, slightly underweight (boy standard weight: 11.2–14.0 kg). Normal reflexes without shortness of breath or cyanosis. No rash, no swelling of superficial lymph nodes, pharyngeal hyperaemia. Bilateral tonsils were not enlarged. Rough tracheal sounds with phlegm rales were heard. Heart and abdominal examinations were normal. Extremities and spine were normal, physiological reflexes existed, and pathological reflexes were not elicited.
Blood test showed WBC 14.85 × 109/L, N% 78.2, L% 14.6, HGB141 g/L, PLT 290 × 109/L, CRP10.0 mg/L. Stool and urine routines were normal; procalcitonin 0.3 ng/L; ESR 15 mm/h; ferritin 90.8 ng/ml; ASO normal; Mycoplasma pneumoniae antibody IgM negative. Liver and kidney function, glucose, coagulation function, rheumatoid index, thyroid function, lymphocyte subtype tests (NK cells, T cells, auxiliary T cells, reactive T cells, B cells) and immunoglobulins all met the reference ranges of his age group; repeated examinations of electrolytes indicated hypokalaemia, hypomagnesemia, low chlorine, low sodium and transient mild metabolic alkalosis (see Table for details). A further check of the 24-h urinary potassium was 57 mmol/24 h, and the 24-h urinary calcium was 2.86 mmol/24 h, which informed increased urinary potassium level; plasma renin activity was 142.05 pg/ml (4–24 pg/ml); angiotensin II was 435.62 pg/ml (25–129 pg/ml); aldosterone was 100.26 pg/ml (10–160 pg/ml); and serum cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone were normal. Multiple reviews of ECG and 24-h Holter showed 1st degree atrioventricular block (see Table for details), cardiac colour Doppler showed tricuspid valve, mild regurgitation of the pulmonary valve; abdominal colour Doppler showed intrahepatic calcification plaque and accumulation of gas in the colon; renal colour Doppler ultrasound and adrenal colour Doppler ultrasound did not appear abnormal.
According to the symptoms, signs and chest radiographs of the child, he could be diagnosed with pneumonia. Analysis of pathogens and blood test results showed a high total number of white blood cells. Neutrophils were dominant, along with high CRP and PCT. According to the infection index combined with our clinical experience, these findings indicate the high possibility of bacterial infection. At the beginning of the treatment, intravenous ceftriaxone (80 mg/kg) was prescribed to treat the infection and to suppress coughing and phlegm with airway management. His body temperature dropped to normal within 24 h, which suggested the antibiotic was effective. On the day of admission, the emergency reports showed electrolyte values with “blood potassium 1.7 mmol/L” and “blood magnesium 0.59 mmol/L”. First, we considered the possibility of electrolyte imbalance secondary to pneumonia; thus, oral and intravenous potassium supplementation (4–5 g/day) were prescribed along with injection of magnesium sulphate and rehydration treatment. Regular review of electrolytes showed that blood potassium gradually increased to 3.1 mmol/L within 2–3 days; however, the result could not be sustained, and it was difficult to make it continue to rise. From further questioning of the child’s medical history according to the parents, it was learned that the child had long-term “sleepiness,” “drowsiness” and other symptoms accompanied by enuresis (3–4 times/week) and severe night sweats (parents described it as “like a shower”); he was also slightly light in weight. All of the above could have been due to possible chronic potassium loss. With persistent hypokalaemia and hypomagnesemia observed in the clinical stay, his urinary potassium excretion increased, and his urinary calcium was normal. The blood biochemical analysis showed that the PH and HCO3- were high. His blood pressure was normal, but plasma renin activity and angiotensin were high. The aldosterone levels were normal, and the clinical consideration of “Gitelman syndrome” was likely. Further second-generation gene analysis (KingMed Diagnostics) (see Figs. and for details) detected two heterozygous mutations (SLC12A3 (16q13/NM-000339.2)): exon number Exon12, cDNA level 1456G > A, protein level Asp486Asn, considering that the disease gene was derived from the mother; and exon No. Intron12, cDNA level 602-16G > A, protein levels were normal, considering a suspicious pathogenicity derived from the father. With the Gitelman syndrome diagnosis having been established, long-term oral potassium citrate granules were prescribed to be taken for 1 year. Blood potassium levels were stable between 3.1–3.5 mmol/L, and the PR intervals were between 0.17–0.2 cm. Growth and development were normal, and the enuresis disappeared, but the night sweats still persisted.