A 34-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department at our institution, with left-sided pleuritic chest pain and haemoptysis for 5 days on the background of being unwell for a month with flu-like symptoms that included fatigue, myalgia, and night sweats. She denied any recent foreign travel or any intravenous drug use in the past. On admission, her blood pressure was 173/100 mmHg (this subsequently reduced to 105/62 mmHg during admission), and her heart rate was 91 b.p.m. She was saturating 100% on room oxygen and was apyrexial at 36.2°C. On lung auscultation, there were mild inspiratory crepitations heard along the left base of the lung. On cardiac auscultation, a systolic murmur was heard over the aortic area that was louder on expiration. On further clinical examination, there were no enlarged neck or axillary lymph nodes. She tested negative for COVID-19 and her initial electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with good R-wave progression, narrow QRS, normal QRS axis, normal PR and QTc intervals, and no ischaemic changes. Her chest X-ray revealed patchy airspace opacification at the left base of the lung that was thought to be infective in nature.
The patient had no known medical history but a family history of a sister who underwent EP ablation for atrioventricular nodal re-entrant tachycardia and suffered a deep vein thrombosis after pregnancy.
Initial blood tests revealed raised inflammatory markers, with an initial C-reactive protein of 71 mg/L (normal <5 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 43 mm/h (normal range 1–9 mm/h, when adjusted for patient demographics), with C4 complement of 0.44 g/L (normal range 0.10–0.40 g/L) and a positive D-dimer test (qualitatively reported, with normal range 0–500 µg/L). The patient’s white blood cell count was 9.6 × 109/L on admission and peaked at 11 × 109/L (normal range 3.8–11.0 × 109/L) 4 days later, before dropping back to normal levels, and the urine sample provided returned negative for bacterial growth while revealing normal white and red blood cell counts. Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram revealed probable sub-acute pulmonary emboli that had mostly resolved but with several peripheral pulmonary infarcts. There were no pathological mediastinal, hilar, or axillary lymph nodes identified, no malignancy of the chest and the upper abdominal viscera and no destructive bone lesion. Blood cultures returned no growth. Initial transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed no obvious vegetations but showed a dilated coronary sinus with aliasing on colour Doppler imaging (; , and ) and turbulent flow in the region of the RCA (; , ). A further TTE was done the following day and revealed good left ventricular and right ventricular systolic function with non-dilated ventricles, no evidence of infective endocarditis, but confirmed a dilated coronary sinus with suspicion of flow towards the left atrium (; , ). Due to suspicion of an unroofed coronary sinus, a bubble transthoracic echocardiogram was performed with administration of agitated saline through a left antecubital fossa vein. However, this was not confirmed, and no significant right-to-left shunt was detected. Only a small number of bubbles were noted in the left atrium after a Valsalva manoeuvre, indicating a patent foramen ovale (; , ). A CTCA was performed, revealing an RCA-to-coronary sinus fistula .
The patient was started on intravenous antibiotics upon admission with initial suspicion of infective endocarditis. However, this was discontinued after negative blood cultures and the absence of obvious vegetations identified on TTE. With the confirmation of multiple pulmonary emboli, the patient was then started on lifelong, therapeutic anticoagulation with apixaban and referred for thrombophilia screening, which was ultimately negative. A transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasound of her pelvis performed a few days after discharge excluded any obvious gynaecological malignancy.
A stress cardiac magnetic resonance imaging scan with adenosine was performed in an outpatient setting after discharge. This did not reveal any stress-inducible myocardial ischemia. The left ventricle was mildly dilated (end-diastolic volume index 103 mL/m2—normal values 62–96 mL/m2) but with normal ejection fraction (left ventricular ejection fraction - LVEF 59%). The right ventricle was not dilated and had good systolic function. The pulmonary artery was not dilated.
With no significant haemodynamic consequences or complications of the RCA-to-coronary sinus fistula, the patient was managed conservatively.