A 53-year-old man presenting with persistent pericardial effusion, a 3-month history of cough, and weight loss of 7.5 kg within 2 years was referred to our hospital. Ten months ago, he had visited a local hospital for periumbilical pain, nausea, and diarrhea, where abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed the existence of pericardial effusion. Because of no symptoms of dyspnea or chest pain, the patients did not receive any treatment for pericardial effusion. He coughed in his supine position for 3 months, and then came to our hospital. In addition to severe pericardial effusion, symmetric septal hypertrophy (thickness 18–28 mm), thickened and nonhomogeneous left ventricular walls with irregular echo-density of the myocardium were also detected by echocardiography in our hospital. There was no sign of systolic anterior motion. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction was considered for the following reasons: Firstly, the symptom of heart failure was supine dyspnea presenting as cough; Secondly, serum level of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide elevated to 19,005 pg/ml at the admission to our hospital; Thirdly, although the left ventricular ejection fraction was 62%, the left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, presenting as decreased mitral annular velocity (6 cm/s) in the interventricular septum and free wall, were found. Thus, furosemide and spironolactone were prescribed to him.

Chest CT showed an irregularly shaped and internal necrotic mass (6.0 × 6.9 cm), and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the anterior mediastinal region. The mass had invaded the pericardium, left ventricular walls, and homolateral superior pulmonary veins. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hypointense signals on T1-weighted sequences, non-homogeneous hyperintense signals on T2-weighted sequences, and late gadolinium enhancement around the mass that was indicative of metastatic disease. Moreover, 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) of the total body revealed increased FDG uptake in the anterior mediastinal mass, multiple lymph nodes, left ventricular walls, and left superior pulmonary veins. Above findings strongly suggested an aggressive and malignant neoplasm arising from the thymus invading into the ventricular, pericardium, left superior pulmonary veins, and multiple lymph nodes.

Due to the superficial location of the thymic mass to the chest wall, CT-guided puncture was performed and specimen was taken for pathological biopsy. Hematoxylin eosin (HE) staining revealed the presence of a number of atypical, pleomorphic cells. Immunohistochemical staining showed the presence of the neuroendocrine markers synaptophysin (Syn), chromogranin A (CgA), the neuronal cell adhesion molecule CD56, and a proliferative index Ki-67 (5%). Thus, the neuroendocrine origin of the thymic carcinoid was confirmed. The patient finally decided to give up further treatment due to personal choice.