A 31-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with an acute onset of left-sided weakness including upper and lower extremities, which began approximately one hour prior, following a fall while seated. The patient reported a frontal headache and slurred speech, along with non-radiating, burning epigastric pain.

The patient had an unremarkable medical history, aside from recurrent episodes of left flank pain previously treated as renal colic at a urology clinic. For this, he had been prescribed a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, his only medication. The patient also reported a smoking history of 18 pack-years but denied any alcohol or substance abuse.

The patient was conscious, alert, and oriented to time, place, and person, with hemodynamically stable and an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. Neurologic examination showed non-fluent speech with intact comprehension and repetition. Sensation was preserved bilaterally; however, there was a marked reduction in power on the left side, with both upper and lower limbs scoring 1/5, and a muted Babinski sign on the left compared to the normal response on the right. Cranial nerve function was intact.

Initial laboratory results in the ED revealed elevated cardiac enzymes and normocytic anemia, with a hemoglobin level of 7 g/dl, a high reticulocyte count, and a low platelet count. Coagulation studies showed an elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) with normal prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR). Evidence of intrarenal injury was noted, with a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) to creatinine ratio of 17:1. Additional findings included indirect hyperbilirubinemia, elevated inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate), normal serum electrolytes, and normal haptoglobin. The patient’s baseline creatinine was 0.7 mg/dl. Urinalysis showed + 2 proteinuria and + 3 hematuria.

Diagnostic investigations included an electrocardiogram (ECG) that showed sinus rhythm with prolonged PR interval and diffuse ST-segment elevation, suggestive of myopericarditis. The echocardiogram revealed a Left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% and bi-atrial dilation. Cardiac catheterization showed non-obstructive coronary artery disease, indicating microvascular thrombosis. A CT scan showed a large acute nonhemorrhagic infarction in the right fronto-parietal–temporal lobes, along with multiple lacunar infarctions, confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed total occlusion of the middle cerebral artery.

The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), where additional laboratory investigations revealed schistocytes on blood smear, positive direct and indirect Coomb’s test, increased ferritin, and a negative rheumatoid factor. Complement component C3 was decreased, and LAC was positive (ratio: 1.74). aCL was positive (26 IU/ml), while IgA and IgM β2GP1 antibodies were negative. Anti-nuclear antibodies (titer: 1:86) and anti-dsDNA antibodies (95.4 IU/ml) were also positive.

The patient received three units of packed red blood cells; two units were administered after the patient remained anemic following the first unit. The patient’s condition dramatically improved after initiating treatment with Methylprednisolone, Hydroxychloroquine, Colchicine, and Rituximab.

Over the following 10 days, the patient exhibited further improvement with significant progress observed in both physical exam and laboratory results. An ECG demonstrated regular sinus rhythm with no ST-segment elevation, but T wave inversion was noted in lead aVL. On the 12th day, the patient was discharged in stable condition with residual left-side weakness (1/5 in the upper limbs and 3/5 in the lower limbs) and normal strength on the right side. An ECG showed regular sinus rhythm with negative T waves in the anterior and inferior leads. An echocardiogram revealed normal findings, including a left atrial size of 20 mm (within the normal range of 20–40 mm).

At his last follow-up visit, 10 weeks after discharge, the patient remained stable and showed improvements in the strength of his left upper lower limb, which were 4/5 and 3/5, respectively. He continued to use crutches to assist with mobility while undergoing physiotherapy.

Thirteen weeks after discharge, the patient visited the rheumatology clinic, where the diagnosis of APS was confirmed through repeat laboratory tests. The results showed positive LAC (ratio: 1.85), as well as positive IgG aCL (46 IU/ml), IgM aCL (22 IU/ml), IgG aβ2GP1 (46 U/ml), IgA aβ2GP1 (39 U/ml), and IgM aβ2GP1 (35 U/ml) antibodies.