A 37-year-old male patient presented to a surgical emergency with the complaint of blackish skin discoloration of the Right arm over the region of the deltoid with severe pain. He had a history of intramuscular diclofenac 75 mg injection into the right deltoid one day back for generalized musculoskeletal pains. The swelling progressed rapidly throughout 24 to 30 h. Past medical and surgical history was unremarkable. There was no history of intake of steroids or any other drug that could lead to an immunocompromised state. No history of illicit drug use. On general physical examination, the patient was anxious, irritable, pale, dehydrated, febrile, and was having a toxic look. He was tachycardic with a pulse rate of 106 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 24 cycles per minute and he was also found to be hypotensive with systolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg.
Local examination revealed a swollen right arm with blackish discoloration over the region of the right deltoid. On palpation, the whole of the right arm was extremely tender, and tense, and had extended subcutaneous emphysema. Furthermore, pallor, pulselessness, and paresthesia of the distal limb raised strong clinical suspicion of compartment syndrome. Establishing a preliminary diagnosis of gas gangrene with concomitant compartment syndrome, immediate resuscitation was given with intravenous fluids, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and strong analgesia. Vital monitoring and IOP started. Arterial blood gas analysis was performed which revealed metabolic acidosis with respiratory compensation. On blood tests, leucocyte count was 18,500 per microliter and C-reactive protein was 53 mg/dl. His creatinine was 1.7 mg/dl and urea was 95 mg/dl. Total bilirubin was 2.7 mg/dl, ALT was 160 units/l. The patient received prompt treatment with release incisions, surgical debridement, and resection of necrotic tissue. All the open wounds were copiously washed with hydrogen peroxide and normal saline. Wounds were covered with antibiotic dressings. Cultures of the fluid from necrotic tissue resulted in a positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis, clostridium perfringens, and Staphylococcus aureus. Histologic examination of the tissue removed from the right deltoid and triceps region described colliquative necrosis. After debridement, the patient was shifted to the ward and monitored for 24 h. On the next day margins of the wounds became increasingly necrosed, and the gangrene extended to anterior and posterior chest walls beyond anterior and posterior axillary lines. Re-Debridement was planned, wound margins were refreshed and the whole of the necrotic muscles involving the triceps and part of the latissimus dorsi were debrided. According to the results of culture sensitivity meropenem, 1 g 12 hourly was administrated. Minor serial detriments were performed over the subsequent days and the wounds were managed with regular dressings. The patient remained under close observation receiving intensive supportive care for almost 4 weeks. Gradual improvement was noted with the development of healthy granulation tissue. The patient was discharged in stable condition with continued outpatient wound care and follow-up in the department of plastic surgery for possible skin grafting after the establishment of healthy granulation tissue.