A 65-year-old female with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, systemic arterial hypertension and long-standing right hearing loss. She began his condition 21 days before his initial evaluation in July 2023, presenting with moderate to intense holocranial headache that partially subsided with the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. She had previously been diagnosed with dementia due to retrograde memory and language disorders. In the neurological examination with Glasgow 13 points (O:4, V:3, M:6), mental functions with global aphasia, isocoria of 3 mm, preserving photomotor and consensual reflexes, right side conduction hearing loss, preserved motor function, sensitive without response to pain in the right hemibody. No evidence of intracranial hypertension or history of seizures. A simple and contrasted tomography was performed, showing the presence of two lesions at the level of both ventricular trigone each one apparently, which were confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan indicating periventricular lesions with extension to the white matter of the temporal and parietal lobes, a clear reduction of the ventricular space of both atrium was observed, no communication between these lesions through fibers of the corpus callosum, with mostly uniform enhancement at gadolinium contrast , and restriction to diffusion. Metastasis, high-grade glioma, and lymphoma were considered as a differential diagnosis, which was complemented by a thoracic and abdominal tomography without evidence of systemic lesions. Serological studies were performed , viral profiles for EBV, CMV, and HIV, as well as tumor markers, which were all negative. Subsequently, a spectroscopy study was performed 8 days before treatment with dexamethasone, where peaks of choline and creatine were observed, a high choline/creatine (Cho/Cr) ratio, with peaks of lipids and lactate, as well as a decrease in N-acetyl aspartate (NAA), suggestive of malignancy and presence of areas of necrosis.
A temporal craniotomy with a transulcal T2–T3 approach guided by a neuronavigation system was performed. Biopsy samples were taken. The tumor was identified as infiltrative and diffused in the white matter, with gray color, soft consistency, and necrotic core. The ventricle was not opened. No complications were presented.
Histopathology revealed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with an angiocentric pattern with positive immunohistochemical staining for CD20 and Ki67 in 70% .
The patient had a complicated course due to pneumonia, was discharged from the hospital 15 days after surgery, and was referred to an oncology center.