In April 2023, a 39-year-old Chinese woman presented to our hospital complaining of a black shadow in front of her right eye for 5 days. This patient had been diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in 2017 and received an autologous HSCT in 2018. Unfortunately, she suffered a relapse of leukaemia and underwent an allogeneic HSCT in October 2022. The patient developed ocular symptoms at 6 months after receiving the transplant. After the consultation, the patient received a series of tests including visual acuity, slit lamp, noncontact tonometer, ocular ultrasound, macular optical coherence tomography, and Optos fundus photography. The patient’s best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes using the Snellen visual acuity chart. The intraocular pressure was within the normal range. Slit lamp examination revealed that the anterior segmental structures of both eyes were normal. Ultrasound of the eye suggested flocculent vitreous clouding in the lower part of the right eye . Partial signal enhancement in the retina of the left eye was found, and part of the photoreceptor cell layer was missing on optical coherence tomography(OCT) . Fundus photography revealed a yellowish-white exudate with haemorrhage in the peripheral retina of the right eye and a faint haemorrhage in the lower retina of the left eye . Combining the medical history and relevant ophthalmic examination, we highly suspected that the patient had developed cytomegalovirus retinitis.
Therefore, we performed anterior atrial puncture and extracted aqueous humour from the patient for viral testing on 23, April. We further refined FFA + ICGA on April 25. Surprisingly, utilizing broad-spectrum high-throughput sequencing, it was found that the aqueous humour of her right eye tested positive for three viral DNAs-CMV, EBV, and HSV . Internal markings and no template control were added to rule out a false detection of both herpes viruses during the high-throughput sequencing. The left eye was positive for CMV only. The FFA + ICGA findings indicated a small amount of retinal exudate in the patient’s right eye, and a large area of obscured fluorescence in the subnasal and inferior choroid . The patient was then treated with bilateral vitreous cavity ganciclovir injections. Viral DNA was retested one week later and no virus was detected in the aqueous humour of either eye by quantitative polymerase chain reaction(QPCR). The test was negative for viral DNA. OCT and fundus photography indicated no significant changes in the fundus. The patients underwent weekly serum cytomegalovirus and EBV testing after the second stem cell transplant. She was cytomegalovirus positive only between November 15, 2022 and January 14, 2023, with viral copy numbers ranging from 1.02 × 102 to 2.37 × 104 during this period. Each test was negative for EBV. The patient was treated with systemic antiviral therapy in the hematology department since February, 2023. As of May 22, 2023, her fundal lesions all remained stable.