A 48-year-old male with an unremarkable medical history was referred to our department with perianal and pelvic pain, and constipation. Physical examination revealed a mass in the rectum. Endoscopic evaluation revealed a normal rectal mucosa. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a cystic mass below S3, with a solid component in the median presacral position posterior to the mesorectum. The mass extended longitudinally by 6 cm, imprinting the right posterior wall of the lower rectum near the levator ani muscles. A diagnosis of a tailgut cyst of 36 × 23 × 33 mm was made, including both a solid component with T2 contrast enhancement and multiple small cyst-like components with a maximum diameter of 10–12 mm . Transperitoneal laparoscopic resection was proposed, as it was deemed safer to preserve the integrity of the cyst wall.
Different approaches to rectal dissection have been described for benign and malignant disease [,]. In our technique, the patient was placed in the supine decubitus position. After laparoscopic entry with an open Veress-assisted technique , four trocars were placed. A circumferential incision of the peritoneal reflection was made posteriorly and laterally, saving the anterior plane. Rectal mobilization began from the posterior aspect, preserving the mesorectal fascia to visualize the cyst, which was isolated and excised to avoid injuries to the capsule. Peritoneal continuity was restored. Specimen extraction was performed via a suprapubic incision .
The procedure may be complicated by injury to the nerves, supplying the rectum and pelvic plexus. Furthermore, bleeding from the presacral vein must be avoided because it is difficult to manage. We suggest mobilizing the posterior wall as the initial step, in order to avoid injuries at pelvic splanchnic nerves, also known as nervi erigentes, which can help to preserve sexual function in male patients.
The estimated operative time was 120 min, estimated blood loss was insignificant, and no transfusion was performed. No postoperative complications occurred, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day two. No signs of recurrence were found at the six-month follow-up and no functional urinary or anorectal symptoms were reported. Preoperative management and postoperative follow-up at six months included MRI and endoscopy, which were negative for metastasis.
Histopathological examination was performed on the excised specimen (5 × 4.3 × 2.5 cm), and macroscopically, the mass was partly multicystic and partly solid in appearance. The solid area corresponded to a neuroendocrine neoplasm with a nested trabecular pattern of growth comprising round cells with salt-and-pepper nuclear chromatin staining positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin, with a ki67 labelling index of 5–10% (compatible with a grade 2 NET). This neoplasm arose in a conglomerate tailgut cyst. The cystic spaces were lined with immature intestinal-type epithelium and urothelium .