In 2016, a 37-year-old woman with a past medical history of rheumatoid arthritis treated with tumour necrosis factor alpha inhibitor complained of rapid palpitations of short duration and near syncope. In 2006, she was diagnosed with symptomatic idiopathic VPB (burden: 33%/24 h). The VPBs were isolated and monomorphic without any repetitive forms. shows a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) with a representative VPB characterized by an inferior axis, a left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology, and R/s transition in V4 suggestive of a triggered activity from the RVOT. The patient was treated with a beta-blocker (name and dosage unknown) as well as magnesium without any improvement. Cardiovascular examination was within normal limit. A successful ablation was performed on the septal aspect of the RVOT without a 3D navigation system. Thirty-four radiofrequency (RF) lesions were delivered at a power between 25 and 30 W with an irrigated catheter (non-nav D-Curve Thermocool catheter, Biosense Webster). No pericarditis was mentioned following the intervention. The patient did not have any complaint until 2008 when she noticed recurrence of isolated palpitations. The palpitations and near syncope in 2016 correlated with frequent non-sustained VT (NSVT) from the RVOT as reconstructed from the three-lead Holter recording (MicroPort, Synescope, MultiChannel-MultiDay Version 3.10) . The early transition in lead V2 is probably due to some inaccuracy of the reconstructed ECG, which is based on the Dower’s transform. This Matrix uses the X, Y, Z signals obtained from the Frank lead system to simulate a standard 12-lead ECG with some inherent inaccuracy. The VPB burden was 3% on the Holter recording. The patient remained symptomatic despite the prescription of metoprolol 25 mg daily. On physical examination, the patient was well-groomed. Cardiopulmonary auscultation was within normal limit. There was no sign of heart failure. A transthoracic echocardiography was within normal limit. A coronary angiogram did not show significant lesions . Suspecting an arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) or an inflammatory cardiomyopathy, the patient underwent a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) and a metabolic 18FDG-PET scan which were normal. A 2nd ablation was then undertaken including endomyocardial biopsies, which are part of a standardized workup at our centre to discriminate between myocarditis and ACM. The tissue was harvested from the interventricular septum without any electroanatomical mapping guidance, as previously described by Rosset et al. Results showed normal immunofluorescence signals for Cadherin, Connexin 43, Desmoplakin, Plakoglobin, and Plakophilin proteins that reasonably ruled out ACM . Under local anaesthesia, an endocardial electroanatomical mapping (Carto 3 System, Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA) revealed an area of low voltage (<0.5 mV) at the septal aspect of the RVOT corresponding to the site of ablation performed in 2006. Despite isoproterenol infusion, only a single run of NSVT was triggered which was enough to confirm by pace-mapping that the scar area of the septal RVOT was involved in the arrhythmic event. shows the NSVT run during the electrophysiology study. The morphology showed an inferior axis, an LBBB morphology, and an R/s transition in V3 that was perfectly reproduced by pace-mapping at the septal RVOT within the scar region. Because of the absence of early potentials in the RVOT, the left ventricle outflow tract and the right coronary cusp were mapped and, as shown by the poor pacemap matching in , did not participate into the arrhythmia. Ablation was delivered at the focal scar region using a temperature control system and an irrigated catheter (Thermocool, SmartTouch, target temperature 43°C, maximal power 30 W). Post-procedure, rare VPB were seen at baseline and under isoproterenol infusion. One week after discharge, because of recurrence of symptomatic NSVT, an epicardial ablation was planned. A dry pericardial puncture under fluoroscopy guidance was performed with a dedicated needle (Becton Dickinson AG, reference 408360). A pigtail was inserted followed by a short steerable guiding sheath (EPI-Agilis, Abbott). After the puncture, 20 mL of serous liquid were drained and sent to the cytology lab (which result showed only few atypical cells). shows the epicardial voltage map (Carto 3D, Biosense Webster) reconstructed with a decapolar catheter (DecaNav, 2-8-2, Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA). The map revealed a localized region of low voltage at the antero-septal aspect of the epicardial RVOT including fragmented potentials and late abnormal ventricular activities (LAVA) facing the scar at the antero-basal aspect of the endocardial RVOT shown in . Importantly, pace-mapping at this location showed a perfect match . A programmed ventricular stimulation with two extrastimuli initiated a non-sustained run matching the clinical VT. The VT started with a narrow QRS followed by a subsequent widening of the QRS (pseudo-delta wave) suggestive of an endocardial activation followed by an epicardial exit . shows mid-diastolic potentials (MDP) within this region. The MDP was very suggestive of an area of slow conduction. Neither entrainment manoeuvers nor sequential mapping could be performed as the VT remained non-sustained despite increasing dose of i.v. Isoproterenol. However, pacing from the MDP site reproduced the clinical VT morphology . The MDP to QRS interval and the stimulation to QRS interval were of similar values (46 ms). This implies that an area of slow conduction or an isthmus was involved in the maintenance of the VT, suggesting that the mechanism was likely a re-entrant VT rather than a focal triggered activity. Endocardial mapping of the septal RVOT facing this area showed LAVA of very low amplitude. Prior to RF ablation, a coronary angiogram was performed with merging of the images into the Carto (Carto Uniview) and confirmed that the area of interest was not in the vicinity of a coronary vessel. Radiofrequency ablation was applied with an irrigated catheter (Thermocool SmartTouch SF, Biosense Webster) epicardially and endocardially thereafter without any complication. Aggressive premature ventricular stimulation including burst pacing (up to five ventricular extrastimuli, shortest coupling intervals at 240 ms) at baseline and under isoproterenol infusion (12 mcg/min) and adrenaline bolus (10 mcg) showed the absence of susceptibility to VT and VPB. The procedure lasted 190 min (9.8 min fluoroscopy time) and included 18 RF lesions (irrigation 8 mL/min in the epicardium, power 25–30 W, total energy 12 884 J). The patient stayed 48 h in our cardiac care unit where a transthoracic echocardiogram excluded a pericardial effusion. She was discharged with a wearable defibrillator vest for 1 month. Clinical follow-up including a 48-h Holter recording did not show any ventricular arrhythmia recurrence at 4-year follow-up.