The patient was a 72-year-old male. He was referred for penile pain. He had a 4-year history of dialysis therapy under a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, which had been made 11 years previously. No urine production was observed, and 4-hour hemodialysis was performed three times a week. He also had a history of acute myocardial infarction, lacunar infarction, hypothyroidism and diabetic retinal detachment. Insulin glargine, aspirin, furosemide, amezinium metilsulfate, levothyroxine sodium hydrate and allopurinol were administered for the respective diseases.
Pain of the glans had persisted for 10 days, but the patient was unable to confirm the site of pain due to blindness. On consultation at the previous hospital, necrosis of the glans was observed and he was referred to our department for treatment.
His height, body weight, blood pressure, pulse rate, and body temperature were 160 cm, 64 kg, 142/74 mmHg, 77/min, and 36.8°C, respectively.
Yellow and black necrosis of the entire glans with severe pain was noted , and purulent discharge with odor was observed. Ulcers of the bilateral lower limbs and right dorsal hand with irregular yellow necrosis, dark red spots, and black keratotic nodules were noted.
Laboratory examination on admission demonstrated corrected Ca, IP, I-PTH, CRP, HbA1c, WBC, Hb, and PLT levels of 9.7 mg/dL, 7.4 mg/dL, 97 pg/mL, 11.5 mg/dL, 7.3%, 13 500/μL, 18.3 g/dL and 23.4 × 104/μL, respectively.
Plain computed tomography of the thorax and abdomen revealed marked calcification involving the thoracoabdominal aorta to external/internal iliac arteries. Calcification of the dorsal artery of the penis and ectopic calcification of the corpus cavernosum were also observed . On urethroscopy, urethral stricture in the anterior urethra was noted, but the investigation was insufficient because it induced further penile pain. Blood flow examination in the penis using color Doppler ultrasound was not performed.
After admission, lavage and debridement were performed based on a diagnosis of calciphylaxis or necrosis related to intravascular thrombus at the department of dermatology. However, pain control of the glans was poor and there was no reduction of necrosis. Partial penectomy was performed 8 days after admission. The glans was dissected at an area proximal to the coronary sulcus. There was no hemorrhage. The external urethral meatus was created by a standard procedure. After surgery, penile pain promptly subsided. Paleness in a portion of the surgical wound, purulent discharge and fever were observed, but perineal care, debridement and antimicrobial drug administration were carried out.
Pathological macroscopic findings included ulceration, necrosis and abscess formation. Microscopy demonstrated marked calcification of the media in the small arteries, and thickening of the intima and lumen stenosis was noted, suggesting calciphylaxis .
The patient was transferred to his previous dialysis hospital 34 days postoperatively, with improvement in his general condition. The course had been favorable based on postoperative follow-up, but he died of pneumonia 11 months after surgery.