A 23-year-old American female patient with 2-week history of blistering and drainage from suture sites from recent cosmetic surgery (abdominoplasty, liposuction of abdominal flanks and back, with immediate fat transfer to the gluteal region in the Dominican Republic on 5 March 2020), presented to the emergency department (ED) with severe abdominal pain between low pelvic sutures and umbilicus, preventing her from being able to stand up straight, pruritis and boils on her back from the area of liposuction preventing her from being able to stand up straight. The patient denied fever and chills. Her blood pressure and pulse were 122/78 mmHg and 101 beats per minute, respectively. General appearance showed an overweight female with three linear open wounds along with incision sites: two on the right and one on the left with residual scars, with clear yellow drainage, erythematous and tender area, and areas of burn and dried scabs on back. The patient had no significant past medical history.
Abdominal examination showed a morbidly obese patient with a non-distended, soft, tender abdomen to palpation around the wound, multiple open draining sinuses along the transverse incisional scar, and the base of openings with healthy granulation tissue. There was no erythema, with no warmth to touch. Respiratory, cardiac, musculoskeletal, and neurological examinations were normal. The patient reported that she was being kept in a “recovery clinic” in the Dominican Republic after the cosmetic operation, and because she complained of severe discomfort from her back drain, the doctor removed the posterior drain. She eventually left the clinic and the Dominican Republic against medical advice and flew back to the USA (11 March 2020).
After arriving from the Dominican Republic, she treated her back pain with a heating pad, causing a partial-thickness burn. She was then treated at Nassau University Medical Center (NUMC) Burn Clinic for her partial-thickness burns. The patient reported that she had multiple draining sinuses along her transverse abdominal incision, as well as her umbilicus. She had been packing the sinuses by herself at home with gauze, wounds continued to drain, and she completed a course of cefalexin and doxycycline after admission to urgent care. The patient was also seen at Good Samaritan Hospital, which recommended trimethoprim–sulfametoxazole, which the patient did not take. She was treated with oxycodone–acetaminophen 10 mg, acetaminophen 1 g, and clindamycin 900 mg at the emergency department.
Computed tomography (CT) of abdomen and pelvis was performed and showed a minor fat-containing umbilical hernia, status post-Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, no evidence of afferent limb dilation, no evidence of obstruction, unremarkable appendix and terminal ileum, and reactive bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy, with the largest node measuring up to approximately 1.5 cm on the left. The CT also showed infiltration of the lower abdominal soft tissues containing an 11.9 × 1.4 × 4.4 cm3 fluid collection compatible with abscess. Several foci of air were noted within the right side of this fluid collection, tracking to a soft tissue defect in the right pyramid line lower abdomen. There was a thickening of the skin and subcutaneous fat-containing globules in the gluteal soft tissues. The urinary bladder was collapsed. The uterus and adnexa were not enlarged.
A management plan was put in place for the patient after the CT, which included intravenous hydration, clindamycin 600 mg, pain control with oxycodone, follow-up blood cultures, interventional radiology (IR) for image-guided drainage, plastic surgery, and wound consult, and skincare referral. IR procedure was done. A fluid culture was sent to the laboratory, and the sample was also to be tested for acid-fast bacillus (AFB). Blood culture was done and showed no growth after 5 days, the abdominal fluid culture showed no growth after 48 hours, and abdominal fluid AFB showed no growth after 24 hours. After 8 days, the culture showed acid-fast bacilli in the liquid culture medium, and the DNA probe result was negative for M. tuberculosis.
The management plan at this stage included no clinical indication for the patient to receive antibiotics at this time; the patient was to be discharged with pain medication, proper irrigation and debridement, daily packing, sterile dressing change, and a plastic surgery appointment was scheduled within the following 2 weeks. Laboratory investigations were ordered and noted as white blood cell (WBC) count: 4.28 × 109/L.
Under real-time ultrasound guidance by IR procedure, access to the fluid collection was obtained with a 19G single-wall needle. Approximately 7 cm3 of cloudy fluid was aspirated and sent for appropriate analysis. After 25 days, the bacterial culture showed M. abscessus complex on 21 June. The patient was prescribed doxycycline for 10 days and azithromycin 500 mg. On 29 June, the left side of the wound almost completely healed, with few open draining tracts on the right side and some minor erythema. The patient was advised to continue on the recommended antibiotics, continue local wound care, and come to the ED for worsening pain, erythema, and drainage from wounds.