A 50-year-old woman with a 45 pack-year smoking history was referred to our hospital for further investigation of an abnormal left hilar shadow . The patient’s medical history included hypertension, and the patient had previously undergone an appendectomy at the age of 35 years and an abdominal myomectomy at the age of 49 years. The levels of tumor markers were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen, 2.8 ng/mL; cytokeratin 19 fragment, 1.4 ng/mL; neuron-specific enolase, 21.0 ng/mL; and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide, 84.4 pg/mL.
Chest contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a 28-mm solid pulmonary nodule in the left lower lobe (S6) and an enlarged left hilar lymph node adjacent to the left main pulmonary artery . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron-emission tomography/CT showed increased FDG uptake in the S6 nodule and the hilar lymph node, in which the maximum standard uptake values were 5.3 and 5.0, respectively . CT-guided biopsy of the S6 nodule led to the pathological diagnosis of high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma. Brain contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging showed no signs of brain metastasis. Thus, the preoperative clinical stage was defined as cT1bN1M0. The patient underwent left lower lobectomy with ND2a-2 lymph node dissection via thoracotomy.
Pathological investigation revealed a 22 × 18 × 12-mm nodule . Within the tumor, there was a dense sheet-like growth of small tumor cells with scant cytoplasm and finely granular nuclear chromatin . Moreover, there was a sheet-like growth of bizarre, highly pleomorphic mono- or occasionally multinucleated giant cells, accounting for approximately 40% of the tumor . Both the small and giant cell components were thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1)-positive and p40-negative, exhibiting neuroendocrine differentiation, as indicated by positivity for synaptophysin and CD56 and negativity for chromogranin A . While the small cell component was E-cadherin-positive and vimentin-negative, the giant cell component was E-cadherin-negative and vimentin-positive, indicating epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) . Only the small cell component was found within the mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes. The final pathological diagnosis was combined SCLC and GC, pT1bN2M0, pStage IIIA. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with 4 cycles of cisplatin and irinotecan. No sign of recurrence has been noted for 1 year after the surgery.