A 76-year-old Asian female presented with a 5-year history of a slowly enlarging lesion on her left breast and recently noted to have grown more rapidly. She reported no discomfort such as pain, pruritus, or systemic symptoms. Her medical history included hyperlipidemia but no hypertension, heart disease, diabetes, hepatitis, or tuberculosis. She had no personal or family history of skin or breast cancer, no significant sun or radiation exposure, and no history of immunosuppression or arsenic exposure.

Physical examination revealed an elderly female in no apparent distress. Vital signs were stable. Examination of the left breast revealed a pigmented plaque with superficial erosion, measuring 10 mm × 8 mm. The surrounding skin was normal. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.

Breast ultrasound scan, computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, SPECT-CT, and axillary lymph node ultrasound scan identified no evidence of metastasis. Dermoscopic findings of the lesion showed multiple blue-gray globules, spoke-wheel areas, leaf-like areas, and erosions. And we did a pathological biopsy on the patient. The histopathological examination demonstrated nests of tumor cells arising from the surface epidermis. Each tumor nest had a palisading arrangement, and there was a small cleft around the tumor nests, proven to be pigmented superficial BCC.

Considering that the patient was an elderly lady, and the examination results revealed no signs of metastasis, we decided to use standard surgical excision followed by intraoperative frozen pathologic evaluation of margins after a consultation with the patient and her family. The nipple and areola were surgically removed with 10 mm margin and primary closure. We did a postoperative pathologic evaluation as well. The surgical specimen was part of the breast skin, measuring 2.0 × 1.8 cm. The depth of excision was subcutaneous adipose tissue. The intraoperative and postoperative pathologic evaluation were both found to have negative margins.

The patient was discharged on the second postoperative day. Following surgery, nonmedical treatment was employed as clear resection margins were confirmed microscopically. At the 3-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic, with no clinical evidence of local recurrence or metastasis.