A 61-year-old female, known to suffer from chronic hepatitis C (Child Pugh A), presented in Jan 2001 to another hospital complaining of abdominal pain. CT-Scan of the abdomen showed a solitary 5 × 5 cm mass in segment VII of the liver. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) showed features consistent with HCC. AFP level at the time was normal 2.23 ng/ml (normal < 5.6 ng/ml). She traveled abroad (outside Kuwait), underwent resection of the tumor and returned back to Kuwait. A brief report stated that the tumor was resected from segment VII with about 1.5 cm safety margin with an uneventful postoperative course. Histopathology of the original tumor proved to be a well differentiated HCC with clear margins and no vascular invasion.
Upon return to Kuwait, she was under the care of the hepatologist who treating her chronic hepatitis with Pegelated Interferon and Ribaverin for 6 months. Unfortunately she remained HCV positive.
In Oct. 2004, three years following her original surgery, she was referred to the Liver Unit, Mubarak Al-Kabeer Hospital with an abdominal wall mass of one-year duration. On physical examination an obvious 7 × 5 cm smooth oval mass was seen in the right upper quadrant at the lateral border of her previous right subcostal scar. Clinically the mass seemed to be within the abdominal wall and the skin over it was free. CT scan of the abdomen showed a round well defined enhancing soft tissue density mass measuring 11 × 5 × 5 cm within the anterior abdominal wall with no intra-abdominal extension or skin infiltration . The liver was free except from signs of previous surgery in segment VII. Tumor markers were: AFP 6.23 ng/ml (normal < 5.6 ng/ml), CEA 1.5 ng/ml (normal < 6.9 ng/ml) and CA19-9 15.9 (normal < 43 ng/dl). FNAC from this mass, was consistent with metastatic HCC . En-bloc resection of the mass (including the mass, overlying skin, abdominal wall muscles and peritoneum) was performed under general anesthesia with primary closure. Histopathology of the removed specimen confirmed implantation of HCC in the abdominal muscles with free surgical margin and no peritoneal penetration . The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on the 7th postoperative day.
To date, 20 months since resection of the metastatic mass, she remains well with normal AFP and liver functions and no evidence of recurrence in the liver or abdominal wall.