This is a 20 year old female with past medical history significant for sickle cell anemia, cardiomyopathy secondary to a ventricular septal defect and multiple occurrences of osteomyelitis who sustained a closed, distal third tibial shaft fracture through a segment of infarcted bone after a ground level fall ( and ).
The patient underwent uncomplicated suprapatellar nailing of the tibia fracture ( and ). At the 1 month follow up visit, there was evidence of full thickness skin necrosis of the medial and anterior incisions around the ankle that were used to insert the distal tibial locking screws ( and ). The patient was started on a 6-week course of intravenous cefazolin and operative debridement of the necrotic tissue was performed. Serial debridements resulted in a medial wound approximately 5 × 8 cm with exposed bone and exposed intramedullary nail and an anterior wound measuring 5 × 5 cm with exposed tibialis anterior tendon ( and ). Due to the exposed fracture, implant, and tendon, the decision was made to proceed with free tissue transfer for wound reconstruction. Due to the dimensions of the wounds and their orientation, a free gracilis was chosen to reconstruct both wounds.
Pre-operative fractionated HbS was measured at 24% and therefore exchange transfusion was not necessary. The patient was warmed pre-operatively and multiple intraoperative warming devices were utilized throughout the case including an underbody and overbody warming system. Total hemoglobin was measured throughout the surgery to ensure it remained above 7.0. All irrigation fluids utilized intraoperatively were warmed in a fluid warmer and the flap was kept wrapped in warm saline-soaked laparotomy sponges throughout the case. 5000 units of heparin was systemically administered just prior to ligating the arterial pedicle to the gracilis muscle flap and the total ischemia time was 54 min. Post-operatively, the patient was started on a heparin infusion to target an aPTT between 50 and 70. The patient was started on oral aspirin 325 mg on post-operative day 2. A dangle protocol consisting of increasing time periods of allowing the leg to hang off the bed while monitoring tissue oxygenation was started on post-op day 5. The heparin infusion was continued for 14 days post-operatively and then the patient was transitioned to lovenox 30 mg BID. The flap healed completely with no evidence of wound healing issues with bone union obtained at the final visit 11 months post-op . .