A 60-year-old Japanese man with a history of low anterior resection for rectal cancer 4 years ago was referred to our department because of a lung nodule detected on chest radiography during a routine medical checkup. He had no symptoms and presented with a body temperature of 35.9°C, blood pressure of 106/65 mmHg, heart rate of 59 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. His laboratory examination results were within normal limits. As his chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a 12-mm tumor in the left posterior basal bronchus during postoperative follow-up, he underwent six cycles of chemotherapy with mFOLFOX6 and bevacizumab at standard doses. After chemotherapy, he underwent chest and abdomen CT scans, which confirmed that the tumor deeply seated in the segment had been growing continuously up to 15 mm . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed an abnormal uptake of FDG, with a maximum standardized uptake value of 2.28 in the tumor. Hence, the patient was treated with a portal robotic S9–10 segmentectomy through a PL approach.
On the basis of the patient’s actual three-dimensional (3-D) pulmonary model, created using an in-house software as presented in the preoperative CT images, the involvement of the pulmonary vessels and bronchi were identified and the location and extent of tumor invasion were assessed to determine the surgical procedure [–].
Under general anesthesia with single-lung ventilation and lateral decubitus positioning, RATS S9–10 segmentectomy was performed with five-port incisions, including an assistant port as a carbon dioxide (CO2) insufflation port. With the pleural space as the entry point, a 12-mm trocar (AirSeal access ports, ConMed, Utica, NY, USA) was inserted as an assistant port in the fifth intercostal space (ICS) anteriorly in the anterior axillary line. Moreover, two 8-mm robotic trocars were inserted, one as a port for the robotic camera in the ninth ICS at the middle axillary line and the other as port 4 on the posterior side of the tip of the scapula. Two 12-mm robotic trocars were inserted in port 1 and 3 in the eighth ICS anteriorly along the anterior axillary line and in the ninth ICS along the posterior axillary line, respectively, after which the da Vinci Xi surgical system (Intuitive Surgery, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was docked . All four robotic arms were used. A CO2 insufflation system (AirSeal system, ConMed) was used at a set pressure of 5 mmHg. The robotic instruments were manipulated through a 12-mm port mounting a 12–8-mm reducer. Fenestrated bipolar forceps, a permanent cautery spatula, and Cadiere forceps were inserted through ports 1, 3, and 4 (Intuitive Surgical), respectively. After lifting the left lower lobe using the Cadiere forceps, the PL was incised up to the inferior pulmonary vein. The basal pulmonary vein was exposed, and both the lateral (V9) and posterior basal veins (V10) were transected using robot staplers . Next, the intersegmental septum was dissected to expose the bronchi and pulmonary arteries. First, the targeted bronchi were exposed and transected, followed by the targeted pulmonary arteries . An intravenous injection of indocyanine green was administered, and observation under fluorescence navigation revealed intersegmental planes, which were marked using the fenestrated bipolar forceps and permanent cautery spatula, after which the target S9–10 segments were resected using the robot staplers . An additional movie file shows this procedure in detail (Additional file ).
The final histopathological investigations confirmed the resected tumor to be a lung metastasis of rectal cancer. The postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperatively, he received no adjuvant chemotherapy. No recurrence was observed for 6 months after the operation.