A 37-year-old man, right-handed driver, presented to the emergency department for a closed trauma of his left upper extremity after landing on the wrist with an out-stretched elbow following a fall. Initial physical examination revealed swelling and transverse widening of the left elbow. The forearm and the wrist were deformed. No open wounds were found. The radial head and the olecranon were palpable laterally and medially. The patient’s hand was well perfused without neurologic abnormalities. Plain radiographs showed a divergent left elbow dislocation associated with ipsilateral ulnar diaphysis fracture, a tearing of epitrochlea , and a fracture of the radial styloid process . The elbow joint was reduced under general anesthesia. Because of the radiohumeral instability, the reduction was stabilized with two Kirschner wires through the distal part of the humerus into the radius . A reinsertion of the medial collateral ligament was performed and the epitrochlea was fixed with two Kirschner wires .
The ulnar diaphysis fracture was reduced and fixed by a screwed plate with Kirschner wire-fixation of the radial styloid process . Postoperatively, the elbow was placed in 90° of flexion and immobilized with a posterior splint for 3 weeks, and then the radiohumeral Kirschner wires were removed. An articulated elbow orthosis was placed; supervised forearm rotation and gentle passive elbow flexion and extension were initiated after the 3rd week. Full extension of the elbow was not aggressively executed until 6-week postoperatively. At that time, the orthosis immobilization was discontinued and the Kirschner wires of the radial styloid process were removed. The patient continued to work on range of motion with a 3 times per week physical therapy. At 4-month postoperatively, all fractures were united ( and ) and the patient continued to show improvement in range of motion with an elbow flexion-extension arc of 30° to 140°. At 3 years of follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic, with 10° of limitation in elbow extension and a full flexion of 145° , he also recovered 80° of pronation and 30° of supination , the patient was satisfied with the clinical outcome.