Herein, we describe the case of a 73 year-old man in good health, who developed widely disseminated sebaceous carcinoma including metastases to brain, visceral organs, lymph nodes, and bone.
He initially presented in late October 2016 for removal of a rapidly growing nodule in the anterior abdominal wall. Two days later he developed confusion, urinary incontinence and progressive aphasia. Emergent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed 4 enhancing gray-white matter junctional lesions, the two largest measured 3.8 × 3.3 cm in the right frontal lobe and 2.3 × 2.5 cm in the left frontal lobe. Two smaller enhancing lesions in the right parietal lobe measured 8 mm and 4 mm in diameter. In November 2016, he underwent craniotomy and resection of bilateral frontal lobe tumors, and he made a full neurologic recovery and went on to receive post-operative gamma knife radiosurgery to the resection cavities and the small parietal brain lesions .
His case was reviewed in melanoma tumor boards at the Masonic Cancer Clinic, University of Minnesota. Sections of tumor revealed sheets of epithelial cells with moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm and areas of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes . Cells exhibited nuclear pleomorphism and increased mitotic activity , desmoplastic stromal reaction and necrosis . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and cytokeratin 7, and negative for S100, HMB45, Melan-A, CD45, calretinin, ERG, p40, TTF1, CDX2, and GATA3. The immunoprofile ruled out melanoma, mesothelioma, lymphoma, sarcoma with epithelioid features, and most visceral carcinomas. Microscopic examination revealed intracytoplasmic lipid vesicles , confirmed by diffuse membranous reactivity for adipophilin [, ] . The findings supported a histopathologic diagnosis of sebaceous carcinoma. Importantly, additional tumor testing confirmed high expression of PD-L1 in 100% of tumor cells . Commercial genomic testing using next-generation sequencing (Foundation Medicine, Massachusetts, USA) confirmed the tumor was microsatellite stable and carried a mutational burden of 17 mutations/Mb. Table also shows various somatic mutations in genes for regulatory transcription factors, DNA repair proteins, growth factor receptors, and targetable MAPK signaling proteins. Several of the affected genes have also been described in cases of sebaceous carcinoma reported in the COSMIC database .
Initial staging positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed evidence of widely disseminated disease involving lung and liver, muscle, bone, and multi-compartment bulky lymphadenopathy in chest and abdomen . Standard chemotherapy approaches using platinum-based chemotherapy were reviewed. However, the patient and family strongly favored a less toxic therapy, considering advanced age and quality of life concerns. Given the strong rationale for use of checkpoint inhibitors in several other tumor types, moderately high tumor mutational burden (17 muts/Mb), and strong PD-L1 expression the patient opted for anti-PD1 immunotherapy. He initiated off-label treatment with pembrolizumab (2 mg/kg, every 3 weeks) in December 2016.
Follow up PET/ CT scan 3 months after the initiation of anti-PD1 therapy revealed remarkable improvement in lymph nodes, lung, and soft tissue, however, there were multiple new and enlarging hepatic and osseous metastases initially worrisome for progression. After multidisciplinary review, the findings were felt consistent with pseudo-progression and immunotherapy was continued. Restaging PET/ CT obtained after 6 months of treatment showed further significant improvements in all previously noted lesions , with residual FDG activity seen in small mediastinal and abdominal lymph nodes. To further characterize the patient’s innate and adaptive immune status at the time of his near complete response, a flow cytometry study of peripheral blood was performed. Lymphocyte subset analysis showed evidence of circulating CD45RA-CD27+ central memory (CM) and effector memory (EM) T cells, and a population of mature CD16 + CD57+ NK cells .
He continued on pembrolizumab, however, after 10 months of therapy he developed severe fatigue and orthostatic hypotension requiring hospitalization. Laboratory testing showed him to have secondary adrenal insufficiency with low (< 0.7 mcg/dL) serum cortisol and low (< 11 pg/mL) ACTH levels. He began 1 mg/kg prednisone with a prolonged steroid taper, and during high dose steroid therapy pembrolizumab dosing was interrupted. In December 2017, with 12 months of follow-up, restaging PET/CT was obtained and showed new FDG avid mediastinal and abdominal lymph nodes and a new hepatic and small bowel lesion . Biopsy of the liver lesion in January 2018 confirmed recurrent metastatic sebaceous carcinoma, and repeat immunohistochemical staining showed tumor cells continued to express high levels of PD-L1 (not shown). After discussion, the patient elected to restart immunotherapy, and he was continued on maintenance adrenal replacement therapy with hydrocortisone (10 mg/5 mg). Recent restaging studies demonstrate growth of the mediastinal metastases and a reduction in the size of the hepatic and small bowel metastases, suggestive of pseudoprogression and a durable ongoing response to pembrolizumab (Additional file ).