A previously healthy 29-year-old Arab female was brought by her father to the emergency department of Aster Sanad Hospital for severe upper abdominal pain. The pain started 1 week previously and progressed, becoming severe at the time of admission. It was radiating to the left shoulder and was associated with nausea, anorexia, low-grade fever, and vomiting. Moreover, the pain was reduced upon lying flat and exacerbated by movement. The patient mentioned that she went to see her family in a nearby village where she was in indirect contact with domestic animals. Past medical history and systemic review analysis were unremarkable. Normal saline 0.9% NaCl (500 mL) and intravenous acetaminophen 1 g were given to the patient in the emergency room.
Initial general physical examination showed hemodynamic stability as per the following: pulse rate 97 beats/minute, respiratory rate 18 breaths/minute, blood pressure 113/95 mmHg, oxygen saturation 96%, and temperature 38 °C. On admission, the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 13. Abdominal examination showed generalized abdominal tenderness, muscle guarding, and rigidity in the upper part of the abdomen, eliciting the findings of acute peritonitis. Hypoactive bowel sounds were heard on auscultation. Cardiopulmonary and peripheral vascular examinations were unremarkable.
An emergency computerized tomography (CT) scan with contrast was ordered upon admission . Evidence of multiple variable-sided hypodense lesions was seen scattered in the spleen. Evidence of mild to moderate intraperitoneal hyperdense free fluid collection was seen at the perisplenic, perihepatic, lower abdominal, and pelvic regions; probably hemorrhagic fluid. Normal CT appearance of the intra- and extrahepatic biliary radicles was observed. Normal appearance of the pancreas was observed, with preserved surrounding fat planes. Both kidneys were of normal size. No masses, stones, or back pressure changes were detected. Normal appearance of both adrenal glands, and all of the different segments of the small and large bowel loops, was noted.
Complete blood count (CBC), coagulation profile, and creatinine tests were ordered upon admission. The CBC showed the following: red blood cell (RBC) count 3.67 × 106/UL (low), hemoglobin 9.8 g/dL (low), hematocrit 29.5% (low), red cell distribution width–coefficient of variation (RDW–CV) 16.3% (high), and red cell distribution width–standard deviation (RDW-SD) 48.8 FL (high). Coagulation profile results were normal. Creatinine level was 41 µmol/L (low).
An emergent explorative laparotomy with splenectomy was performed. Before the surgery, pneumo-meningococcal and flu vaccine was given. Under general anesthesia and aseptic technique, the skin was draped. A midline skin incision was done. Upon exploration, blood was found to be all over the abdomen. There were ruptured bleeding cysts in the spleen, as shown in Fig. . Hence, ligation of splenic vessels was done followed by the removal of the spleen. Omentoplasty in the cyst space was performed. A drain was inserted in the pelvis and fixed. Finally, the dissected spleen was sent for pathological examination.
Pathological examination of the splenectomy specimen revealed a spleen weighing 900 g and measuring 18 cm × 4 cm × 6 cm, with an intact capsule, smooth surface with focal laceration, and preserved hilum. Cut section of the spleen revealed dark brown homogeneous splenic tissue with no nodules or masses detected.
Microscopic examination of sections prepared from the submitted spleen revealed splenic tissue with marked congestion in cords, with dilated sinusoids, and packed with RBCs. There were numerous cystic lesions lined by fibrous tissue with no identified epithelial or endothelial cell lining, and containing blood and fibrinous debris, with adjacent chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate. There were other foci in the spleen that showed proliferation of sinusoid-like channels, lined with plump endothelial cells and filled with blood. Diagnosis of congestive splenomegaly, with splenic peliosis and splenic vascular hamartoma, was established.
The patient was discharged with the following medications: amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 1 g [twice daily (BID) for 1 week], diclofenac 50 mg (every 12 hours for 1 week), paracetamol 1 g [three times daily (TID) for 1 week], pantoprazole 40 mg (once daily for 1 week), and enoxaparin 40 mg injection subcutaneously (once daily for 7 days). There were no postsurgical complications. On follow-up after 1 week from discharge, the patient was well but displayed thrombocytosis with a platelet count of 1,000,000/μL. Thus, she was prescribed low-dose aspirin of 81 mg.