A 6-month-old female American Shorthair cat was presented for the investigation of vomiting and regurgitation following the ingestion of solid food. The cat had been experiencing this problem since it had been acquired as a kitten, and the issue had been dealt with by providing meals with water or wet food.
Physical examination revealed poor growth (body weight 2.4 kg, body condition score 3/9), although the cat had a voracious appetite. Auscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds. Thoracic radiography, including a positive contrast oesophagram (barium with wet food), was performed. The lateral view of the positive contrast oesophagram is shown in . Radiographic findings included marked dilation ofthe oesophagus cranial to the heart base, and a VRA was suspected. However, the site of constriction of the oesophagus was not clearly identifiable on the radiograph, and it was concluded that the oesophageal constriction was too far cranial with respect to the heart base to have been associated with a classic persistent right aortic arch VRA. Other examinations, including complete blood cell count, serum biochemical analysis, electrocardiography, echocardiography, abdominal ultrasonography and non-invasive blood pressure measurements, revealed normal findings.
For the CT examination, the cat was induced by propofol (approximately 6 mg/kg, to effect, IV), maintained with 2% isoflurane mixed with 100% oxygen and mechanically ventilated. Electrocardiography-gated CTA (Iopamidol, 2 ml/kg, bolus tracking method) was performed with an 80-detector-row CT system (Aquilion Prime; Toshiba) in order to confirm and classify the suspected VRA, and to determine if surgical correction would be possible. Three-dimensional reconstruction images of CTA in the cat are shown in . The aortic arch and proximal descending aorta were located to the left of the midline, which is a normal finding. However, the following vascular anomalies were observed: (1) the right subclavian artery branched aberrantly from the proximal descending aorta (aberrant right subclavian artery); (2) the origin of the aberrant right subclavian artery from the aorta was markedly dilated (Kommerell’s diverticulum; this is considered to be present when the diameter of the subclavian artery near its origin from the aortic arch is at least 1.5 times the diameter at its more distal end); and (3) the left and right carotid artery directly branched from the aorta (bicarotid trunk). The site of constriction of the oesophagus was apparent at the level of the aberrant right subclavian artery with Kommerell’s diverticulum. Any other malformations that could cause oesophageal constriction were not detected.
The cat was premedicated with midazolam (0.2 mg/kg IV) and morphine (0.3 mg/kg SC), induced by propofol (approximately 4 mg/kg, to effect, IV), maintained with 1–1.5% isoflurane mixed with 100% oxygen, and manually ventilated. A left lateral thoracotomy was performed at the level of the third intercostal space via standard procedures. The intraoperative view of the cat is shown in . The aberrant right subclavian artery with Kommerell’s diverticulum extended over the oesophagus from left to right, pressing it ventrally. Angiography (Iopamidol, 1 ml/kg) was performed with fluoroscopy to check the blood flow in the right subclavian artery peripheral to the right thoracic limb . The aberrant right subclavian artery was ligated using 3-0 non-absorbable polyester suture (Ethibond excel; Ethicon) and transected. Balloon dilation of the oesophagus was also performed. A gastrostomy tube was installed to ensure adequate nutrition postoperatively. Atropine sulphate (0.01 mg/kg, IV) was administered, as needed. Bupivacaine hydrochloride (1 mg/kg) was administered at the incision area and the surrounding intercostal muscles during the operation. After the operation, orbifloxacin (5 mg/kg q24h), famotidine (1 mg/kg q24h) and metoclopramide (0.2 mg/kg q12h) were administered for 7 days and postoperative pain was treated with meloxicam (0.1 mg/kg q24h) for 7 days after surgery. Wet food was gradually introduced, with the cat an upright posture, on the day after surgery. To maintain the minimum calorie intake (resting energy requirement calorie), residual wet food and fresh water were administered, as needed, using a gastrostomy tube.
The cat recovered well after surgery and the gastrostomy tube was removed on day 14 postoperatively. Right thoracic limb function appeared normal. There was no evidence of reduced perfusion in the limb; the foot was warm and the pad colour appeared normal. At 3 months postoperatively, fluoroscopy with a positive contrast oesophagram (barium with wet food) was performed. Although mild dilation of the oesophagus was still observed, the constriction of the oesophagus had resolved and the passing time of barium was markedly shortened. More than 1 year after surgery, the general condition of the cat was stable (no regurgitation after ingestion of solid food) and the body weight was 2.8 kg (body condition score 5/9).