A 41-year-old man with SIT since early childhood was referred to our hospital because of high serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels (6.0 µg/L). The patient had no surgical history. His body mass index was 24.3 kg/m2. Physical examination results were normal. All laboratory data were within the normal range, except for the tumor markers. Colonoscopy revealed a bulge at the orifice of the appendix, but pathological examination did not reveal any malignancy . Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed complete “mirror-images” of the visceral organs . CT also showed appendiceal wall thickening, a cystic tumor with contrast effect, and an enlarged lymph node close to the tumor . CT and magnetic resonance imaging showed no solid component in the cystic tumor that would strongly suggest mucinous adenocarcinoma. The preoperative diagnosis was an appendiceal mucocele, which was considered a possible tumor such as low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (LAMN). We planned a laparoscopic-assisted ileocecal resection with D2 lymph-node dissection since the tumor was located at the root of the appendix with an enlarged lymph node. Preoperatively, we evaluated anatomical variations using 3D-CT, and no vascular anomalies except for completely inverted vessels were observed . In addition, we watched horizontally flipped videos of patients with normal anatomy undergoing similar operations to simulate mirror images and symmetrical procedures.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in lithotomy position. In contrast to normal surgery, the operator stood on the patient’s right side, the first assistant on the left side, and the scopist between the legs . A laparoscope was inserted through the umbilical trocar, and the other four trocars were placed opposite to their usual placement as shown in Fig. . Additionally, a 12 mm trocar was placed in the operator’s right hand, and two monitors were placed at the patient’s head. One monitor showed original images, and the other showed horizontally flipped images that looked the same as the normal anatomy . The central monitor 1 displayed the original images for the surgeons to see them easily, because it is dangerous and difficult to move the forceps while looking at flipped images due to paradoxical movement of the instruments. Moreover, the images displayed on the monitors were exchanged according to the surgical situation. As needed, the operation was momentarily paused to check for the range of mobilized regions and to visualize important anatomical structures by watching the monitor that showed flipped images .
Laparoscopy and intraperitoneal observation revealed transposition of the visceral organs, such as the liver, gallbladder, stomach, and colon. The ileocecal resection procedure was performed using the retroperitoneal approach as usual. The small intestine was moved cranially to secure the surgical field, and we initiated ileocecal mobilization. We dissected the mesentery from the retroperitoneal tissue with a focus on the gonadal vessels and identified the transverse portion of the duodenum. Next, while dissecting along the descending portion of the duodenum , we dissected the lateral attachment of the colon to the left abdominal wall toward the cranial side and mobilized the hepatic flexure . Finally, we performed additional dissection around the duodenum and pancreatic head, completing the mobilization . Since D3 lymph-node dissection was not necessary, we divided the ileocolic vessels near its root without lymph node dissection around the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and performed resection and reconstruction of the colon extracorporeally. In total, the operative time was 119 min, and the patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative pathological examination revealed lymphoid follicles in the intestinal epithelium of the appendiceal orifice and inflamed appendiceal mucosa with neutrophils and eosinophils. No tumor cells suggestive of LAMN or malignancy were observed.
Regarding laparoscopic surgical procedure for SIT, it was unclear how far the mobilization proceeded due to the mirror image; however, during the procedure, we periodically examined the mobilization progression by momentarily pausing the operation to watch the monitor showing flipped images. Additionally, we noted the following differences between surgery in SIT and surgery in patients with normal anatomy: (1) operability involving large movements such as moving the small intestine and securing the surgical field (2) recognition of anatomies such as orientation of the gonadal vessels and duodenum, positional relationship between the hepatic flexure and duodenum, and the hepatic flexure in the upper left abdomen being closer than expected as compared to the splenic flexure in normal anatomy. In such situations, we were able to appropriately address any confusion and misrecognition by checking the flipped monitor . Additionally, this procedural method allowed for safe operation on important organs, such as the pancreatic head . To enable the readers to understand the procedure, a video of the surgery with flipped images has been attached as a Additional file : Video S1.