A 58-year-old Caucasian non-smoker male with a history of symptomatic paroxysmal and persistent AF from 6 months, arterial hypertension, and heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF, NYHA Class 2), without previous ablation procedures, was admitted to our hospital for AF catheter ablation. At the time of admission, his vital signs were in the range of normality and he was in sinus rhythm after spontaneous conversion of AF. He was receiving a rate-control treatment with a beta-blocker (bisoprolol 2.5 mg qd) and digoxin (0.125 mg qd), both in therapeutic range, a direct oral anticoagulant for stroke prevention (CHA2DS2-Vasc = 2), and an antihypertensive combination therapy with an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor and diuretic. He was also unable to tolerate antiarrhythmic drugs in the past. His physical examination was unremarkable. A chest X-Ray obtained before the procedure was completely normal. Routine blood tests were normal at the time of admission except for mildly increased N-terminal prohormone B-type natriuretic peptide levels (630 pg/mL; reference range <125 pg/mL). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed normal left ventricular and right ventricular systolic function and the absence of significant valvular heart disease with an only mildly enlarged left atrium (LA) and left ventricular concentric remodelling. A transoesophageal echocardiography was performed 24 h before the procedure in order to rule out the presence of LA thrombosis. Catheter ablation was performed under general anaesthesia with orotracheal intubation. Induction of anaesthesia was obtained with propofol 2 mg/Kg, fentanyl 100 mcg, and rocuronium 1 mg/Kg, and it was completely regular. General anaesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane 1.2–1.4% in a 1:1 oxygen:air combination. Analgesia was maintained with remifentanil infusion 0.03–0.08 mcg/Kg/min. A five Fr pig-tail catheter was placed at the aortic valvular plane through the right common femoral artery and a decapolar steerable diagnostic catheter was placed in the coronary sinus through the right common femoral vein. Then a fluoroscopy-guided transseptal puncture was performed without complications (SL0™ Swartz sheath, Abbott; BRK™ transseptal needle, Abbott). An electroanatomical three-dimensional map (EnSite NavX, Abbott) of the LA was obtained using a high-density mapping catheter (Advisor™ HD Grid Mapping Catheter, Sensor Enabled™ (SE), Abbott). PVI with RF energy (standard energy, 30–35 W) was started with the use of a 4 mm tip bidirectional irrigated catheter (FlexAbility Ablation Catheter, Abbott). The activating clotting time was maintained between 250 and 350 s through unfractionated heparin iv infusion at standard dose. At the time of RF initiation, the patient vital signs were completely normal. The procedure was initiated targeting the left superior pulmonary vein (LSPV). After a few seconds, during the encircling of the LSPV and RF delivery at the site of posterior left pulmonary venous carina, the patient developed a reproducible asystolic reflex associated with hypotension, suggesting GP irritation with subsequent vagal activation . RF delivery was stopped for a few seconds and then resumed after recovery of electrical activity. About 2 min after the first RF delivery, a prominent and diffuse ST-segment elevation was noted and the patient developed a transient complete atrioventricular block with a junctional escape rhythm requiring temporary right ventricular pacing and i.v. administration of atropine 0.5 mg. Bedside TTE was performed in order to rule out pericardial involvement or mechanical complications and showed a mildly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) without clear regional wall motion abnormalities in the absence of pericardial effusion. An invasive coronary angiography (ICA) was immediately performed. Severe multivessel CAS in the absence of significant atherosclerotic disease or air embolism was detected . CAS resolution and subsequent flow normalization were obtained after intracoronary administration of nitroglycerin . The ST-segment promptly returned to isoelectric line . Repeated bedside TTE performed after spasm regression showed recovered LVEF and confirmed the absence of pericardial effusion. After complete resolution and stabilization of the patient clinical parameters, the procedure was resumed and PVI with encircling and adjunctive LA lesion lines (mitral isthmus and roof line) were completed without further complications . After the procedure, myocardial injury markers (high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I) resulted slightly elevated with a ‘rise and fall’ pattern (peak 1060 ng/L, normal range <14 ng/L). After 48 h of clinical monitoring, the patient was discharged with a non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (verapamil, 40 mg tid) therapy. At 30 days, 3 and 6 months follow-up the patient was in sinus rhythm without left ventricular wall motion abnormalities.