A 46-year-old woman had undergone mastectomy for breast cancer (estrogen receptor 2+, progesterone receptor 3+, and HER2 3+) 5 years before presentation and had subsequently remained under observation without any postoperative adjuvant therapy. Multiple lung, liver, and bone metastases were identified in year 3 postoperatively, and systemic chemotherapy was introduced. The chemotherapy regimen included docetaxel, trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and bisphosphonates, and radiotherapy for lumbar spinal bone metastases (20 Gy/5 Fr). However, she developed multiple brain metastases (BM) 1 year later, which were treated with whole-brain radiotherapy (30 Gy/10 Fr) and placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt for hydrocephalus. The systemic chemotherapy regimen was subsequently switched to trastuzumab emtansine, but further LM developed, and the patient was referred to our hospital.
At the time of referral, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was 4, level of consciousness as assessed by Glasgow coma scale score was E3V4M6, and she was suffering from intractable headaches, severe nausea and vomiting, and cerebellar ataxia. T1-weighted gadolinium- enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed diffuse contrast enhancement of the meninges, mainly in the posterior cranial fossa, with compression of the cerebellum by the significantly thickened meninges [,]. In light of the clinical course, treatment options were limited, and best supportive care was presented as an option.
However, the patient requested further therapy, and given her good karnofsky performance status (KPS), an aggressive treatment strategy was pursued. The first step in the treatment was to relieve intracranial hypertension, and decompression of the posterior cranial fossa was performed . After surgery, headaches, nausea, and vomiting were immediately improved and her performance status improved.
Treatment with lapatinib at 1250 mg and capecitabine 1200 mg was started on postoperative day 14. As early as 2 weeks later, the diffuse abnormal signal enhancement across her tissues shrunk dramatically on T1-weighted gadolinium- enhanced MRI after starting this new regimen [,]. Further imaging revealed that the LM had almost disappeared on MRI by 2 months of therapy [,]. At present, no recurrence has been observed more than 1 year after the treatment. The patient is continuing to attend our hospital unit for treatment under the same regimen and currently remains well with an ECOG Performance Status 1.