We report a case of a 46 year-old female patient, with a cataract on her right eye with a central corneal leukoma. Patient reported during one of the examination prior to the surgery that when she was 6 years old, patient had an eye injury with corn leaf. At the age of 10 year patient reported that she had another injury of the same eye with a glass. Patient also said that she wasn’t seeing quite well after that. Patient reported that she wasn’t under any medical therapy or that she was wearing contact lenses or glasses. Three years ago patient had a transplantation of amniotic membrane due ulcer on the same eye in different hospital then ours. Now she was admitted to hospital for a triple surgical procedure.
Ocular examination on admission day to hospital revealed patients best uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) to be light perception on patient RE (right eye) and 1.0 with out any correction LE (left eye). Results on patient slit lamp revealed on the right eye corneal edema with a central leukoma, with a complicated cataract and partial seclusion of pupil and no pathological findings on left eye. Patients pupil size were equals. Patient ocular movements were normal in all gazes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was also normal. Examination of the left eye was normal. The vitreous was quiet and retinal vessels were of normal caliber. Details on the founds of right eye were impossible to asses due the changes in anterior segment. We performed ultrasound examination and we performed intraocular lens calculation. Due pathological changes on the right eye we were unable to accurately measure the true corneal power values so we performed intraocular lens calculation for the left eye. Before the surgical procedure patient was treated with Prednisone 80 mg intravenous and as well systematic antibiotics with local corticosteroids and antibiotics . The pupil was dilated preoperatively with tropicamide 1% eye drops. Before surgical procedure a good quality donor cornea was retrieved from a cadaveric transplantation.
After informed consent was obtained, operation was performed in general anesthesia. After excision of the opaque recipient cornea, a cataract was seen. Before the staining of anterior capsule, surgeon performed excision of pupillary membrane and synechiolysis. The anterior capsule was initially stained with VisionBlue (Dutch Ophthalmic, USA). Cataract extraction with IOL implantation (open sky) was performed under operating microscopes Operative Microscope OPMI Visu 150 Carl Zeiss Meditec Inc, Dublin, using Alcon Infiniti® Vision System Fort Worth Texas USA, sodium hyaluronate (Provisc® Alcon) as viscoelastic and surgical instruments Alcon and Geuder AG Heidelberg Germany. After placing four cardinal sutures, the donor button was fixed to the recipient using separate 10/0 nylon sutures. . Follow-up examinations were performed on days 1, 3, 7, and 30 days. Thirty days after surgery her UDVA was 0,5. The patients received topical antibiotic and corticosteroids. Postoperatively, if keratometric astigmatism exceeded 4.0 D, tension of the running sutures was adjusted after 1 to 2 months, and selective removal of separate sutures began after 2 months. Currently patients visual acuity is 0.6 without correction.