A 14-year-old boy, with nothing relevant in his medical history, came to our observation for a strong back pain associated to a right lumbar scoliosis and a severe coronal imbalance . The pain started almost 1 year before, after a playing soccer. He was first treated by a physiatrist, who prescribed postural gymnastics, swimming, and physiotherapy. Then, a thoracolumbosacral orthosis (TLSO) was prescribed too (after the scoliosis was diagnosed).
As he was referred to us, an MRI and a CT scan were prescribed, and the radiological report stated as follows: “Findings orientate to a slow-growing expansive lesion with wear of the L2-L3 arcal structures on the left. It could be an osteoblastoma of the left neural hemiarch of L2 with associated cyst-type hematological lesion ABC (secondary ABC) in intraforaminal development with compression of the L2 root in the intraforaminal area” ( and ).
Clinically, he presented an important trunk imbalance , a severe lumbar pain with irradiation to the proximal third of the thigh.
The patient has been operated by posterior approach wide excision of the lesion with removal of left inferior L1 articular process, of left L2 hemilamina to the basis of the left L2 pedicle, and of left L3 superior articular process; excision interested whole bone cyst compressing intraforaminal tract of the left L2 nervous root; wide excision of bony structures with excision margins within healthy bone tissue assures best chance of removing the entire lesion minimizing local recurrence risks.
After bone structures excision, soft tissues that surrounded left L2 nervous root have been removed too, as to completely free the root, leaving nervous structure without any compression.
The patient experienced no post-surgical complications and was discharged after 2 days from the procedure. A TLSO was prescribed for the first 6 weeks.
At the 6 months follow-up control, the patient was completely pain free, he returned to all his previous sport activity. The trunk imbalance was still slightly noticeable and the X-rays showed a similar lumbar curve with a small compensatory thoracic curve that reduced the coronal imbalance .