A 66-year-old man, affected by type II DM for 4 years and arterial hypertension for 10 years, developed severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy without macular edema just 2 years after DM diagnosis. The patient was treated with panretinal photocoagulation (PRP), because he had a poor glycometabolic control and was unable to adhere to a close follow-up. One year after PRP, he developed severe visual loss due to diffuse non tractional bilateral DME. Thus, the two eyes were treated with an IV triamcinolone injection 1 month apart (the right eye [RE] before the left eye [LE]) and laser grid photocoagulation was performed in both eyes 2 weeks after IV injection. After no visual recovery for over 2 months due to the persistence of macular edema in both eyes, an IV injection of bevacizumab was given in the RE, where a larger amount of intraretinal fluid and subfoveal neural detachment were observed. However, 1 week after the injection, anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION) with a residual visual acuity of hand motion was observed. During the entire period, the patient had poor glycometabolic control (glycated hemoglobin >9%, high hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia) and poor adherence to therapy. This fact could have influenced the patient’s poor response to therapy and the development of AION.
As a result of this unfortunate adverse event, the patient refused an IV injection of bevacizumab in his LE. After informing the patient about the risks and benefits of different treatment options such as observation, off-label IV injections of steroids, and subtenon injections of IFNα, the patient signed an informed consent for a cycle of subtenon injections of IFNα.
Before the treatment, the BCVA in the LE was 20/200. The patient received posterior subtenon injections of IFNα (1×106 IU/ml) three times (on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday) for a week in his LE, according to the following procedure: after the administration of topical 0.4% oxybuprocaine surface anesthesia, 1 ml of IFNα was slowly injected into the inferotemporal quadrant under the Tenon’s capsule, using a 27-gauge needle on a 2.5-ml syringe. The needle was moved toward the macular area, until the hub was firmly pressed against the conjunctival fornix. After the first injection, topical 0.3% netilmicin eye drops were prescribed three times a day for 7 days. During the period of IFN-α therapy, the patient had a good systemic condition and a good glycometabolic control (glycated hemoglobin = 6.9%).
A complete ophthalmic examination including BCVA, indirect ophthalmoscopy, and SD-OCT of the macular region was conducted several times throughout the period of IV injection and laser grid therapy and, specifically, preoperatively, as well as at 1 week, 1 month, 4 months, and 1 year after the last injection of INFα. SD-OCT images were obtained using Spectralis OCT spectral-domain (Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) and the baseline macular scan was set as the reference (Figure ). Fifteen months after the treatment, the BCVA in the LE was 20/40, with reduced cystoid macular edema but the SD-OCT highlighted the persistence of the photoreceptor inner segment/outer segment (IS/OS) disruption already highlighted at the baseline (Figure ). The patient gives his written consent for the use of his data and any accompanying images.