A 66-year-old Macedonian male presented with symptoms of constipation and blood in the stool (hematochezia) for 3–4 months before seeing a gastroenterologist. Review of his medical records revealed no family history of note. The outer anal examination revealed old thrombosed hemorrhoids, and endoscopy revealed an obstructive neoplastic mass located 5–7 cm from the anus. The tumor tissue showed diffuse ulcerations and bled when touched. Eight biopsy specimens were taken for pathohistological examination. The diagnosis of mucinous AC with signet ring cells was made. Radiographic examination showed no pathological findings in the liver, pancreas, spleen and lungs, but revealed a tumor mass in the left lower kidney pole with infiltrating border that caused compression to the collector system. Preoperative computed tomography confirmed synchronous tumors in the kidney and rectum . The patient was admitted to the University Clinic of Abdominal Surgery in Skopje for surgical treatment. Laboratory tests showed elevated values for the enzymes lactate dehydrogenase (612 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (387 U/L) and C-reactive protein (up to 45.7 mg/L). A medial laparotomy was performed, with surgical resection of the anterior rectal area, simultaneously with left nephrectomy. Carcinosis in the small pelvis was observed.
Tissue samples were analyzed at the Institute of pathology, Faculty of Medicine in Skopje. Gross rectal examination of tissue specimens showed a rectal tumor measuring 5.5 cm infiltrating into the perirectal fat. The kidney contained a yellowish round tumor measuring 5 cm, with necrosis and hemorrhage. The adrenal gland was slightly enlarged into perirenal fat. The tissue specimens were fixed in formalin, embedded in Paraffin and routinely stained with hematoxylin & eosin stain. Microscopic analysis revealed PSRCCR with nodal metastasis, lymphatic and vascular tumor emboli and uncommon metastasis to synchronous RCC and to the adrenal gland . The tumor was classified as Stage IV according to the pTNM/UICC staging system. All specimens were analyzed immunohistochemicaly with CK20, CDX2, vimentin, RCC, E-cadherin and the mismatch repair (MMR) proteins MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. Signet ring cells were positive for CDX2 and CK20 . The absence of expression of E-cadherin in the metastasized cells indicated that they were the same as those in the primary carcinoma .
There was nuclear expression only of MMR protein MSH6, whereas the MMR proteins MLH1, MSH2 and PMS2 showed loss of the nuclear signal . Therefore, the tumor was further analyzed molecularly using the ABI 310 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), which revealed a microsatellite stable (MSS) tumor. Molecular analysis showed mutations in TP53 and ERBB2, as determined by next-generation sequencing of AKT1, BRAF, EGFR, ERBB2, FOXL2, GNA11, GNAQ, KIT, KRAS, MET, NRAS, PDGFRA, PIK3CA, RET and TP53. The patient died a few months after surgical treatment.