A 52 year-old woman collapsed at her home in front of an acquaintance. “Bloody vomit” was noted. An ambulance was called and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was begun by paramedics. The patient was transported to hospital, but she remained in cardiorespiratory arrest despite ongoing CPR. Resuscitation efforts were finally stopped.
It was later learned that several days prior to her death she had complained of unspecified upper digestive symptoms, but had steadfastly refused to seek medical advice. The medical history included bipolar disorder for which she was apparently compliant in taking her medications. She also smoked and had type II diabetes. Her medications were the following: quetiapine, lorazepam, baclofen, glickazide, metformin, and esomeprazole.
The coroner was notified and an autopsy was requested.
A complete autopsy was performed. The pertinent anatomic findings were confined to the gastrointestinal tract. The middle portion of the esophagus showed a prominent brownish 9 cm longitudinal ulcer, with a maximal width of 0.5 cm, situated 12 cm from the esophago-gastric junction . The esophago-gastric junction itself showed brownish steaks without ulceration, induration or a mass lesion. The stomach contained approximately 750 ml of dark blood; the small bowel and colon contained dark, tarry blood. There was no identifiable mucosal lesion beyond the esophagus.
Microscopic examination of numerous sections (>30) from all levels of the esophagus, including the ulcer, showed complete sloughing of the epithelium with a striking subepithelial lichenoid lymphocytic infiltrate extending into the muscularis mucosae . Sections of the esophago-gastric junction showed no evidence of varices. Fungal elements and viral inclusions were absent; Periodic acid-Schiff staining for identification of fungi and immunohistochemical staining for Cytomegalovirus and Herpes simplex viruses I and II were negative.
An extensive immunohistochemical study was performed in order to characterize the immunophenotype of the lymphocytic infiltration. The following antibodies were used: CD20, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8 and CD43. Unfortunately, marked post-mortem autolysis rendered interpretation difficult. Only CD43 staining was well preserved , showing diffuse positivity, thus demonstrating that the lymphocytic infiltrate was essentially composed of T-cells. For the other antibodies the results were less reliable, although better antigen preservation of the deeper situated lymphocytes in the muscularis mucosae was noted. Here, a high CD8/CD4 ratio was found. CD2, CD5, CD7 and CD20 were negative, but, given the absence of positive controls for these markers, interpretation was essentially impossible.
A representative formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue block was submitted for evaluation of T-cell receptor gamma chain rearrangement by polymerase chain reaction. However, amplification was not possible for technical reasons.
Laboratory results were the following: lorazepam at a therapeutic blood level; tetrahydrocannabinol metabolites were also present. Ethanol was absent. Blood acetone: 10 mmol/L (normal: 0–0.34), ocular liquid glucose: 640 mg/dL, ocular liquid lactic acid: 230 mg/dL, and ocular liquid acetone: 12 mmol/L. The results were compatible with diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
The final autopsy diagnoses were: 1) fatal upper gastrointestinal bleeding due to lichenoid esophagitis with diffuse mucosal sloughing and a large ulcer of the mid-esophagus, and 2) diabetic ketoacidosis.