An 11-year-old male came to our hospital with a complaint of bilateral nasal bleeding of 1 day duration, which was of about 4 times, and it was massive as claimed by the family. He also has had associated history of skin rash which was noticed a day prior to the onset of nasal bleeding.

On further asking, the patient has had history of loss of appetite and significant but unquantified weight loss of one month duration but no history of fever or cough. He has no history of bleeding diseases, connective tissue disorders, autoimmune disorders, or cancer in himself or in his family. All vital signs were normal at the time of presentation, but there was a dry clot in the nostril bilaterally and no symptoms of anemia. A chest examination revealed scattered inspiratory crackles on both sides of the upper lung zone. Organomegaly, there was nothing. A petechial rash covered the chest and rear sides of the body, including the upper extremities.

Except for isolated thrombocytopenia, a complete blood count and serum chemistry, including the reticulocyte count, were unremarkable. A peripheral blood smear revealed isolated severe thrombocytopenia with normal blood cell morphology. Autoimmune screening (ANA, Coombs test), coagulation profile, viral screening including the COVID-19 test, blood cultures, urine cultures, were all non-revealing. The rate of erythrocyte sedimentation (ESR) was 70 mm/hr, which is suggestive of MTB. A smear for acid-fast bacilli was negative, but Gene expert from the sputum detected MTB with rifampicin sensitivity.

The ultimate outcome of the chest X-ray revealed bilateral diffusely dispersed nodular opacities all over the lung fields, which were commented on by three different radiologists.

With a presumptive diagnosis of immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), the patient was hospitalised and began therapy with oral prednisolone 20 mg twice a day.

He was then managed with antituberculosis (ATT) RHZ (75/50/150) 4 tablets, and E100 mg (R stands for Rifampicin, H for Isoniazid, Z for Pyrazinamide, and E for Ethambutol in this order). Four tablets as per the national guideline, which was started after 1 week of admission because of late isolation of TB.

Prednisolone 2mg/kg/day, ie 20 mg po bid (tapered over six weeks and stopped), and there were no reported problems of initial complaints after withdrawing the prednisolone.

He was transfused with Platelet 20 mg/kg, ie 400 mg, with post-transfusion CBC of almost the same, supporting the diagnosis of ITP.

This patient was discharged after 2 weeks of hospitalization, being taking ATT and Prednisolone, with the latest platelet count of 44,000*109, with appointment after 2 weeks or to come early if there are any complications. Fortunately, there were no complications related to the disease/or treatment, and on the day of appointment (after a total duration of 1 month of treatment and 31 days of the complaint), repeated CBC was done, and it showed Platelet count of 59,000*10*9 and the organ function test in search of ATT-related toxicities were also all in the normal range. The patient was again appointed after 2 months, and on return, the Platelet count was raised to 118,000*109 which is still below the normal value. Prednisolone was tapered over 6 weeks and stopped. After the total six months of therapy with ATT, platelet counts (204* 109) were became in the normal range after being successfully increased amid follow-up, and ATT was stopped as per the national guideline.