Following a right radical orchidectomy and four cycles of chemotherapy for a metastatic non-seminomatous germ cell tumor of the testis, our patient, a 21-year-old man of Caucasian origin, underwent RPLND for a residual mass. The procedure was prolonged and in order to achieve complete surgical excision, a right radical nephrectomy and excision of the inferior vena cava from the iliac veins to the level of the left renal vein was necessary due to tumor infiltration and encasement.
Three days postoperatively, the patient developed bilateral leg pain, lower limb oedema and abdominal distension secondary to abdominal ascites . This continued to worsen and on day nine postoperatively, he developed a paralytic ileus, pleural effusions and respiratory failure, and was transferred to the intensive care unit for elective intubation, ventilatory support and chest tube drainage of the pleural effusions .
With fears that our patient would develop intra-abdominal compartment syndrome and that the respiratory compromise would be worsened, a 12 Fr pigtail drainage catheter was inserted under ultrasound guidance on postoperative day 22 into the abdominal cavity, immediately producing 11 litres of chylous fluid. Shortly after a drain was inserted, the respiratory compromise improved and the patient was extubated. The drain continued to maintain an output of six liters per day for a further four days before settling to an average output of between two and three liters per 24 hours. Conservative management consisted of a parenteral diet of medium chain triglycerides, diuretic therapy and 20% albumin three times a day. Daily intraperitoneal infusion of 200 mls of the water-soluble contrast medium Conray 280 mg I/ml (Iothalamate meglumine) in order to promote peritoneal lymphatic fibrosis was attempted but produced no real improvement. Blockage of the intra-abdominal drain necessitated its replacement on two separate occasions.
On day 41, the patient was discharged to the ward where he maintained this improvement. Total parenteral nutrition was commenced to supplement poor oral intake. The patient had also developed bilateral foot drop on day 22 postoperatively. This was felt to be due to pedal oedema compressing each peroneal nerve at the head of fibula. It improved gradually with resolving peripheral oedema and physiotherapy. He was discharged to a peripheral hospital for further care on day 53, with an average output of 1.5 liters. Histologically, all the resected retroperitoneal tissue was free from residual tumor and contained only lymphoid tissue with large areas of necrosis.