A 57-year-old lady with a history of diabetes, thyroid disease, dyslipidemia, and an episode of atrial fibrillation, resolved with pharmacological cardioversion several years before, presented to the Emergency Department for worsening dyspnea (New York Heart Association Classification—NYHA: IV). Her medical therapy included levothyroxine once daily, dapagliflozin 10 mg once daily, metformin 1,000 mg twice daily, rosuvastatin 5 mg, and ezetimibe 10 mg every night. She had no prior heart failure admissions. Other symptoms included orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea but no chest pain or syncopal episodes. Physical examination showed a pulse rate of 95 bpm, blood pressure of 140/70 mmHg, and 97% of peripheral oxygen saturation. Cardiac auscultation revealed a pansystolic murmur of 3/6 Levine grade over the apex as well as an ejection systolic murmur over the second intercostal space at the left sternal border. There were moderate bibasal lung crepitations and mild ankles edema. Intravenous furosemide was given with resolution of the lungs and ankles edema. Her electrocardiogram showed ectopic atrial rhythm, left anterior hemiblock as well as LV hypertrophy . Laboratory tests showed troponine T of 20 pg/ml (URL of 14 pg/ml), N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) of 582 pg/ml (URL <150 pg/ml).
A trans-thoracic echocardiogram showed a significant septal, asymmetric LV hypertrophy (basal anteroseptal wall diastolic thickness of 19 mm). Left and right ventricular systolic functions were normal. There was a clear SAM of the AML and an LVOT gradient of 56 mmHg at rest rising to 136 mmHg during the Valsalva maneuver ( and ). In addition, there was evidence of moderate to severe MR with a significant anteriorly directed jet, not very typical of SAM-related MR. A large calcification at PML-base was noted. 2D-3D trans-esophageal echocardiogram (2D-3D TEE) revealed the true MR mechanism. There was an MR combined mechanism based on: (1) PML degenerative prolapse with P2-flail from ruptured chordae with an eccentric anteriorly directed regurgitant jet and (2) a second posteriorly directed jet, related to SAM of AML ( and –). The pre-operative end-systolic mitral annular diameter was 39 mm while the end-diastolic diameter was 34 mm. There were no signs of infective endocarditis. We added beta-blockers and intravenous diuretics to pre-existing therapy and her clinical condition improved together with a significant LVOT gradient reduction (from 56 to 30 at rest). She underwent coronary-computed tomography angiography that excluded the presence of significant coronary stenoses. She was discharged and, one month later, she underwent MV surgical repair (artificial ring annuloplasty plus artificial chordae implantation) together with septal myectomy. Septal myectomy was performed according to modified Morrow’s procedure. The ruptured chorda was resected during the operation. Regarding annuloplasty, a Carpentier-Edwards Physio II ring N. 32 (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was used. Chordal reconstruction was performed using n. 2 ePTFE Goretex neo-chordae (W.L. Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA). Gore-Tex chords were anchored at the papillary muscle and individually sutured to the free posterior leaflet margin. This intervention shifted the coaptation line posteriorly and contributed to fully resolving AML-SAM. The final outcome was good.