A 31-year-old man suffered an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest during the night while asleep. His girlfriend started CPR immediately. Upon arrival of the emergency medical team, the patient was found in VF and defibrillation could restore spontaneous circulation. He had no significant past medical history and was taking no medications. Family’s medical history revealed that the patient’s sister had implanted a pacemaker due to sick-sinus syndrome, at the age of 22 years. Plasma electrolyte levels, including potassium and calcium, were within normal ranges. Toxicological screening was negative. The ECG at presentation showed sinus rhythm and an ER pattern with substantial J-point elevation in most of the ECG-leads with notching of the terminal part of the QRS complex in the lateral leads and slurring in the inferior leads . Coronary angiography revealed an anomalous origin of the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery arising from a separate ostium of the right sinus of Valsalva without any other concomitant congenital anomaly. In the absence of neurological recovery or purposeful movements, a targeted temperature management protocol with a goal temperature of 36 °C was started in the intensive care unit . Three hours later, the patient began to experience very frequent episodes of spontaneous VF. The episodes of VF were induced by short-coupled monomorphic premature ventricular complexes (PVC) falling into the vulnerable descending part of the T-wave . The PVCs showed a right bundle block morphology in V1 and a right-inferior axis in the limb leads, suggesting an origin in the left anterior fascicle. The patient was shocked for more than 10 VF episodes, but the PVC kept reoccurring, sometimes just a few beats after cardioversion . The patient’s condition was finally stabilized by isoproterenol infusion, which successfully suppressed the PVC’s at higher heart rates in sinus rhythm. During the course of the isoproterenol infusion, a reduction of the ER pattern on the 12-lead ECG was observed . Compared to the ECG at presentation the notch in the lateral leads disappeared and the slur in the inferior leads was markedly attenuated. Remarkably, new T wave inversions were present, possibly attributed to cardiac memory. Two days later, the patient was extubated and showed a good neurologic recovery. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging demonstrated normal cardiac structure and function and no late gadolinium enhancement. Regarding the anomalous origin of the LAD from the opposite sinus CMR revealed an interarterial course, in which the LAD passes between the aorta and pulmonary trunk. The left circumflex (LCX) artery was located in its usual expected position at the left sinus of Valsalva . A dual chamber ICD was implanted allowing for continued atrial pacing. A myocardial perfusion imaging with bicycle exercise stress testing was performed four weeks after the hospitalization and showed no signs of ischemia. The patient has not experienced any further arrhythmias during the first two months of follow-up.