A 20-year-old man with psychomotor delay and a history of epilepsy was admitted to the emergency department of the State University Hospital in Haiti for abdominal distension, rigidity, generalized pain, absence of bowel movements and gas, and a history of vomiting. He had a history of falling on a sharp object that pierced his perineum 6 days prior, with the onset of symptoms 3 days later. Vital signs on admission were blood pressure 104/58 mmHg, heart rate 138 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, temperature 36.2 degrees Celsius, and oxygen saturation 98 % on room air. Initial physical examination revealed rebound tenderness, decreased bowel sounds, and diffuse pain. Rectal examination showed a clean anal margin, tonically competent anal sphincter, and a rectal ampulla filled with stool. He had a functional impairment of grade B according to the Fränkel classification, with a lesion level at L2/L3. The initial diagnosis on admission was peritonitis due to hollow organ perforation with a Fränkel grade B spinal cord injury. Initial treatment included ceftriaxone 2 g IV, metronidazole 500 mg IV, tramadol 100 mg, omeprazole 40 mg IV, dexamethasone 8 mg IV, tetanus serum 5000 U/ml, intra-rectal fleet enema, fluid resuscitation with Ringer lactate, and placement of a Foley catheter for diuresis monitoring. Laboratory tests showed a hemoglobin level of 16 g/dL, white blood cell count of 3250, urea level of 25 mg/dL, creatinine level of 6.9 mg/dL, and normal electrolyte levels. No imaging studies were available at the center. After anesthetic evaluation, the decision was made to proceed to the operating room, because he becomes hemodynamically unstable with a blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg, heart rate of 148, oxygen saturation of 94 %, and a urinary drainage bag containing 400 cc of highly colored urine was emptied.

In the operating room, the abdomen was accessed through a supra umbilical-pubic incision that was later extended. After resecting various anatomical planes, the abdominal cavity was opened, revealing a highly dilated rectum with areas of extensive necrosis at the base.

The colon was dissected, revealing dilation of the entire colonic frame using Mattox's maneuver to explore the retroperitoneal zones 1 and 2. Three staged biopsies were performed (diseased zone, transition zone, and healthy zone).

A double-barreled sigmoid colostomy was created, followed by irrigation of collected materials. Approximately 300 cc of reactive fluid was aspirated. During the procedure, the patient experienced three cardiac arrests but was successfully resuscitated with the transfusion of two units of compatible blood. Due to the patient's inability to tolerate the rest of the procedure, closure was done using the Bogota technique to delay definitive closure.

The surgery lasted about 2 h and 40 min, and the patient was transferred to the postoperative care unit with a diagnosis of Hirschsprung's disease complicated by severe acidosis and acute renal failure. The patient left the operating room in a relatively stable condition with the following vital signs: blood pressure 130/60 mmHg, heart rate 70 beats/min, and oxygen saturation 93 % on room air. However, approximately 15 min later in the postoperative period, the patient's condition deteriorated with blood pressure dropping to 63/39 mmHg, heart rate increasing to 154 beats/min, respiratory rate of 44 breaths/min, temperature of 39 degrees Celsius, and oxygen saturation of 70 % with supplemental oxygen. About 4 h later, the patient passed away.