A 51-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital presenting with a two-month history of dry cough, dyspnea, and pain localized to the left chest and precordial region. The patient is a lifelong non-smoker and reported no infective, cardiac symptoms or myasthenia gravis (MG). Her weight was stable and there was no history of thoracic trauma or tuberculosis infection. Physical examination revealed rapid breathing for 28 breaths/min, decreased breath sound on the left chest and mild tenderness in the third thoracic vertebra region. No signs of hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or skin lesions were observed.
Blood tests showed mild leukocytosis (13.30 × 109/L) with lymphocytosis (9.98 × 109/L). Absolutely CD4-positive T cell count and CD8-positive T cell count in the peripheral blood were 4,180 cell/ul and 1,679 cell/ul, respectively. Subsequent flow cytometric analysis confirmed that these lymphocytes were polyclonal T-cells. Her serum levels of procalcitonin (PCT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were normal and no abnormalities in her liver and kidney functions. Ultrasound examination of the superficial lymph nodes revealed enlargement in the bilateral neck, axillary, and groin regions. Immunohistochemical staining of biopsy specimens from the cervical lymph nodes and bone marrow indicated CD3-positive, CD5-positive, CD7-positive small T-cell lymphocytosis. Moreover, gene rearrangement analysis did not detect any clonal rearrangement of the T-cell receptor (TCR). Flow cytometric examination of bone marrow showed mature T-cell lymphocytosis with normal phenotype.
Contrast-enhanced chest CT scan depicted diffuse nodular thickening of the left pleura with mild enhancement, leading to the collapse of the left lung. This was seen infiltrating the mediastinum and pericardium . Bronchoscopy revealed stenosis of the left lower lobe bronchus, yet no malignant cells were detected in the bronchial mucosal biopsy specimens. The subsequent 18F-FDG PET/CT study indicated increased 18F-FDG uptake in the left pleura (SUVmax 8.3) . Additionally, compression with increased FDG uptake was observed in the second thoracic vertebrae (SUVmax 8.2) . Considering these findings, our differential diagnoses included malignant pleural mesothelioma, lung cancer with pleural metastasis, and T-cell lymphoma.
Pleural biopsy revealed plenty of small-sized lymphocytes with scattered distribution of medium-sized cells in hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) staining . Immunohistochemical (IHC) stain showed medium-sized cells were positive for multiple epithelial-derived markers, including PCK , CK19 and P63 . Additionally, these cells exhibited weak positivity for TdT and Ki-67 , but were negative for CD5 , the mesothelial marker CR , and the pulmonary-origin marker TTF-1 . The small-sized lymphocytes were positive for CD3 , CD5 , CD8 and Ki-67 (80%, Fig. F), but negative for CD20 in IHC stain. Based on above findings, the patient was finally diagnosed as ectopic pleural thymoma (type B1 according to the WHO classification) with T-cell Lymphocytosis and bone metastasis. Regrettably, the patient declined further chemotherapy or radiotherapy options.