A 25 year old Sinhalese Sri Lankan female presented with a 1 day history of bilateral lower limb weakness, and numbness with urinary incontinence. She had no back pain and no history of constitutional symptoms such as fever, loss of appetite, or recent subjective weight loss.
On examination she had atonic lower limbs, with absent muscle power, and absent bilateral lower limb reflexes below knee level, with sensory impairment up to T6 level. She had no spinal deformities or tenderness, and no papilloedema. Upper limb examination was unremarkable except for a hard non tender bony mass on the left scapular region. She had a blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg, pulse rate of 78 beats per minute and had no respiratory compromise.
She was investigated with a suspicion of metastatic disease and X-ray of the left shoulder showed a soft tissue and bony mass on the dorsal aspect of the left scapula with multiple lytic lesions suggestive of a primary bone neoplasm , but chest radiograph, ultrasound scan of the neck, and Computed tomography (CT) of abdomen were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine showed an intradural extramedullary mass with an extra spinal component at C7-T2 level causing severe cord compression , hence intravenous dexamethasone regimen was started.
Ultrasound guided core needle biopsy from the left scapular mass showed malignant small round blue cell tumour suggestive of Ewing sarcoma. Blood investigations showed Heamoglobin of 9.2 g/dl, white blood cell count of 12 × 103/μl, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)of 150 mm/h, C-reactive protein level of 96 mg/l, normal liver enzyme levels and liver functions tests, and serum alkaline phosphate level of 173 μ/l. Her blood picture showed increased rouleaux formation with anaemia of chronic disease.
She had no improvement of symptoms following treatment with dexamethasone. Before implementing on oncological management, 3 days after onset of symptoms, she developed sudden onset progressive ascending neurological impairment with upper limb and bulbar involvement, and unfortunately resulted with respiratory failure and death.