A 67-year-old male patient presented with dyspnoea and reduced cardiopulmonary exercise capacity. In his past medical history there was an admission for recurrent exercise-induced palpitations in 1980. At that time, he participated in high-frequency/high-duration/intermediate intensity endurance training (Class B, ∼4200 MET minutes/week). Subsequent cardiologic workup was not able to define underlying structural or rhythmical disease. A recommendation against exercise was not given, but coincidentally the patient ceased from his regular workouts in the early 1980s, when starting an ambitious career. His activity was confined to moderate-intensity training. In 2012, he restarted regular activity (Class B, ∼1800 MET minutes/week) and increased his workout volume in February 2020 when he retired. In July 2020, symptoms worsened significantly.
The patient presented with regular heart rate (HR), blood pressure (BP), and body mass index. Physical examination was noticeable for a 3/6-systolic murmur with punctum maximum at fourth intercostal space right parasternal. Key laboratory findings are presented in . His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with epsilon waves in V1–4 and T-wave inversions in leads II, III, aVF, and V1–6 . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed enlarged and dyskinetic RV with aneurysmatic extension on RV free wall (RV end-diastolic diameter basal: 65 mm, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion: 21 mm, RV outflow tract in parasternal long-axis view: 53 mm, RV outflow tract in parasternal short-axis view: 61 mm), as well as high-grade tricuspid regurgitation (TR) (grade III/III, effective regurgitant orifice area: 53 mm2, coaptation defect: 8–9 mm) and low-grade pulmonary regurgitation (grade I/III). Left ventricular (LV) size and function were preserved [LV ejection fraction (EF): 55%] and there were no relevant vitia of aortic and mitral valve (
and
Video 1–3).
We suspected RV cardiomyopathy and investigated patient’s family history. Indeed, his sister had been diagnosed with ARVC as well as both of her teenage children, one of whom suffered from cardiac arrest while playing tennis at the age of 19 but was successfully resuscitated. His uncle, grandfather, and great-uncle sadly passed away from SCD at the age of 59, 60, and 19, respectively . In a synopsis of these initial findings, we initiated workup according to 2010 modified Task Force Criteria.
Seven-day Holter ECG showed two non-sustained ventricular tachycardias (maximum length of 12 beats) and an ectopic beat burden of 22 000/24 h . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) correlated largely with echocardiographic findings: besides functional and morphological abnormalities, i.e. akinesia of the RV apical and medial anterior wall with signs of fatty degeneration, RV dilation and EF were further quantified (RV end-diastolic volume index: 227 mL/m2, RVEF18%) . Complementary genotyping revealed heterozygous nonsense substitution in PKP-2 gene (NM_004572.3: c.369G>A; p. Trp123Ter), which matched the ARVC phenotype in three databases for clinical variants (ClinVar, dbSNP, gnomAD) ., Conclusively, ARVC was established as definite diagnosis .
Medical heart failure therapy including beta-blocker, angiotensin-converting enzyme-inhibitor, and aldosterone antagonist was introduced. Using the ARVC risk score, the risk for a fast ventricular tachycardia/ventricular flutter/sustained ventricular arrhythmia was calculated at 7.1% within 5 years and patient underwent prophylactic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implantation. The latter was complicated by poor impedance levels at preferred implantation site in apical RV myocardium. Adequate connectivity was finally achieved after implantation into high-septal myocardium.
The patient was advised against smoking, high-cholesterol diet, exercise training, and anaerobic activity. We offered psychological counselling and consultation of a local ARVC support group. Monthly follow-ups were set in our specialized ARVC centre and mutation-specific cascade family testing was recommended in our cardiogenetic centre.
On regular follow-up 4 months later, the patient reports clinical deterioration. Electrocardiogram findings appeared unchanged. The ICD device did not elicit ventricular tachycardias. Repeated echocardiography showed severe TR (effective regurgitant orifice area: 40 mm2, proximal isovelocity surface area: 7–8 mm), which now appeared to be additionally aggravated by interference of ICD lead with septal leaflet. Of note, echocardiography-controlled repositioning of the ICD lead did not seem to be promising considering the difficulties in ICD implantation and fragile nature of the RV myocardium. During exercise stress testing, systolic BP and HR increased appropriately. Furthermore, we performed stress echocardiography and supine incremental stepwise cycle exercise right heart catheterization to investigate resting and stress haemodynamics. The onset of dyspnoea at 75 W was correlated with diastolic LV compression and obstruction of LV filling by increasing RV pressure and RV failure . Left ventricular early systolic volume at 100 W was estimated to 50 mL.
Diagnostic angiogram showed coronary sclerosis without obstructions . Resting pulmonary artery (PA) systolic/diastolic and mean pressures were measured at 25/16 and 23 mmHg, respectively. Exercise-induced PA pressures rose slightly to 32/23 and 26 mmHg. The transpulmonary gradient remained regular at rest and when subjected to stress at 12 and 14 mmHg, respectively. Pulmonary artery oxygen saturation was 49% at rest and 37% at performance limit, evidencing slightly increased peripheral oxygen extraction. Overall, there was no evidence for pulmonary hypertension. Extended pulmonary diagnostics using high resolution computed tomography of lungs and spirometry excluded any obstructive and restrictive lung pathologies. Abdominal ultrasound documented systolic flow reversal in dilated liver vessels and inferior vena cava . Gastrointestinal symptoms and dilated liver veins were interpreted as progressing signs of right heart congestion with beginning congestive gastritis and hepatopathy (AST 59 U/L, ALT 73 U/L, GGT 149 U/L, bilirubin 0.9 mg/dL).
We expanded medical treatment by adding standard coronary artery disease prophylactic agents, namely acetylsalicylic acid and rosuvastatin. Heart failure medication was modified by adding torasemide and antiarrhythmic medication was adjusted by discontinuation of bisoprolol in favour of sotalol . Despite conflicting evidence, sotalol is still a guideline-recommended prophylactic agent for patients with ARVC/D, which is based on data from the OPTIC study, showing a trend towards fewer ICD shocks in patients treated with sotalol compared to beta-blockers. On the next regular follow-up, the patient reported a significant improvement regarding symptom burden. Thus, therapy was continued in its present form with regular re-assessments in ongoing monthly follow-ups.