A 10-year-old girl born to non-consanguineous parents with no family history of neurological disease is presented as a first pregnancy product; she was born at 36 weeks with intrauterine growth retardation by induction of labour and was hospitalised for six days for jaundice treated with phototherapy.

The psychomotor development patterns were normal until 3 years and 8 months; later, she presented loss of motor and language milestones, which persists to date. Initially, she presented gait disturbance due to inversion of the left foot and, at four years, dystonia in the left lower limb, which progressively evolved to compromise both lower limbs and gait, for which the patient required a self-propelled wheelchair from the age of seven. Receptive and expressive language development was normal until the time of disease onset, but over time, she developed a dystonic dysarthria that persists to date.

He was initially treated with levodopa-carbidopa with little success, so baclofen and diazepam were added, achieving partial clinical improvement; during the following months and years, trihexyphenidyl, biperiden and clonidine were administered, and botulinum toxin was applied without significant improvement of the dystonia.

The patient is currently being treated with levodopa-carbidopa, biperiden, trihexyphenidyl, diazepam and clonidine, but dystonic dysarthria and oropharyngeal dystonic compromise persist, and sitting and standing are not achieved; her dystonia mainly compromises the lower limbs.

Full pathological and metabolic studies were performed for diagnosis, as well as ophthalmologic, cardiac, radiologic, electrodiagnostic, and genetic evaluations. The exome sequencing study was inconclusive, however, the full genome sequencing identified a likely heterozygous pathogenic variant in the KMT2B gene, c.1205delC, p. (Pro402Hisfs*5), which causes a frameshift that begins at codon 402. The new reading frame ends four positions after a stop codon. The variant was confirmed by Sanger sequencing.
