A 70-year-old man presented to a neurologist in February 2020 with complaints of aggressive behaviour, depressed mood, gait problems and general deterioration.
The patient’s medical history listed chronic axonal-demyelinating sensory-motoric polyneuropathy, peripheral arterial vascular disease, chronic kidney insufficiency, hypertension and diabetes mellitus. He also had a pacemaker, due to paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. He had quit smoking in 1995. Alcohol consumption was not clearly stated.
Clinical examination revealed general weakness and areflexia in the four limbs. Electroencephalography (EEG) was normal, as was a CT scan of the brain, according to the protocol. Nerve conduction studies and electromyography (ENMG) indicated the known polyneuropathy, most probably due to diabetes mellitus.
A CT scan of the lumbar spine could not explain the impaired gait.
A second contact with the same neurologist took place 4 months later. The gait problems had increased, accompanied by aggressive behaviour, loss of interest and problems with executive functioning.
A second CT scan of the brain listed a ventriculomegaly, but not in the conclusion.
As treatment, the patient was advised to see a psychologist for the depressed mood and to visit a rehabilitation centre for the gait impairment. The latter recommendation was refused.
In November 2021, the patient went to the urologist because of urinary incontinence. A urodynamic study revealed an overactive bladder, which was treated with medication. There was no improvement at all.
Two months later, the patient was admitted to hospital because of generalised deterioration, acute renal insufficiency and dysregulated glycaemia. During this admission, the patient was confused and delirious. Gait problems were evident, with an increased risk of falling, as well as urinary incontinence. Rehabilitation was then started for the first time.
Less than a few weeks after discharge, May 2022, the patient was readmitted to hospital, in the intensive care unit, after a fall with rib fractures and haemothorax. He was disoriented and developed hyperactive delirium, reported as being of multifactorial origin. At this time, ethyl abuse was mentioned. This could have explained the falls, cognitive dysfunction and delirium.
On admission to the rehabilitation unit (May 2022), the patient was seen for the first time by one of the authors. He had a cognitive deficit, an impaired gait with frequent falling and urinary incontinence. Upon clinical examination, cogwheel rigidity, gait impairments and ataxia were noticed. In the absence of a diagnosis, a PET scan was requested, and the imaging was reviewed by the radiologist. Heteroanamnesis with the patient’s spouse revealed that the symptoms were progressively increasing, but alcohol consumption was not mentioned. According to the spouse, the patient was no longer the same person she used to know. The triad of symptoms was recognised, and a retrograde review of imaging confirmed the suspicion of iNPH ( and ).
Following the diagnosis, a diagnostic lumbar puncture was performed with drainage of 30 ml cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Testing pre- and post-puncture indicated an increase in scores on the Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) from 24 to 27/30. In addition, the Timed Up & Go test was significantly better. Clinical improvements were also observed in gait pattern and cognition.
A ventriculoperitoneal shunt (VP shunt) was placed successfully: cognition improved, and both gait disturbances and urinary incontinence disappeared. Neurological examination normalised. Multidisciplinary rehabilitation was subsequently continued with favourable results, despite the long existence of the symptoms.
Upon discharge from our ward, the patient was able to walk securely and independently. Further rehabilitation was provided at home. Vertigo and fatigue remained and were followed up by the neurologist. With the improvement of urinary incontinence, medication could be tapered off.