A 34-year-old male patient presented to our hospital with multiple yellowish elevated masses in different locations of the body, including the dorsum of the hands, elbows, buttocks and feet. In addition, the patient also had bilateral arcus cornealis and Achille tendon masses . The total number of masses was 15, and the size of masses varied from 1 × 1 × 1 cm to 8 × 8 × 5 cm. The masses were initially asymptomatic; they appeared 10 years ago, and then they increased progressively in size. The patient complained of discomfort and difficulty dressing and sitting due to large masses in the buttocks. In addition, patients also reported difficulty wearing sandals due to the masses in the feet. The patient's hygiene was affected, and especially the masses made the patient feel inferior when in contact with others. Even the patient decided to divorce because of psychological influences related to abnormalities in the body. The results of the chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasound, electrocardiogram and echocardiogram of the patient were normal. The patient's family medical history was not taken because the patient did not wish to disclose it. The low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) level of the patient was 10.04 mmol/L (reference value, <2.6 mmol/L). Based on a high level of LDL-C, arcus cornealis and presence of xanthomas, the patient was diagnosed with Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) based on the Simon Broome Criteria.
After receiving the consultation, the patient agreed to be admitted to the hospital for surgery to remove the masses. Lipid-lowering therapy was immediately administered for the patient with Atorvastatin 40 mg/day. After 4 days of hospitalization, the patient then underwent surgery to remove the masses. The resected masses had a surface of normal skin. The core of the masses looked yellowish-colored uniform, relatively solid, without necrosis, and localized in the subcutaneous layer without invading the muscle or joint capsule . The skin incision was oval around the circumference of masses with the longitudinal axis parallel to the Langer's line. The excision margins were normal skin. After removing masses, all defects were sutured directly . A total of 13 masses were removed; the remaining 2 masses on the finger were not removed because the patient still had to use the fingers to take care of himself. The remaining 2 masses would be removed during the next surgery. Histopathology showed a typical xanthoma with infiltration of foam cells . The healing process was normal. All sutures were removed 14 days after surgery. The patient was discharged and continued treatment with atorvastatin 40 mg/day. Gene sequencing test (on the Nextseq, Illumina system) showed homozygous LDL-C receptor gene mutation on chromosome 19. Due to difficult economic conditions, the patient's family members did not undergo gene sequencing to find mutations causing FH. Follow-up at 1.5 months postoperatively, the LDL-C level of the patient was reduced to 8.8 mmol/L and the wounds healed well and no re-appearance of masses was observed .