A 60-year-old Japanese woman presented with numbness in both lower extremities. This symptom appeared four months prior to admission, and she experienced giddiness two months before. However, she had ignored these symptoms. Her medical history revealed that she had undergone an oophorectomy, and she had a uterine sarcoma at the age of 36 and mastitis at the age of 45. Her consciousness was clear but she had anaemic conjunctivae. Physical examination revealed that she was a well-nourished female with normal vital signs. She had no chest pain. Her liver and spleen were not palpable. Although she experienced numbness in both her lower limbs, the neurological findings were normal, and neither extremity was cold.
The patient had a white-blood-cell count of 2.74 × 103/μl with 37% neutrophils, 62% lymphocytes and 1% monocytes. Her haemoglobin level was 7.8 g/dl and her platelet count was 1787 × 103/μl. Examination of bone-marrow aspirate revealed normal cellular marrow, megakaryocytic hyperplasia and erythroid dysplasia. Her karyogram was normal.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed in the aorta a moveable mass with a diameter of 1.5 cm. The interior of the mass had no blood supply. A computed tomographic scan of her abdomen revealed a circular thrombus in the descending aorta at the level of the diaphragm . Arteriosclerosis was not recognized at that point.
We diagnosed this case of thrombocytosis and anemia as myelodysplastic syndrome and/or myeloproliferative disorder-unclassifiable (MDS/MPD-U), and the aortic thrombus was thought to be associated with myeloproliferative thrombocytosis.
For myeloproliferative thrombocytosis, she was treated with 500 mg of hydroxyurea from the seventh day of her hospital stay. However, she was administered 1000 mg of hydroxyurea on the 16th day because her platelet count increased to 2074 × 103/μl. In addition, she was administered 50 mg of ranimustine on the 18th day. The platelet count decreased to 274 × 103 /μl on the 39th day, but it increased slowly thereafter. After administration of 1000 mg of hydroxyurea, her platelet count stabilized at approximately 1000 × 103/μl. She was administered transfusions for anemia.
Ticlopidine was administered to prevent the development of a thrombosis on the seventh hospital day, which was the same day treatment for myeloproliferative thrombocytosis was initiated. Aspirin (100 mg) was administered when an aortic thrombus was identified by computed tomographic scan on the 10th day of her hospital stay. The numbness in both of her lower extremities disappeared within two days. Also, the aortic thrombus was not observed in the computed tomographic scan on the 17th day of her hospital stay. She was administered aspirin after seven days . She has been without symptoms for more than one year.