A 29-year-old smoking White man, without any personal or family history, was hospitalized in our department for the management of a small bowel obstruction (SBO). There was no fever or night sweats. The general condition was preserved. He had a history of a 2 months non-bloody diarrhea (5 stools/day). At presentation, physical examination revealed marked abdominal distension, diffuse tympanism with tenderness without rebound tenderness. There was no fever and vital signs were stable. Neurological and cutaneous examinations were normal. Examination of the anal margin and the rectal examination were normal.
Abdominal CT scan revealed segmental, multifocal thickened small intestinal walls (8 mm) and dilated loops in the small bowel (up to 41 mm). The thickening was circumferential with a target appearance due to submucosal oedema.
White blood cell and eosinophilic polynuclei count was elevated (700/mm3). Hemoglobin value was 12.8 g/dl and platelet count was within normal ranges. The C-reactive protein value was elevated (96 µmol/l). Liver and kidney function tests were normal. The SBO had improved with conservative management.
Parasitological examination of stool and stool culture were negative. Quantiferon, ASCA, PANCA and anti-transglutaminase antibodies were negative. LDH levels were normal.
The MR enterography showed a discontinuous multifocal inflammatory thickening of the ileum . Ileo-colonoscopy showed normal ileum and segmental petechial colitis. Pathology was normal for ileal biopsies and showed a catarrhal0 colitis with high eosinophilic infiltration without epithelial architectural changes for colonic biopsies . The gastroscopy showed a congestive and petechial gastropathy. Pathology was normal for esophageal and duodenal biopsies and showed chronic gastritis without HP for gastric biopsies.
The patient did not have antibiotics, since the Parasitological examination of stool and stool culture were negative. He was diagnosed with primary eosinophilic enterocolitis. He received corticosteroid therapy. We observed the resolution of the subocclusives syndromes, the diarrhea and the biological inflammatory syndrome, the normalization of the PNE level. Control MR enterography was normal three months after corticosteroid therapy. Since the patient was asymptomatic, we did not do a second look endoscopy.
After a year, the patient was asymptomatic and the biological tests were normal.