A 57-year-old South Asian man presented with a painless, nodular lesion (1 cm × 0.5 cm) on his left knee. He had had a renal transplant eight months earlier for autosomal dominant polycystic kidney-related renal failure. He received two doses (20 mg) of interleukin receptor-2 antibodies (Simulect®, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Surrey, UK) at induction and on the fourth postoperative day. This was followed by tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisolone for immunosuppression. During the follow-up period, his tacrolimus level was kept within the therapeutic range (5 to 8 ng/ml). He was cytomegalovirus (CMV) negative and had received a kidney from a CMV-negative deceased donor. He had immigrated to the United Kingdom from Bangladesh twenty-five years ago and had last visited there eight years ago. There was no past history of trauma to the knee.
He was started on flucloxacillin and the course was extended for a period of 14 days. In spite of antibiotic therapy, the lesion progressed significantly and reached 5 cm × 5 cm and became cystic in nature. The lesion was confined to the skin and subcutaneous tissue with no deep extension to bone or lymph node involvement. The surface of the lesion had multiple small sinuses showing a dark-brown discharge, which was sent for microscopy.
During this period, he did not show any systemic symptoms and inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein) and his white cell count were both normal. Because of the failure of antibiotic therapy and the fast growing nature of the lesion an incisional biopsy was performed.
Histological examination of the specimen showed marked epidermal hyperplasia and abundant fungal spores with hyphae. The microscopy of the discharge also confirmed the fungal spores and hyphae (fungal grains).
The patient was started provisionally on voriconazole while awaiting confirmation of the causative organism. The large size of the lesion on his knee significantly reduced his quality of life so an excision biopsy was done. The specimen showed marked epidermal hyperplasia with microabscess formation. Within the microabscess, there were PAS (Periodic acid-Schiff) positive branching and septate hyphae . No bacteria were found. The excision margins were clear, and no evidence of the neoplastic process was found.
Nuclear ribosomal repeat-region sequencing confirmed that the causative organism was P. romeroi (Mycology Reference Laboratory, Bristol, UK). An in vitro antifungal susceptibility test demonstrated that P. romeroi was sensitive to voriconazole. Following a successful surgical removal, voriconazole was continued orally for two months under the care of the infectious-disease team. No recurrence was seen during the following six months.