A 44-year-old Japanese man with well-controlled hypertension, and without any history of renal dysfunction or urinary abnormalities presented with a fever and pharyngeal pain. He was first examined at a local clinic, and was prescribed antibiotics for 10 days. He reported facial and leg edema 19 days after the consultation, and was admitted to our hospital. He has been treated for sleep apnea syndrome over the past two years, but had no family history of kidney disease.
On admission, the patient’s body temperature was 36.9 °C, and his blood pressure was 175/109 mmHg. He had edema around his eyes and feet. A chest X-ray, electrocardiography, and abdominal ultrasound were performed, but did not show any apparent abnormalities.
The patient’s initial laboratory test results are summarized in Table . He showed nephritic urinary abnormalities and severe kidney failure (urinary protein 3+, urinary occult blood 3+, serum creatinine 5.46 mg/dL). His CRP (4.05 mg/dL), antistreptolysin-O titer (3440 IU/mL), antistreptokinase titer (40,960 IU/mL) and gamma globulins (IgG/IgA/IgM: 2130/660/50 mg/dL) were increased. His complement C3 level was low (28.8 mg/dL), while C4 level was normal. Autoantibodies, such as the antinuclear antibody, anti–double-stranded DNA antibody, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were undetectable. The rapid antigen test on a throat swab sample demonstrated positivity for group A beta-hemolytic Streptococcus (Streptococcus pyogenes). Urinary pneumococcal (Streptococcus pneumoniae) antigen was negative. Thus, the patient had developed acute nephritic syndrome with severe renal insufficiency following an antecedent pharyngitis with Streptococcus pyogenes after a latent period of approximately 3 weeks, and a clinical diagnosis of severe PSAGN was made.
The patient’s clinical course is summarized in Fig. . Symptomatic treatment was initially performed, but as the patient had a mild fever and high CRP level, 2 g of ceftriaxone was administered every 24 h in consideration of a possible latent infection. Although the patient’s kidney function gradually improved, the severe hematuria continued. Moreover, his hemoglobin level and platelet count decreased. Hemolytic anemia was suspected because his haptoglobin level was less than 10 mg/dL, and LDH was high at 514 IU/L. Hemolytic anemia (Hb: 8.8 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (Plt: 9.2 × 104 μL), and severe renal failure, with minimal abnormalities in coagulation tests suggested a complication of TMA. The plasma level of ADAMTS-13 activity was normal (88%). Stool culture and assays for Shiga-like toxin and an O157 LPS antibody, respectively, were negative. Thus, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli-associated hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) were unlikely. Meanwhile, the direct Coombs test was transiently positive, i.e., it was positive when performed on hospital day 11, whereas that performed on hospital day 21 was negative. A renal biopsy was performed after improvement in the patient’s anemia and thrombocytopenia, after a blood and fresh frozen plasma transfusion on hospital day 18.
Light microscopy analysis of formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue (FFPE) sections of renal biopsy containing 11 glomeruli demonstrated no sclerosis or crescents, but diffuse and global glomerular endocapillary proliferation with massive infiltration of neutrophils was observed . The glomerular massive infiltration of neutrophils was further confirmed by chloroesterase staining . On the other hand, marked infiltration of inflammatory cells (consisted mainly of mononuclear cells without eosinophils) in the tubulointerstitial area, with tubulitis, capillaritis, and interstitial inflammation was observed . Immunofluorescence analysis of fresh frozen tissue sections demonstrated strong glomerular C3 deposition along the capillary walls , but no immunoglobulin or C1q deposition (data not shown). Electron microscopy showed many subepithelial humps .
We also analyzed the presence of NAPlr, a nephritogenic protein isolated from Streptococcus pyogenes, and performed in situ zymography for plasmin activity on serial sections of fresh frozen tissue. NAPlr deposition and associated plasmin activity were observed in glomeruli with a similar staining pattern , supporting the histological diagnosis of PSAGN . Thus, histologically, glomerular lesions of this patient were typical of PSAGN. On the other hand, the severe tubulointerstitial changes that were observed are not the usual histological findings of PSAGN. Therefore, to evaluate the pathogenesis of TMA in a patient with a transiently positive direct Coombs test, we analyzed the FFPE sections of renal biopsy with fluorescein isothiocyanate-labelled peanut lectin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), which is known to have strong and specific binding affinity for T-antigen [, ]. We found the specific binding of peanut lectin to some tubular epithelial cells and vascular endothelial cells in the cortical tubulointerstitial area, whereas such binding was not observed in glomeruli in the same field or in a similar area of a normal control kidney . Furthermore, staining for IgM and T-antigen on serial sections of fresh frozen renal biopsy tissue demonstrated IgM deposition in the T-antigen-exposed sites . In addition, multiple staining for CD3, CD68, peanut lectin, and chloroesterase (a neutrophil marker) on fresh frozen tissue sections revealed massive accumulation of CD3-positive T cells and CD68-positive macrophages around the peanut lectin-positive tubulointerstitial lesions. In contrast, there was minimal infiltration of neutrophils in these area .
The patient began steroid pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (500 mg/day for 3 days) from hospital day 31, followed by oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) before the renal biopsy results were confirmed, because the patient demonstrated severe renal insufficiency and severe hematuria even though active infection was absent and his platelet count had improved. He was well-tolerated for the treatment with few side effects. His serum creatinine level recovered to 2.0 mg/dL. He was discharged from the hospital on day 44 and was followed-up as an outpatient. His complement levels became normal 13 weeks after the onset of symptoms, and his serum creatinine was 1.15 mg/dL with no hematuria or proteinuria at the most recent follow-up.