A male neonate with a birth weight of 2800g, body length of 47cm, and Apgar scores of 9–10-10 was born via cesarean section delivery to a 33-year-old G4P2+1L1 mother at 38+5-week gestation in hospital in a nonconsanguineous marriage with 4000mL of II° meconium-stained amniotic fluid in a tertiary first-class hospital in Chengdu, western China, in 2019.

The mother had a history of one intrauterine fetal loss at 7 months’ gestation for undetermined cause, gave birth to a healthy male infant two years previously, and experienced a spontaneous abortion during her third pregnancy with specific details unavailable. This was her fourth pregnancy, and she underwent routine prenatal examination in the local county-level hospital during the mid-term of pregnancy. Given the history of previous stillbirths, the pregnant woman underwent comprehensive genetic screenings, including thalassemia gene screening, amniocentesis, and examinations of fetal chromosomal number chromosomal aneuploidy, and gene copy number variations at gestational age of 22+5 weeks at the most authoritative hospital in the province. However, all these investigations failed to reveal any abnormalities. At 35+6-week gestation, the local hospital detected a serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level in the pregnant women exceeding 1000 ng/mL. At 36+5-week gestation, upon transferring to our hospital in preparation for delivery, ultrasound revealed mild polyhydramnios (Amniotic fluid index of 33.5 cm.), chorioamniotic membrane separation(CMS), and an enlarged fetal gastric bubble (7.2cm×3.0cm), and the pregnant woman was diagnosed with gestational diabetes (GDM) and suspected fetal digestive tract obstruction by the outpatient obstetrician.

On physical examination, the neonate was found tachypnea (with respiration rate of 55/min) and absence of skin along Blaschko’s lines over the anteromedial aspect of both lower legs almost symmetrically, and also skin absence on the nasal tip, ears, right neck, the right hip, and mucosa absence in the oral cavity, and totally the skin missing covered about 17% of the whole body surface (Roughly, calves, feet, buttocks, and neck accounted for 10%, 3.5%, 2.5%, and 1% respectively), with scattered blisters. The skin and mucous membrane adjacent to these defects appeared “normal” but showed a strongly positive Nikolsky test. Moreover, there was bilateral ear maldevelopment.

Right after the delivery, routine airway sputum suctioning was performed on the neonate. Subsequently, the neonate was transferred to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) laminar flow ward due to extensive skin lesion and pneumonia, placed in reverse isolation in a 34°C temperature-controlled incubator with humidity of 55%, aiming to minimize insensible water loss. The neonate received immediate thermoregulation and total parenteral nutrition, along with vitamin K1 for vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKDB) prevention, analgesia, sedation, and cefuroxime anti-infective treatment. In terms of care, continuous electrocardiographic monitoring, oxygen inhalation, and fasting were initiated promptly.

For skin care, given the extensive abnormal skin area of the patient, to alleviate pain and reduce the duration of dressing changes, we planned an alternate-day dressing change strategy, alternating between the trunk and limbs. The dressing sequence involved moistening and softening, wound cleaning, medication application, covering with petrolatum gauze, non-adherent foam dressing, and self-adhesive elastic bandage wrapping.

The neonatologist requested urgent consultations. Given absence of skin and scattered blisters of the skin, the dermatologist suspected “Bart Syndrome”. A subsequent plain abdominal radiograph was performed and it revealed a large gastric air bubble with no gas distally, indicating PA. Consequently, the pediatric surgeon made a supplementary diagnosis of CPA. After 26 hours and 53 minutes of hospitalization, the neonate’s family decided to discontinue treatment, and the neonate passed away approximately 30 hours after birth. Despite departmental discussions mentioning the possibility of EB and/or ACC in the neonate and proposing the need for pathological and genetic examinations, these planned investigations were not implemented due to the neonate’s short lifespan, lack of family support, and other factors.