A 50-year-old Chinese woman accidentally injured her left thumb at 5 pm, while cutting a fish for dinner. She washed the wound with cold, running water for 1 minute and applied a bandage. However, on the night of the incident, her left thumb became red and swollen, which gradually spread to the left dorsal hand and extended to the forearm within 12 hours after the injury, warranting a visit to the emergency department of local hospital the next morning. The doctor recommended hospitalization for surgery. She refused and came to our hospital for treatment a day after the injury.
During admission, there was significant swelling on the dorsum of the left hand and left forearm, high tension, and severe infection. She had a history of dilated cardiomyopathy, chronic heart failure, atrial fibrillation, and type 2 diabetes. Physical examination on admission showed a temperature of 36.8 °C, pulse rate of 80 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 87/54 mmHg. A linear wound was also observed at approximately 0.5 cm in length at the left thumb interphalangeal joint on the radial side. The skin and soft tissues of the left hand and the left forearm were red and swollen, especially the left dorsal hand extending to the left dorsal forearm. A purple ecchymosis was noted on the skin of the left dorsal hand, accompanied by scattered tiny tension blisters, high skin tension, significant tenderness, slightly above normal skin temperature, and a weak pulse in the ulnar and radial arteries . Emergency laboratory and clinical examinations performed revealed white blood cell count (WBC) of 21.41 × 109/L, N of 92.0%, platelet count (PCT) of 6.72 ng/mL, GLU of 16.4 mmol/L, HbA1c of 8.0%, and BNP > 5002 pg/mL. A standard 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation, while a plain computerized tomography (CT) scan of the left forearm and left hand revealed moderate to severe swollen skin and soft tissue.
Initial diagnosis was skin and soft tissue infection in the left upper limb, dilated cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure (CHF) (grade III cardiac function), atrial fibrillation, postoperative state of cardiac pacemaker implantation, and type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM). Combining the patient’s history of injury, the possibility of infection by aquatic-related bacteria such as Vibrio, Aeromonas, Mycobacterium marinum was considered .
Emergency open decompression was performed on the left upper limb. A longitudinal incision was made to the deep fascial layer, along the most significantly swollen site, to achieve complete tension reduction and drainage . Intraoperatively, a large amount of clear yellow discharge was found in the deep fascia of the dorsal area of the left wrist and hand. We sent the discharge for bacterial culture. The wound was thoroughly flushed with a large amount of hydrogen peroxide, normal saline, and iodophor and then packed and bandaged with iodoform gauze. Postoperatively, we administered antibiotics such as cefoperazone–sulbactam sodium 3 g intravenously twice a day, combined with moxifloxacin 0.4 g once a day. During postoperative change of dressing, we found that the wound infection continued to spread, partly to the second phalanxes, accompanied by skin blackening and tissue necrosis . On the second day after admission, surgical debridement was performed on the left upper limb. Further open decompression and drainage was conducted. During the operation, the viability of fat and tendon tissues was found to be poor and the subcutaneous venous network was scattered and embolized ; therefore, another discharge sample was sent for bacterial culture. The wound was flushed with a large amount of hydrogen peroxide, normal saline, and iodine and then packed and bandaged with iodoform gauze. On the fourth day after admission, the results of bacterial culture were reported as A. veronii and A. ichthiosmia. The drug sensitivity test results showed that the two bacteria were sensitive to cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, and quinolones but resistant to penicillin and carbapenems. Based on the drug sensitivity test results of the bacterial culture, we administered cefoperazone–sulbactam sodium 3 g intravenously twice daily (BID), combined with levofloxacin 0.5 g four times daily (QD). Subsequently, multiple operations to control the wound infection, and further skin grafting to close the wound, were performed. Finally, the patient recovered and was discharged 1 month after the injury. After 3 months of rehabilitation, the left hand recovered well in appearance and function . The patient was very satisfied with our treatment and expressed great gratitude.