A 23-year-old male of South Asian origin with mosaic Klinefelter syndrome was diagnosed with mediastinal non seminomatous GCT (see Fig. for timeline). Initial management was with surgical resection. At this time the full blood count was normal. Histology confirmed complete excision with narrow margins. Four months later he relapsed with rising levels of beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (ß-HCG). He was treated with alternating POMB (vincristine 2 mg IV and methotrexate 300 mg/m2 over 24 h on day 1, bleomycin 15 mg IV over 24 h on days 2 and 3, cisplatin 120 mg/m2 IV over 12 h on day 4) and ACE (dactinomycin 0.5 mg IV on days 1–3, etoposide 100 mg/m2 IV on days 1–3, cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2 IV on day 3) chemotherapy, but due to a severe reaction to cisplatin and a presumed treatment-related cerebrovascular accident, cisplatin was substituted with carboplatin. He completed 2 cycles, resulting in biochemical remission.
Twenty-three months later he developed thrombocytopenia, macrocytic anaemia, and a raised serum lactate dehydrogenase associated with epistaxis, fatigue and backache. Biochemical markers for GCT remained low. Bone marrow (BM) aspirate showed severe dysplastic changes in all three hematopoietic lineages with 6% myeloblasts classifying him as myelodysplastic syndrome with excess blasts-1 (MDS-EB1) . Karyotyping of the BM revealed an abnormal hypotriploid karyotype, with various numerical gains including trisomy 8 and tetrasomy 22, and a single structural abnormality, an isochromosome comprising two copies of the long arm of chromosome 15 .
This was an unusual karyotype for MDS and given the high risk of leukemic transformation, he was planned for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).
Only 2 weeks after the first BM study and during work-up for HSCT, he developed rapidly worsening cytopenias with peripheral blasts. Repeat BM biopsy now showed infiltration with TdT+ CD10+ abnormal B-cell precursors consistent with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with L3 morphology . The cytogenetic study revealed an abnormal male karyotype with a new t(8; 22) (q24;q11) with MYC rearrangement confirmed with FISH, plus other chromosomal abnormalities; a single euploid cell carrying an isochromosome 15 was noted .
He received induction chemotherapy according to the UK-ALL14 trial protocol (complex regimen including cytarabine, daunorubicin, vincristine, dexamethasone, PEG-asparaginase, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide and mercaptopurine) achieving complete morphologic and cytogenetic remission of ALL but with persistent trisomy 8 in 12% of cells examined by FISH. He proceeded to a matched unrelated donor allogeneic HSCT with reduced intensity conditioning with alemtuzumab (10 mg IV daily on days − 7 to − 3), fludarabine (30 mg/m2 IV daily on days − 7 to − 3) and melphalan (140 mg/m2 IV on day − 2) and prophylaxis of graft-versus-host disease with post-transplant methotrexate (8 mg/m2 IV daily on days + 2, + 4 and + 8). Hematological recovery occurred by day + 40. A BM study on day + 71 post-transplant, performed due to new progressive thrombocytopenia, demonstrated complete cytogenetic remission of the ALL clone, and FISH analysis again showed persistence of trisomy 8 in 9% of examined cells.
One week later he developed tonsillitis, worsening thrombocytopenia necessitating frequent platelet transfusions, and severe opiate-refractory bone pains most marked in the right knee. MRI of the knee showed extensive lytic lesions. Severe sepsis and visual impairment resulting from bilateral retinal hemorrhages then developed. BM study now showed 87% infiltration with abnormal erythroblasts and no evidence of abnormal lymphoid precursors. A diagnosis of pure erythroid leukemia was made. Karyotyping of the BM revealed an abnormal hyperdiploid karyotype, with both structural and numerical abnormalities. FISH for the MYC rearrangement remained negative, confirming that this was a new lineage malignancy unrelated to the ALL .
FLAG-IDA chemotherapy (fludarabine 30 mg/m2 IV for 4 days, cytarabine 2 g/m2 IV for 4 days, G-CSF 480 µg from day − 1 until day 5, and idarubicin 10 mg/m2 for 3 days) was administered followed by CD34+ stem cell top-up. The patient declined further inpatient treatment and was discharged on day 11 post-chemotherapy. Unfortunately, he died at home 2 weeks later, 41 months after initial diagnosis of GCT, and 10 months after diagnosis of his first hematologic malignancy.