A 65-year-old woman with a 5-year history of clinical stage IIA (T2N0M0) invasive ductal carcinoma of the left breast was hospitalized for worsening shortness of breath, hemoptysis, and cough since 2 months. Her breast carcinoma was 32 mm in diameter at diagnosis, with a histologic grade of 3 and nuclear grade of 3. Immunostaining for the estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor revealed negativity for both, but the tumor cells were positive for HER2. The patient had received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with four cycles of epirubicin and cyclophosphamide, followed by four cycles of trastuzumab and paclitaxel. A left mastectomy had been performed, and the surgical specimen showed no residual cancer. After the operation, four cycles of trastuzumab had been administered as adjuvant chemotherapy; however, trastuzumab had been discontinued because of heart failure. Echocardiography showed diffuse and moderate impairment of left ventricular contraction and a decrease in ejection fraction from 65.8 % to 36 %. Seven months after stopping trastuzumab administration, a repeat echocardiography revealed that her ejection fraction had recovered. Since then, she had been followed-up without treatment for breast carcinoma until this readmission.
On admission, the patient showed normal auscultation findings. A chest radiograph showed faint infiltrates at the base of both the lungs. Arterial blood gas analysis using room air indicated minimal hypoxemia: pH, 7.42; PaCO2, 42 mmHg; and PaO2, 78 mmHg. D-dimer levels were slightly increased to 1.2 μg/mL (normal, <1.0 μg/mL). Serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and HER2 were elevated to 57.0 μg/L (normal, 0.8–4.8 μg/L) and 64.9 ng/mL (normal, <15.2 ng/mL), respectively. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans revealed peripheral consolidation with ground-glass opacity in both the lower lobes and a heterogeneous mediastinal mass . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography demonstrated increased FDG uptake in the peripheral consolidation and the mass. Echocardiography revealed normal contractions without any finding suggestive of pulmonary hypertension. Because transbronchial lung biopsy did not lead to any diagnosis, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) lung biopsy was performed. The surgical specimens of the peripheral area of the left lower lobe and the mediastinal mass revealed tumor cell embolism, intimal fibrocellular proliferation of small arteries, fibrin thrombi, recanalization, and infarction in the left lower lobe, as well as metastasis to the mediastinal pleura . Immunohistochemical staining of tumor cells revealed positivity for mammaglobin, gross cystic disease fluid protein 15, HER2 (3+), and vascular endothelial growth factor. Accordingly, a diagnosis of recurrent breast cancer with PTTM was made.
Retreatment with trastuzumab therapy rapidly improved the symptoms and CT findings of peripheral consolidation and the mass, resulting in partial remission . After four cycles of trastuzumab therapy, it was stopped owing to heart failure. The patient visited another hospital and is alive more than 2 years after the diagnosis of PTTM.