A 23-year-old male initially presented in our emergency department with symptoms suggestive of angina pectoris. The patient reported the sudden onset of chest pain radiating to the left arm as well as headache 1 day after vaccination with the second dose of the mRNA-1273 (Moderna) COVID-19 vaccine. Dyspnoea, fever, or excessive sweating were denied. Further examination revealed a relevant past-history of perimyocarditis in 2018 and 2019 (possibly post-infectious). The patient was not on medication at the time of presentation.
The clinical examination of the patient was unremarkable. The body temperature recording was 37.5°C. The heart rate on admission was 96 beats/min and the blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg. The oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with mild concave ST-elevations in II, III, and aVF. Laboratory data (see ) revealed leucocytosis, elevated levels of creatine kinase, C-reactive protein, and high-sensitivity troponin I levels. The nasopharyngeal SARS-CoV-2 PCR test was negative, and the patient denied any history of infection with COVID-19. The patient was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) for observation and further clinical management.
The troponin I level peaked on the second day (10.923 μg/L; normal range 0–0.045 μg/L) and NT-proBNP levels showed moderate elevation (1,970 ng/L; normal range 0–125 ng/L). A thoracic CT revealed no obvious pulmonary infiltrates and no evidence of coronary plaques or significant stenoses in the coronaries. An echocardiogram performed in the ICU revealed a moderately reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) with hypokinetic inferolateral and apical segments.
The echocardiographic findings were confirmed using a cardiac MRI (CMR) (3T MAGENTOM SKYRA, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany). Considering the medical history of the patient, images from the CMR scan during the earlier bout of myocarditis were compared to the present . The contrast enhanced images showed comparable subepicardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the lateral and apical myocardial wall during the qualitative assessment. A definitive diagnostic conclusion based on LGE alone could not be drawn due to inter-scanner and inter-study differences. Cine images from the current CMR revealed a dilated left ventricle (end-diastolic diameter-−64 mm) and a moderately reduced LVEF (38%) vs. a mildly reduced LVEF (51%) in the examination 2 years ago. Additionally, in the current CMR, native T1 maps revealed a diffuse increase in relaxation times in all myocardial segments [1,344 ± 74 ms; normal range <1,228 ms (1,181 ± 47 ms) for this 3T machine] . As example, the elevation of T1 mapping indices in the mid-ventricular myocardial inferoseptal segment has been shown in , although there is no evidence of any LGE in this segment. There was evidence of a mild pericardial effusion (3 mm). This could suggest renewed involvement of affected myocardium with spread of acute inflammation in other segments too. These findings support the diagnosis of acute myocarditis according to the updated Lake Louise criteria .
The patient was started on a therapy with Ibuprofen 400 mg (twice daily), beta-blockers (Bisoprolol 2.5 mg once daily) as well as an ACE-Inhibitor (Ramipril 2.5 mg once daily). There was rapid improvement of clinical symptoms and a repeat echocardiogram performed on day 6 showed only a mildly reduced LVEF (52%) thus facilitating a timely discharge. The patient was stable throughout the course of hospital stay and no complications were documented. A follow-up CMR performed after 3 months revealed a markedly improved LVEF (57%). Videos documenting this improvement have been added as . LGE was comparable to the previous studies. T1 mapping indices had normalized (1,194 ms) except for myocardial segments corelating to chronic myocarditis (also evident in past CMR images) .