A 48-year-old white female patient was admitted for workup of chronic pericardial effusion, which was first detected during an episode of pneumonia 3 months earlier, but remained constant despite complete remission of pneumonia after antibiotic treatment. At the time of admission, the patient was in a stable haemodynamic condition, but suffered from progressive dyspnoea on exertion (New York Heart Association Class III).
Lung auscultation on admission revealed diminished breath sounds and dull percussion sounds of the basal right lung. The rest of the physical examination, especially cardiac auscultation was inconspicuous with a regular rate and rhythm, normal heart sounds, and no murmurs. Initial vital parameters and laboratory testing were also normal. Bedside echocardiography demonstrated a large pericardial effusion up to 35 mm with ‘swinging heart’ phenomenon . Left and right ventricular systolic function as well as valvular function was normal. End-diastolic collapse of the right atrium and increased respiratory variation of mitral and tricuspid valve flow velocities have been noticed as indicators of a beginning haemodynamic relevance of the pericardial effusion, but diastolic right ventricle relaxation and vital parameters were not compromised. Because of the chronic setting of the large symptomatic pericardial effusion, pericardiocentesis was performed demonstrating a serous pericardial effusion with low cell count and no evidence of purulence or malignity. Besides the known pericardial effusion, computed tomography (CT) revealed an unclear mass in the pericardial space . The mass was attached to the anterior wall of the left ventricle, measuring 20 × 22 × 8 mm, and demonstrated pronounced peripheral uptake of contrast media. For additional non-invasive tissue characterization cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was performed using a 1.5-T Magnetom Aera (Siemens Medical System). Cine MR images confirmed residual, partially organized pericardial effusion without haemodynamic relevance, as well as the previously described mass , demonstrating isointense signal on T1- and hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images . Most common entities of tumours in this location are pericardial cysts and lipomas, which both could be ruled out by T1- and T2-weighted MR images, fat saturation, and perfusion studies . After administration of gadolinium contrast, CMR first-pass perfusion depicted peripheral perfusion of the mass, suggesting a hypervascular tumour . Late gadolinium enhancement showed intense inhomogeneous signal after 5 min indicating slow blood flow . In regards to the marked arterial perfusion of the mass as well as its proximity to the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and its diagonal branches, coronary angiography was performed. Contrast injection led to a ‘tumour blush’, emphasizing the vascular characteristic of the tumour, and revealed feeding arteries from the LAD .
With the diagnosis of chronic pericardial effusion, as well as an unclear hypervascular and hyperperfused tumour with peripheral contrast uptake on CT and CMR located within the pericardial space in close proximity to the LAD, a decision for open surgical exploration via anterolateral thoracotomy was made by our Heart Team. Intra-operative frozen section was indicative for a benign vascular tumour, most likely a haemangioma. Consequently, the tumour was removed completely and specimens were further evaluated. Histological workup revealed numerous, capillary-type small vessels within a fibro-oedematous background. Staining for CD31 and ETS-related gene (ERG) expression were positive, highlighting endothelial cells. Proliferation rate of less than 5% was assessed using Ki67-staining. Thus, the differential diagnosis of a malignant neoplasm including metastasis, which is much more common than primary pericardial tumours, could be excluded and the final diagnosis of a capillary-type haemangioma of the pericardium was made. After surgery, the patient rapidly improved and at follow-up 6 months after the initial presentation neither the tumour nor the pericardial effusion recurred.