A 63-year-old man admitted to the stroke service at our center presented with the sudden onset of headache, vomiting, and right-sided hemiparesis followed by loss of consciousness (World Federation of Neurological Surgery grade IV). A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed diffuse thick SAH combined with a large right temporal intracerebral hematoma , and a ruptured right middle cerebral artery aneurysm was successfully clipped following extensive hematoma evacuation by emergent surgery performed at 6 hours after SAH onset. The early postoperative course was uneventful, and the neurological deficits disappeared with the exception of mild left hemispatial neglect. He received standard post-SAH fluid and drug management at our institution. On the ninth day after SAH onset, however, he became restless and then developed aphasia and right-sided hemiparesis. Transcranial Doppler (TCD) measurements were compatible with mild left middle cerebral artery (MCA) vasospasm (left MCA peak velocity, 149 cm/s; mean velocity 120 cm/s). Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) imaging performed immediately after the onset of symptoms revealed no apparent ischemic findings , but subsequent technetium 99 m hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime single photon emission CT (Tc-99 m HMPAO SPECT) revealed a mild reduction in rCBF in the left anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and MCA territories ] indicative of clinical deterioration attributable to vasospasm. Hyperdynamic therapy with dobutamine (initial dose: 3 μg/kg/min; increased in 3 μg/kg/min increments every 4 hours to a level at which the deterioration resolved) combined with mild hypervolemia with supplemental low-molecular-weight dextran (500 mL/day) was initiated.
Cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed under local anesthesia via a transfemoral approach since there was no clinical improvement after 2 hours of maximal hemodynamic augmentation with dobutamine (12 μg/kg/min) to raise cardiac output to supranormal plateau level (cardiac index >5.0 L/min/m 2 ), assisted by radial artery waveform-based pulse contour cardiac output monitoring (FloTrac system version 3.02, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). Prior to DSA, transcranial rSO2 was measured by a NIRS cerebral oximetry device (INVOS 5100C, Somanetics, Troy, MI, USA), which was composed of a light-emitting diode and two detectors located 30 and 40 mm from the diode, allowing compensation for NIR absorption from the scalp and the skull to determine rSO2 in the underlying area of the brain. Each of the four-channel sensors (SAFB-SM, Somanetics, Troy, MI, USA) was placed symmetrically on the scalp of the patients at the approximate location overlying the spasm-affected vascular territory and on the mirror--image location in the opposite hemisphere.
DSA revealed severe vasospasm of the distal portion of the A1 segment of the left ACA and of the proximal left A2 and M2 segments and diffuse spasm in their branches . After systemic heparinization, a 5-Fr. guiding catheter was advanced to the cervical portion of the internal carotid artery and a microcatheter was placed at the top of the internal carotid artery, Arrow] and fasudil hydrochloride (25 mg) was infused at a rate of 1.0 mg/mL (consisting of 60 mg of fasudil hydrochloride mixed in 60 mL of normal saline) for distribution into both the ACA and MCA territories, resulting in significant reversal of vasospasm in distal A1 and M1 segments and improvement of cerebral circulation time (as measured by the interval between the first image in which contrast is visible above the supraclinoid internal carotid artery and the peak filling of the cortical parietal veins) from 6.6 to 5.3 seconds. Since focal severe vasospasm still existed in the distal potion of M3 (superior division), superselective infusion of fasudil (25 mg) into the MCA distribution was performed by directing the microcatheter into the distal portion of M1 [, arrow]. Although further dilation could not be obtained in the M3 segment, good angiographic results were obtained in the remaining spastic vessels . Within an hour of completion of the procedure, his symptoms improved.
The intra-arterial fasudil likewise produced improvement of low and fluctuating rSO2 in the left ACA--MCA territory immediately after onset of each infusion[, Ch-1], and the left MCA territory flow then gradually increased following superselective infusion in the distal M1 segment[, Ch-3]. TCD velocities normalized after the procedure (left MCA peak velocity, 132 cm/s; mean velocity 98 cm/s), compatible with angiographic improvement of the M1 vasospasm.
The postprocedural course was uneventful, and the symptoms were managed with hyperdynamic therapy under stable but slightly reduced (< 10%) rSO2 on the left side. However, he developed aphasia and weakness of the right hand with decreased voluntary movements over the course of the next 24-36 hours. TCD velocities consistently remained within normal range, but decreased and unstable rSO2 in the left ACA--MCA territory were detected. Diffusion-weighted MR imaging revealed small hyperintense signals in the left insular cortex and medial frontal cortex . Tc-99 m HMPAO SPECT detected decreased rCBF in the left ACA and MCA territories, in contrast to hyperperfusion observed in the superior trunk of the left MCA territory [b. Recurrent vasospasm in the distal vascular territories, particularly in the left ACA and MCA territories, was strongly suspected and DSA was performed immediately as an additional.
Repeated DSA demonstrated moderate vasospasm of the distal A1 and diffuse vasospasm in the distal ACA and MCA branches as well as persistent focal spasm in the distal potion of the M3 segment . Then intra-arterial fasudil infusions (25 mg/each) were performed again, resulting in improvement of the distal vasospasm and cerebral circulation time[Figure , inset] from 5.8 to 4.9 seconds. In response to intra-arterial fasudil infusions, rSO2 in the left ACA--MCA territory rapidly increased to a level close to that on the contralateral side . The patient's symptoms gradually resolved over the next 72 hours accompanied by maintenance of stable rSO2 values. Cardiac output (> 5.0 L/min/m 2 ), systolic blood pressure (< 180 mmHg), and heart rate (< 130 bpm) were also maintained within each target for hyperdynamic therapy by titration of dobutamine dose and intravenous calcium antagonists. No apparent periprocedural clinical/vital signs or radiological findings of increased intracranial pressure or hemorrhage associated with the intra-arterial fasudil therapy were observed. Follow-up MR angiography on day 14 (corresponding to 3 days after the second endovascular therapy) confirmed improvement of vasospasm . Diffusion-weighted MR imaging revealed no additional ischemic findings after repeated endovascular therapy . Abnormal rCBF distributions in the left hemisphere were also normalized . The patient underwent ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement on day 30 for the treatment of post-SAH normal pressure hydrocephalus , resulting in favorable functional outcome with a modified Rankin Scale score of 1 at 2 months.