33-year-old woman with a history of essential hypertension who is attending a dermatology evaluation for her 15-day-old newborn son due to the recent appearance of non-scaling, erythematous, raised-border, round plaques that began in the retroauricular region 5 days after birth and then spread to the abdomen, posterior trunk and both newborn's inguinal folds. The newborn, born in winter, did not receive phototherapy at any time.

The mother, who had a normal pregnancy with no relevant perinatal history, had no personal or family history of connective tissue disorders.

Due to the high suspicion of neonatal lupus, both the mother and the newborn were examined. The mother presented positive antinuclear antibodies with a titer of 1/1280, a spotted pattern, positive anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies with a titer of 1/20 and positive anti-RO and anti-LA antibodies with values greater than 200 U/ ml. She was evaluated in rheumatology and in a directed questioning she reported a history of fatigue, alopecia, xeroftalmia, acrocyanosis and recurrent non-painful ulcers at the level of the labial mucosa. Physical examination showed malar erythema and reticular livedo outlined on both upper extremities. The diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus with associated Sjogren's syndrome was raised, supported by a Schirmer's test consistent with severe dry eye due to hypolacrimia. Steroidal therapy was initiated with prednisone 20 mg daily for 30 days, then decreasing doses for 8 weeks until discontinuation associated with hydroxychloroquine at doses of 200 and 400 mg on alternate days, with good response and improvement of the general condition. The mother remains stable with her underlying disease and is under rheumatology control to date.

In the newborn examination, an initial electrocardiogram was within normal limits, then a Holter rhythm monitor showed normal atrio-ventricular and intra-ventricular conduction and an echocardiogram showed a patent foramen ovale. In the blood tests, moderate neutropenia (ANC = 620), altered liver tests with mild elevation of transaminases (GOT 95 IU/L and GPT 130 IU/L) and the presence of anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies were noted. Photoprotection was indicated and follow-up was performed with examinations at 2 and 5 months of life that showed recovery of neutropenia, normalization of liver tests and decrease of the anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies. In the dermatological controls, complete regression of the skin lesions was observed at 2 months of follow-up.
