A man in his 50s was transferred by ambulance to a nearby physician because of rupture of gastric varices. At that time, he was diagnosed as having cirrhosis after chronic type B hepatitis and had been followed up with by the physician afterward. He was suspected to have developed HCC based on the imaging examination in December 2014, and he was referred to our hospital in March 2015 for further examination and treatment.
At the time of the first visit, his consciousness was clear, but he had a flapping tremor. He presented with notable conjunctival yellowing. His abdomen was flat and soft without tenderness. Laboratory test results indicated pancytopenia, a prolonged prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, hypoalbuminemia, and jaundice. The result of the indocyanine green retention test was as high as 36.5%. The alpha-fetoprotein level was within the normal range of 2.8 ng/mL, but the protein induced by vitamin K absence/antagonist-II (PIVKA-II) level was as high as 163 mAU/mL. He had cirrhosis after chronic type B hepatitis. The nucleotide analog (entecavir) was already prescribed by the previous physician, and the serological test result was positive for hepatitis B virus DNA . Abdominal dynamic computed tomography (CT) showed that the liver edge was blunt, and the surface was irregular. A 39-mm nodule, which was enhanced in the arterial phase and slightly washed out in the equilibrium phase, was located in segment 8 of the liver. Moreover, prominent splenomegaly, collateral circulation, and a small amount of ascites in the pelvis were confirmed . In gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethilene-triamine-pentaacetic acid-enhanced dynamic magnetic resonance imaging, the 39-mm nodule, which was enhanced in the early phase and had a low signal in the hepatocyte phase, was also observed in segment 8 of the liver. Aside from this tumor, a small nodule measuring 9 mm in diameter showed the same contrast pattern in segment 8 of the liver . CT during arterial portography showed perfusion defects in the 2 HCCs, and CT during arteriography showed hypervascular tumors in the early phase and peripheral enhancement in the late phase, which was consistent with typical HCC contrast patterns . These HCCs were enhanced simultaneously during arteriography of A8, and obvious vascular invasion was not observed . No other lesions suspected of HCC were found in the liver. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed high-risk esophageal varices (Lm, F2, Cb, RC-sign [+]).
On the basis of these findings, we diagnosed the patient as having HCCs (cT3N0M0, clinical stage III) with severe liver damage. Regarding liver damage, the Child-Turcotte-Pugh classification was class C (11 points), and the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score was 16 points, suggesting that he was a candidate for liver transplantation. Although there were 2 HCCs, one of them had a diameter exceeding 3 cm, which deviated from the Milan criteria. When applying the HCC therapy algorithm in Japan to this patient's comprehensive disease condition, only palliative care was recommended. Therefore, to determine treatment other than palliative care, we consulted with a transplant surgeon. As both HCCs were perfused with A8, locoregional therapy could be conducted to downstage HCC and maintain the liver reserve. Moreover, since this patient was relatively young, and his performance status was good, we considered liver transplantation as a curative treatment for HCC and sever liver damage. After confirming the wishes of the patient and his family, we decided to perform TACE following radical liver transplantation. Before these treatments, endoscopic varicocele ligation was performed for the esophageal varices. After confirming the disappearance of varices, lipiodol TACE was performed in segment 8 of the liver with 20 mg of epirubicin and gelatin sponges. There were neither postoperative complications nor changes in the Child-Turcotte-Pugh score. The PIVKA-II level decreased from 163 to 33 mAU/mL after TACE.
Abdominal dynamic CT on day 60 after TACE showed sufficient lipiodol deposition in the 2 HCCs in segment 8, but a tiny lipiodol deposit-free area remained . On the basis of these findings, we determined that the progress of HCCs was successfully downstaged within the Milan criteria, and this patient underwent liver transplantation 110 days after TACE. Surgery was performed using a left lobe graft (graft weight, 298 g; graft-to-standard liver volume ratio, 25.8%). The operative time was 13 h and 53 min, and the bleeding volume was 7,885 mL.
Pathologically, most of the tumor was successfully treated by TACE, except for the small remaining HCC where lipiodol deposition was insufficient. The smaller HCC which was 9 mm before TACE was completed . Postoperatively, hyperbilirubinemia and ascetic accumulation due to small-for-size syndrome were temporarily observed but gradually improved after enlargement of the graft volume. This patient was discharged on day 35 after liver transplantation. Two and half years after transplantation, he remains alive without HCC recurrence or liver deterioration.