Patient: Female, 61-year-old

Final Diagnosis: Dilated cardiomyopathy

Symptoms: Dyspnea on exertion

Medication:—

Clinical Procedure: Medications and CRT

A 61-year-old woman with no medical history was admitted to our hospital in September 2008 for 2 months of progressive dyspnea. She was documented to have decompensated HF with New York Heart Association (NYHA) II functional limitations. She had no history of tobacco smoking, alcohol consumption, or substance abuse. Results of the physical examination were: height, 150 cm; weight, 42 kg; body mass index (BMI), 18.7 kg/m2; blood pressure, 120/66 mmHg; heart rate, 73 beats/min; and oxygen saturation, 94% (room air). Her dyspnea on exertion was class II based on the NYHA classification. On auscultation, a third heart sound (S3) and an apical systolic murmur were detected.

Chest radiography revealed cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusions. ECG showed a sinus rhythm with LBBB and a QRS complex duration of 140 ms. Echocardiography revealed severe LV enlargement with impaired systolic function and an LVEF of 18% (normal range, 55–65%). LV diastolic to systolic dimension (LVDd/LVDs) was 56/48 mm (normal range, 40–55/30–45 mm), and moderate MR was observed. Based on these findings, the patient was admitted with a diagnosis of HF.

Secondary cardiomyopathy associated with autoimmune disease, metabolic disease, and inflammatory disease may show echocardiographic findings similar to DCM. Blood tests results were normal and ruled out these diseases. Coronary angiography was also performed to exclude ischemic cardiomyopathy, and it did not demonstrate significant coronary artery disease. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated LV dilation with an LVEF of 16% and no evidence of abnormal gadolinium enhancement. Thus, no findings were suggestive of secondary cardiomyopathy after these examinations. Along with these results, and based on the 2006 American Heart Association Classification of “Contemporary definitions and classification of the cardiomyopathies,” we reached a final diagnosis of DCM.

Diuretic treatment was initiated (furosemide: 40 mg/day, initially administered via intravenous injection and then orally) in combination with an angiotensin II receptor blocker (candesartan: 4 mg/day) and a β-blocker (carvedilol) for secondary prevention of HF. As the prognostic improvement associated with β-blockers is dose-dependent, the guidelines recommended increasing the dosage in accordance with the tolerance level of the patient. In our case, the carvedilol dosage was increased to 10 mg/day. The use of mineralocorticoid/aldosterone receptor antagonists and a further increase in the carvedilol dosage were not possible because of hypotension. The patient’s HF improved, and she was subsequently discharged.

In October 2009, the patient was readmitted because of HF re-exacerbation, despite ongoing pharmaceutical treatment. Echocardiography revealed an LVEF of 30% and an LVDd/LVDs of 67/54 mm, and ECG indicated a QRS width of 144 ms. We determined that CRT was required; however, the patient refused because of fear of surgery. Hence, pharmaceutical treatment alone was continued. In June 2011, the patient’s HF worsened, and she was readmitted with significant widening of the QRS complex (160 ms), decreased LVEF (27%), and rapidly increased LVDd/LVDs (79/69 mm). In July 2011, she consented to CRT, and a pacemaker (AllureTM, St Jude Medical, MN, USA) was implanted. The placement of the LV leads resulted in a high LV pacing threshold; however, no other positions were feasible because there was no other coronary vein branch wherein the LV lead could be inserted with a good threshold. Immediately after implantation, the LVEF increased and QRS width decreased.

Echocardiography performed in August 2011 revealed significant improvements in both the LVEF (46%) and LV enlargement (LVDd/Ds of 56/43 mm), the QRS width was 124 ms, and we were able to increase the carvedilol dosage to 20 mg/day. Follow-up echocardiography performed in June 2012 confirmed the improvement in the LVEF (65%) and LVDd/LVDs (47/30 mm), revealed QRS width of 136 ms, and showed mild MR.

At this point, due to the high threshold of the LV pacing lead, the remaining battery power was estimated to last less than 1 year; thus, we decided to discontinue biventricular pacing. Although the LBBB persisted, follow-up ECG and echocardiography indicated that the QRS width had not increased (136 ms) and there was no deterioration in MR or LVEF. Therefore, with the patient’s consent, CRT was discontinued in October 2012 to preserve the battery. We changed the mode from DDD to AAI as there was a mild bradycardia, possibly due to the increased β-blocker dose. It was clearly communicated to the patient that CRT would be promptly restarted if there was any sign of HF re-exacerbation; she was carefully monitored for the following 4 years, during which there was no deterioration of cardiac function. Echocardiography and ECG revealed an LVEF of 69%, LVDd/LVDs of 44/27 mm, and a QRS width of 130 ms during follow-up in August 2014, and an LVEF of 60%, LVDd/LVDs of 42/30 mm, and a QRS width of 126 ms in June 2016. The latest follow-up in November 2018 revealed an LVEF of 64%, LVDd/LVDs of 44/30 mm, and a QRS width of 132 ms.

In anticipation of probable cardiac remodeling that could re-exacerbate the HF, and thus require prompt resumption of CRT, a generator exchange surgery was performed in June 2016. At the most recent follow-up in 2020, CRT had not been resumed and the patient’s status remained stable without signs of re-exacerbation.