A healthy 15.2-year-old male arrived at the dental office coming from the Hospital Emergency Unit 18 h after a facial trauma due to a bicycle accident. Intraoral examination revealed avulsion of tooth 11 and an uncomplicated crown fracture of tooth 21 .
The fragment of tooth 21 was discovered inside the swollen and lacerated upper lip. No other oral injury was detected clinically. Examination of the avulsed tooth showed an uncomplicated crown fracture and necrotic periodontal ligament cells due to the prolonged dry storage. After the parents’ informed consent, the root of the avulsed tooth was planed to remove the necrotic periodontal tissue, and was then filled with gutta-percha and sealer after pulpectomy .
The fractured crown was restored with composite resin. A local anaesthetic was administered to remove the contaminated coagulum from the socket prior to pushing back the tooth with a gentle pressure. A functional splinting with an orthodontic 0.014-inch braided stainless steel wire and composite resin was positioned from tooth 13 to tooth 23 and left in place for 3 weeks. Fragment of tooth 21 was not utilized to restore its fractured crown, and a seal against bacterial invasion into its dentinal tubules was created using a dentin bonding agent. The proper positioning of tooth 11 was confirmed with a periapical radiograph. Tetanus prophylaxis was not necessary. A 7-day treatment of systemic amoxicillin (2 g for day) and an analgesic on demand were prescribed at the Hospital Emergency Unit. Finally, strict instructions were given to the patient about soft diet for 1 week and oral hygiene (soft toothbrush after each meal and mouth rinsing twice a day with 0.12 chlorexidine) for the entire splinting period.
The splint was removed 3 weeks later and the fractured crown of tooth 21 was restored with composite resin .
The importance of recall visits was emphasized to the patient and the parents, so the patient was scheduled for a follow-up according to the International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT). Due to the prolonged extra-alveolar dry storage (about 18 h) and the age of the patient, ankylosis and infraocclusion of tooth 11 were expected. A replacement root resorption of the replanted tooth was suspected at the 3-month radiographic control , and dramatically increased later (, , and ); infraocclusion about 1 mm was observed. Due to ankylosis and discoloration of the crown, and an anterior open bite, the patient was encouraged to undergo a comprehensive treatment that he previously always avoided.
Finally, 16 years after the trauma ( and ) the patient was scheduled for an orthodontic and implanto-prosthetic rehabilitation.