A 23-year-old male patient without past medical history presented to the emergency room with recent retrosternal chest tightness and pain. He reported recent gastro-intestinal (GI) symptoms of nausea, vomiting, 4-day watery diarrhea with transient episode of fever (38.7 °C). At admission, physical examination showed an impaired general status. He was afebrile (37.2 °C), respiratory rate 20 per min., cardiac assessment showed blood pressure of 140/70 mmHg, regular tachycardia of 100 beats per minute and normal cardiac murmur. Pulmonary examination showed a respiratory rate of 16 cycles per min, and auscultation was normal. He denied abdominal pain, and palpation showed no tenderness and no liver or spleen enlargement. He reported generalized myalgia but rheumatological evaluation did not show arthritis or productive myalgia. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed left axis deviation with regular sinusal tachycardia. Routine laboratory showed leukocytosis 13 G/L (normal range < 10 G/L), neutrophilia 8.2 G/L (normal range 1.5–7 G/L) and lymphopenia 600/mm3 (normal range 1500 to 4000/mm3) on cell blood count, with elevated C-reactive protein of 130 mg/dL (normal range < 5 mg/dL), serum electrolytes, creatinine and liver enzymes within normal limits. Maximum Troponins and creatine kinase MB (CK-MB) were elevated to 678 ng/L (normal range < 14 ng/L) and 54 ng/mL (normal range < 7 ng/mL). The patient was admitted to the cardiac department for further workup. He was managed symptomatically with analgesics, anti-reflux and fluids. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a preserved ejection fraction (EF) of 55% with normal wall motions, no valvular dysfunction, normal pulmonary pressure and no pericardial effusion. His risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) was low; moreover, clinical, biological and echocardiographic presentation summed the hypothesis of an acute myocarditis. A large etiological workup, including repeated peripheral blood culture, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Coxiella burnetii, Borrelia burgdorferi, Leptospira spp., Rickettsia spp. and Brucella spp., was conducted. The serologies, such as urinary Legionella pneumophila antigen, were negative. Moreover, serologies of RNA viruses (coxsackieviruses A and B, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus) and DNA viruses (adenoviruses, parvovirus B19, cytomegalovirus, human herpes virus-6, Epstein-Barr virus, varicella-zoster virus and herpes simplex virus) were negative. Autoimmune assessment, including antinuclear, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, systemic sclerosis and autoimmune myopathies specific antibodies and converting enzyme assay, were negative. The patient denied any recent drug intake. A Gram stain of specimen stool collected showed multiple curved and spiral Gram-negative rods. Biochemical tests indicated an oxidase, catalase and hippurate negative and indoxyl acetate-positive bacterial species, corresponding to C. jejuni. Stool cultures confirmed the diagnosis of C. jejuni sensitive to macrolides (Azithromycin/Roxithromycin/Clarythromycin) and flouroquinolones (Ciprofloxacin). Continuous telemetry monitoring showed some runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT). Oral bisoprolol 2.5 mg twice daily was started for that, and oral 1 g of Azithromycin was administered. He remained clinically stable over the rest of the hospital course, and the diarrhea was progressively resolved. The patient remained stable, and we could perform cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging. Triple inversion-recovery black-blood T2-weighted STIR sequences showed focal areas of hypersignal in the subepicardium of the posterolateral left ventricular (LV) wall, indicative of myocardial edema . In addition, steady-state-free-precession (SSFP) cine CMR showed early hypersignal in the subepicardium of the posterolateral LV wall immediately after injection of 0.1 mM of Gadolinium chelates, indicating focal hyperemia . Inversion-recovery gradient-echo-based late Gadolinium enhancement techniques, acquired 10 min. after Gadolinium injection, revealed subepicardial nodular lesions of myocardial damage . The final diagnosis of C. jejuni-related acute myocarditis was supported by the Lake Louise criteria . The patient was discharged free of symptoms after one week in hospital. On close follow-up, his C-reactive protein and cardiac enzymes normalized after three weeks. Repeated TTE and 24-h ECG were normal, so bisoprolol was progressively discontinued after 6 months. Control CMR imaging at 3 months showed regression of the focal areas of hyper signal in the sub epicardium of the posterolateral left ventricular (LV) wall.