A 6-year-old girl presented to the pediatric emergency department with the chief complaints of vomiting blood and blood in stool. Her mother reported that she noticed the blood in her daughter’s stool three days ago and her daughter then started vomiting blood and the symptoms became worse dramatically.
The baby was delivered at 34 weeks gestation with cesarean section with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), hospitalized in a neonatal intensive care unit for 1 month and treated with laser photocoagulation due to the vision loss in the left eye. The cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed at the age of 6 months in a pediatrics neurology clinic due to convulsions and it revealed diffuse symmetric calcifications, changes suggesting hemorrhage, dilated lateral ventricles, septated cystic lesions in the area extending from the roof of the third ventricle to the lateral ventricle and also hemorrhage in the globe in left orbit . After further ophthalmoscopic tests, cranial findings and genetic tests, the patient was diagnosed with Coats plus syndrome.
Physical examination of the patient showed that the weight and height were below the 3rd percentile and mid-upper arm circumference <115 mm. The patient was ill-appearing. Her peak heart rate was 120/min and her blood pressure was 70/40 mmHg. Leukocoria and glaucoma were detected in left eye . The patient had hypotonia and her muscle strength in bilateral lower and upper extremities was 3/5. The liver and the spleen were not palpable and the percussion over Traube’s space produced dull sounds during the abdominal examination.
Laboratory test results were: hemoglobin (Hb): 6.5 gr/dL, hematocrit (Hct): 21%, thrombocyte count: 292000/mm3, white blood cell (WBC) count: 2010/mm3, international normalized ratio (INR): 1.3, alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 113 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 115U/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT): 245 U/L, albumin: 3.21 gr/dL. The metabolic studies did not show any abnormalities and the levels of viral markers, alpha 1 antitrypsin, alpha fetoprotein, ceruloplasmin, autoantibody and tissue transglutaminase were normal.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed linear echogenicity and heterogeneity in the liver. Abdominal doppler ultrasonography suggested portal hypertension. An upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed folded vascular appearance reminiscent of esophageal varices, as well as vascular telangiectasia in the pyloric antrum, duodenum and colon . A liver biopsy revealed portal fibrosis.
The patient was initially received nothing-by-mouth diet and intravenous (IV) proton pump inhibitors. The severe gastrointestinal bleeding of the patient was later stopped after receiving IV octreotide and erythrocyte transfusion. The patient kept being treated with propranolol, ursodeoxycholic acid and anticonvulsant. The patient was followed in the pediatric gastroenterology, neurology, and eye clinics. She continued to have intermittent gastrointestinal system bleeding and had severe malnutrition; therefore, the patient was admitted to the emergency department and hospitalized multiple times. The patient was treated with tranexamic acid when she had mild bleeding and received IV octreotide when the bleeding was severe. The patient later was admitted to the intensive care unit due to multi-organ failure secondary to severe gastrointestinal system bleeding, and for that reason an emergency endoscopy could not be performed. She received IV octreotide and erythrocyte transfusion again; however, her condition did not improve, and she eventually died.