A 69-year-old Japanese man presented with pain and a polypoid mass on the lower left gingiva for which he consulted in our hospital. He had received chemoradiotherapy for SCC of the buccal mucosa 15 years prior to this consultation at the age of 54 years. At that time, he had an ulcerative lesion with a reddish and rough surface in the buccal mucosa including the corner of the mouth . The patient was a plasterer, and asbestos exposure was not apparent. He had no relevant medical history, including no history of smoking and alcohol consumption. The lesion was diagnosed as moderately differentiated SCC following a biopsy . Radiological examinations suggested a cancer metastasis in the left submandibular lymph node, and he received chemotherapy with cisplatin (total 110 mg) and 5-fluorouracil (total 2925 mg) via peripheral venous route and concomitant radiotherapy: the primary tumor and neck were irradiated at the dose of 70 Gy, performed in the hospital for 4 months. The treatment resulted in a complete clinical remission of the primary tumor and a complete remission of the neck lesion, which was pathologically confirmed as metastasis composed of nonviable SCC cells (data not shown). No recurrence was detected in subsequent years; however, he developed mandibular osteonecrosis 6 years after chemoradiotherapy and was treated with oral roxithromycin.
On examination at the age of 69 years, his vital signs were within normal ranges. He developed Parkinson’s disease a year before this consultation, and the disease was well controlled with oral levodopa (300 mg/day) and benserazide hydrochloride (85.5 mg/day). He showed trismus; however, he had no other abnormal physical and neurological findings. On intraoral inspection, a polypoid mass measuring 10 mm in diameter was found in the left molar region of the lower gingiva . Its surface was rough and covered by a whitish pseudomembrane. Panoramic radiography showed bone resorption, exhibiting a moth-eaten appearance that involved the base of the mandible . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a soft-tissue mass lesion accompanied by extensive bone resorption of the mandible .
A malignant tumor was suspected, and a biopsy specimen from the polypoid lesion was obtained. The polypoid mass was composed mainly of loose granulation tissue , where atypical spindle or pleomorphic cells were scattered in the fibrin-rich edematous or pale stroma together with neutrophils, lymphocytes, and capillary endothelial cells . The surface of the lesion was mostly ulcerated but partially covered by squamous epithelium with no obvious atypia; only slight nuclear enlargement and disordered basal cell polarity were noted . In the subepithelial tissue, atypical spindle cells were arranged haphazardly and exhibited large, basophilic cytoplasm and bizarre nuclei . Some of them exhibited mitotic figures, some of which were atypical . Neutrophils were frequently incorporated within their cytoplasm , some of which appeared to be degraded with missing nuclei .
Immunohistochemistry revealed that atypical spindle cells were positive for vimentin and α-smooth muscle actin , but not for pan-cytokeratin . No epithelial markers other than p63 were detected . The spindle cells were partially positive for p63 , and most were positive for p53 . Ki-67 staining was observed in approximately half of the cells (data not shown). Furthermore, granular CD68 staining was observed in the cytoplasm . These findings were highly suggestive of a malignancy, and SCSCC and post-irradiation sarcoma were considered in the differential diagnosis, given that the patient had a history of chemoradiotherapy for treating SCC of the buccal mucosa 15 years before.
Although the final diagnosis had not been determined, the patient was admitted to our hospital for surgery. On admission, his height and body weight were 145 cm and 45.7 kg, respectively, and vital signs were within normal range (blood pressure 127/79 mmHg, pulse 68 beats/minute, and body temperature 36.0 °C). Complete blood count showed mild anemia (red blood cells 4.07 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 128 g/L, hematocrit 36.0%, mean corpuscular volume 90.4 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin 31.4 pg, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration 348 g/L, white blood cells 5.49 × 109/L, and platelets 130 × 109/L). The biochemical test results of blood and urine were within normal ranges with the exception of a mild elevation in C-reactive protein (8.7 mg/L), which was presumably caused by the gingival tumor. He underwent hemimandibulectomy pursuant to a clinical diagnosis of a malignant tumor. The postoperative course was uneventful.
The hemimandibulectomy specimen had a protruding tumor that exhibited an ulcerated surface and that measured 23 × 15 mm from the gingiva to buccal mucosa . The location of this tumor was not the same site of the previous tumor. On the cut surface, there was a whitish and solid lesion invading the mandibular bone . Histologically, most of the lesion was composed of conventional SCC, measured 45 × 25 × 15 mm in size, and invaded the mandibular bone extensively . The spindle cells were distributed near the SCC foci, mostly in the remaining polypoid segment . Because the atypical spindle cells were concomitant with the conventional SCC component, we finally diagnosed the lesion as SCSCC. The tumorous spindle cells frequently contained neutrophils within the cytoplasmic vacuoles , forming cell-in-cell figures. Such figures were much rarer in the conventional SCC cells. Intense staining for lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP-1) and cathepsin B, which are both lysosomal markers, were observed around the vacuoles containing the neutrophils . This suggested that such cell-in-cell figures may result from the phagocytosis of neutrophils rather than from emperipolesis. The patient has had no evidence of recurrence 5 years after the surgery.