A 75-year-old man with a history of persisting abdominal pain and mild diarrhoea for three months was referred by a general practitioner to the hospital. During this period the patient observed a weight loss of 2 kg, but did not show any B symptoms. A colonoscopy was performed without pathological findings. A subsequent CT examination of the abdomen showed two separate fat-containing retroperitoneal masses one in the adrenal gland and the second lateral of the psoas muscle inferior to the right kidney, outside the peri-renal adipose tissue. The lesions were separate and had no connecting tissue in between them . To further confirm the obtained CT scan results an MR imaging was performed and showed again a fat-containing lesion in the adrenal gland and a 7 × 5 × 7 cm soft tissue-tumour inferior to the right kidney without invasion of the right kidney, urethra or renal vasculature. Both lesions appeared similar in the CT and MR imaging and were consistent with a well-differentiated liposarcoma . Aware of the fact that a liposarcoma of the adrenal gland is extremely rare, a primary benign and fat containing tumour derived from the adrenal gland itself, such as a lipoma or myelolipoma was considered. Regarding tumour markers, only increased levels of CA 19-9 were detected (81.86 U/ml reference < 37 U/ml, CEA 2.2 μg/l, reference < 5 μg/l). To exclude a neuroendocrinological pathology additional tests were performed but did not reveal any noticeable conspicuities.
Consequently, we assumed a combination of a retroperitoneal liposarcoma and a primary benign, lipomatous tumour of the adrenal gland. Alternatively, the very rare case of the combination of a retroperitoneal liposarcoma and an adrenal liposarcoma was taken into consideration. Therefore, two therapeutic options were considered on these accounts. In the unlikely case of simultaneous liposarcomas an enbloc resection including both masses would be required after pre-treatment. But, in the probable situation of a benign lipomatous primary lesion of the adrenal gland in combination with a retroperitoneal liposarcoma an adrenalectomy with an additive biopsy of the infrarenal mass was decided as the strategy of choice in this individual case.
Concerning this strategy a neoadjuvant radiotherapy followed by radical surgery, preventing the kidney, could have been performed as it has been approved as follows. To perform a neoadjuvant therapy a positive biopsy for sarcoma would be a compulsory prerequisite. Prognostic survival markers for retroperitoneal liposarcomas are the histologic subtype and margin of resection . Response rates to neoadjuvant chemotherapy alone are less than 10% . Preoperative radiation therapy or combined radio-chemotherapy with consecutive radical resection improves survival [,]. Concerning surgery complete resection of the lesion is to be achieved. Extended resection including contiguous organs without pre-treatment is associated with an increased risk without influence on disease specific survival and is therefore considered to be inappropriate .
According to our described strategy, the patient received a laparotomy. As expected, the adrenal tumour appeared well-encapsulated in accordance with a benign lipomatous tumour. Following the above mentioned second option first an adrenalectomy was performed. The rapid section of the adrenal lesion revealed the result of a myelolipoma. Having in mind that both lesions presented morphologically identical in CT and MR imaging and the assessed intraoperatively analogousness of the masses, we resigned a biopsy of the infrarenal tumour and removed it in toto without the kidney. Once more the rapid section revealed a myelolipoma. The final histology described a 4 cm sized and in weight 46 g well-encapsulated myelolipoma of the adrenal gland. Further a 14 cm sized and in weight 250 g well-encapsulated retroperitoneal myelolipoma was determined, without capsule involvement. Both tumours were composed of predominantly mature adipose tissue with mature myeloid elements, allowing the diagnosis of an extra-adrenal and adrenal myelolipoma. Consequently no other treatment than surgery was indicated and has not been performed in this case.
Postoperatively, the patient's recovery was uneventful and he was subsequently discharged.