A 17-year-old girl self-reported nocturia that progressed for half a year. Before being hospitalized, she had noticed foamy urine for 3 weeks. She was admitted following 5 days of nausea and vomiting. Blood tests revealed increased serum creatinine of 18.02 mg/dl, high urea nitrogen, low hemoglobin of 75 g/L, low serum albumin of 28.2 g/L, and severely increased parathyroid hormone (PTH) of 606.0 pg/ml. A lipid panel blood test revealed that the levels of triglyceride (TG), total cholesterol (TC), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) were normal, and the level of very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) was decreased a bit. A urine analysis showed an increased level of proteinuria of 10.85/L/day, a positive result of a hematuria blood test, and a high level of pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (>9,000 pg/ml). In the meantime, there was no significant change in her weight. She did not has mental development delay. Ultrasonography revealed the reduced size of bilateral kidneys with hyperechoic reflections inside the renal parenchyma. A kidney biopsy was offered, but it was refused by her parents. Echocardiography indicated small accumulations of pericardial fluid, the mildly regurgitant tricuspid valve, and a slightly enlarged left ventricle. The primary diagnoses were NS, CKD5, renal anemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism. After admission, the hemodialysis was initiated in 48 h and continued for 4 months. Then, the patient received an allogeneic kidney transplant from her father.
The patient was the third child of phenotypically normal Chinese parents. The other two siblings were healthy and proteinuria was not found . Her parents did not have consanguineous relation and family history was not remarkable. She was naturally conceived with an uneventful perinatal period. She was born at term at 40 weeks of gestational age. Based on the fact that disease-causing gene variants have been identified in adolescents with idiopathic NS, genetic screening in the patient’s family for inherited diseases was recommended.
The patient and her parents signed informed consent for genetic analysis. Our legal ethics committee approved this genetic study. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood of the patient and phenotypically normal parents for WES. Sanger sequencing was used for further verification. We identified a de novo heterozygous missense variant c.494C > T in the ACTN4 gene (NM_004924.6). This variant has not been registered in population databases (1,000 Genomes Project, gnomAD, and dbSNP) or reported in disease databases (ClinVar, Human Gene Mutation Database, OMIM).
A cosegregation analysis was performed among family members. This variant was de novo and verified by Sanger sequencing . Silico predictive algorithms (SIFT, PolyPhen-2, REVEL, MutPred, MutationTaster, PROVEAN, and MVP) of pathogenicity all showed damage. The analysis of conserved sequences suggested this variant was located in highly conserved sequences across several mammalian species . The variant c.494C > T (p.A165V) was located in a critical and well-established functional domain (the calponin-homology domain of ACTN4 protein) without benign variants . Summing up the above, according to the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) for interpreting sequence variants, the novel missense variant was pathogenic (PS2 + PM1 + PM2 + PP3 + PP4).
DynaMut (a web server) is a well-established normal mode approach. We used it to visualize and assess the stability and interatomic interactions of mutant proteins. We put information into DynaMut as follows: wild-type structure (PDB accession code: ), mutation detail (A165V and chain A). The prediction outcome of stability was ΔΔG: −0.087 kcal/mol (destabilizing). In comparison with p.A165V, we put p.G195D into DynaMut. The prediction outcome of stability of p.G195D was ΔΔG: −1.349 kcal/mol (destabilizing). The residues 165 and 195 in the wild-type were observed to form residue interactions (colored in light green) with their surrounding residues, whereas some interactions were seen to be increased in mutant sites (p.A165V and p.G195D) .