The patient was a 67-year-old man experiencing abdominal distension since September 2006. In October 2006, the abdominal fullness became progressive, and he had hard general fatigue. There was no history of vomiting, fever, or gastrointestinal bleeding. Renal failure occurred due to diabetes mellitus (DM). On admission in November 2006, a physical examination revealed a 25 × 30 cm hard mass that was palpable in the middle and lower left abdomen minimal intrinsic mobility and massive ascites.
An upper gastrointestinal barium study and gastric endoscopic examination indicated no anomalies. Tumor findings of Doppler ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic lesion with a hypervascular area . An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a huge heterogeneous mass sized 20 × 25 cm extending from the greater curvature of the middle body of the stomach . Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, and almost the entire abdominal cavity was visualized in the coronal view. The irregular wall of the lesion exhibited a low intensity signal on the T1-weihted image and a high-intensity signal on the T2-weighted image .
Routine biochemical investigation revealed hypoalbuminemia, renal dysfunction, and hyperglycemia. Since the admitted patient was diagnosed with DIC (platelet count: 2000 mm3, FDP: 135.4 μg/ml, PT: 1.20, SIRS score: over 3 heads) surgery could not be performed. The patient received a platelet transfusion of 20 units each day 6 times, and the DIC was treated with nafamostat mesilate and fresh-frozen plasma. Due to this treatment, the platelet count recovered to 7.0 × 104; tumor resection was performed at 16 days after admission. Laparotomy revealed a huge extraluminal tumor arising from the greater curvature of the stomach that measured 25 × 30 cm and had not ruptured into the peritoneal cavity or infiltrated other organs . An attaching pedicle approximately 3 cm in breadth was observed in the greater curvature of middle body of the stomach. Partial gastric resection was performed .
The resected mass measured 25 × 25 × 20 cm. In cross section, the tumor appeared hard and homogenous with a small polycystic area . Histopathology of the resected specimen showed large spindle cell GIST with >5/50 HPF (high-power field) mitotic activity . No evidence of infiltration was observed in the resected margins of the stomach wall. Immunohistochemical staining was strongly positive for CD34 and CD117 , and negative for α-SMA, S-100 and Desmin.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the coagulopathy improved rapidly. The patient was carefully followed up regularly. Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec™/Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland) was administered orally 300 mg per day because the patient displayed renal dysfunction (serum creatinine: 3.98, blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 41.5)