We present the case of a 57 year-old woman on follow-up in primary care for a four-year history of mild hyperkalemia [range 5.3–5.9 mmol/L (reference range: 3.5–5.1 mmol/L)] without associated hemolysis (spectrophotometric hemolysis index <6 mg/dL in all laboratory reports). The patient did not exhibit any associated signs or symptoms. Control electrocardiograms were normal, without significant findings. Her medical history included arterial hypertension, adequately controlled with ACE inhibitors. In this context, the patient was referred to the Unit of Nephrology for further examination.
Anamnesis and physical examination did not reveal any data of interest. The patient was receiving amlodipine for arterial hypertension, with good control. Control electrocardiogram was normal. A potassium-low diet and control laboratory analysis in three months were indicated. Three months later, a control blood analysis was performed. The laboratory received a sample of serum and a request for determination of potassium alone. The sample was not hemolyzed (hemolysis index <6 mg/dL) and showed mild hyperkalemia of 5.5 mmol/L. Once pre-analytical and drug-related causes were excluded, differential diagnosis was performed, including:Hyperkalemia secondary to renal insufficiency. Hyperkalemia secondary to intravascular hemolysis. Hyperkalemia secondary to acidosis. Hyperkalemia secondary to tissue breakdown (rhabdomyolysis). Pseudohyperkalemia secondary to oncohematologic disease (essential thrombocytosis, acute or chronic leukemia).
For differential diagnosis in the laboratory, blood was drawn at the hospital and sent to the laboratory with the following tests request: Hemogram including reticulocytes and blood smear. General biochemistry including ions, hemolysis index, hepatic profile (GOT, GPT, GGT, LDH, and ALP), renal profile (creatinine, urea, and estimated glomerular filtration rate CKD-EPI), creatine kinase, haptoglobin, phosphocalcic, and iron metabolism (iron, transferrin saturation index, transferrin, and ferritin). Venous gasometry: Blood gas test is immediately performed with a pH of 7.39 (range of reference 7.35–7.45). 24-urine biochemistry.
An EDTA sample was sent to obtain a hemogram and a lithium heparin sample for biochemistry. Smear was normal, without morphological alterations. All parameters in the hemogram were within normal range, with 1.55% reticulocytes (range of reference: 0.9–2.6%). Oncohematologic diseases were excluded by differential diagnosis.
The only finding on general biochemistry was cholesterol 248 mg/dL (range of reference: <200 mg/dL), with potassium 3.98 mmol/L (range of reference in plasma: 3.4–4.5 mmol/L), creatinine 0.86 mg/dL (range of reference: 0.51–0.95 mg/dL), and haptoglobin 39 mg/dL (range of reference: 30–200 mg/dL), and a hemolysis index <6 mg/dL. PCR, CK, hepatic profile and other parameters were within normal range. Laboratory analysis excluded hyperkalemia, due to the absence of renal insufficiency or data of cellular lysis or signs of intravascular hemolysis. Urine biochemistry was normal, with all parameters within normal range.
Once all potential causes were excluded by differential diagnosis, and in the absence of elevated potassium levels, a possible case of familial pseudohyperkalemia was considered. Three lithium heparin tubes were collected at the hospital for incubation at different time points and temperatures: Two aliquots for incubation at 4 °C for 2 and 4 h, respectively. This simulated transport conditions from the primary care center to the laboratory, since samples are transported at 4 °C for a mean of 3 h. Two aliquots for incubation at 25 °C for 2 and 4 h, respectively. This simulates transport conditions from the room where blood is drawn to the laboratory, since samples are transported at room temperature for a mean of 3 h. Two aliquots for incubation at 37 °C for 2 and 4 h, respectively. This simulates in vivo conditions.
Uncentrifuged samples were received for analysis. Centrifugation was performed after the incubation period was completed (results shown in ). In parallel, a negative control was performed (Results shown in ).