A 76-year-old-male presented to his General Practitioner (GP) complaining of right-sided abdominal pain that had been ongoing for more than 4 weeks. His medical background was significant for hypercholesteraemia and a long history of pipe-smoking. His medications are limited to oral atorvastatin 20 mg once daily. He was referred to the endoscopy unit to undergo colonoscopy. During the procedure, a polypoid lesion was noted to be protruding from the appendiceal orifice. There was clinical concern that it represented an adenomatous polyp or malignancy therefore biopsies were taken. Due to its location, it was not feasible to endoscopically remove the lesion. Biopsies demonstrated benign colonic tissue only. A Computed Tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated dilatation of the appendiceal orifice of more than 2 cm, a thickened irregular appearing appendix and an irregular soft tissue nodule measuring 1.2 cm adjacent to the tip and abutting the bladder. His laboratory tests were within the normal range. The case was discussed at the weekly multi-disciplinary team meeting. Given the unusual overall endoscopic and imaging findings where the concern was for a malignant process, in addition to the patient's symptoms the decision was made to perform a laparoscopic right hemicolectomy by a consultant colorectal surgeon. At surgery the appendix mass was densely adherent to the bladder peritoneum and was carefully dissected free.
The microscopic examination confirmed an overall double lumen in the appendix, furthermore the separate nodule that was attached the tip of the appendix represented a further nodule of appendiceal tissue (, ). Special stains showed a thickened fibrotic wall but there was no infiltration of the wall by a pathological process, e.g. amyloid. No mass was identified to suggest an intussusception of the appendix. The histological features confirmed two separate lumens. Moreover, the separate nodule of appendiceal tissue was thought to represent autoamputation of the tip but no faecal material was present to suggest it was previously intact with the main appendix. It may represent a developmental anomaly.
The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on day ten and was able to return to his normal living activities at his 4-week and 2-month clinic review.