A 38-year-old Sri Lankan female presented with sudden onset severe right side headache and vomiting. At the same time she developed right-sided complete ptosis and ophthlamoplegia. The headache and vomiting lasted for one day, but the ptosis and ophthalmoplegia persisted. She did not have a history of diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia or any connective tissue disorder.
On examination she had complete ptosis, ophthalmoplegia and a fixed dilated pupil (5 mm) on the right side. Direct and consensual light reflexes were absent on the same side. Vision and fundoscopic examination was normal. Left eye was normal with full eye movements and light reflexes. Other cranial nerves including sensory component of the trigeminal nerve were normal. She did not have scalp tenderness or tenderness over the superficial temporal artery. Upper limbs and lower limbs were neurologically normal and she did not have any cerebellar signs. Brachial pulse was decreased on the right side compared to left side. Blood pressure on the right arm was 90/ 60 mmHg and on the left arm it was 120/ 80 mmHg. She had bruit over right subclavian and carotid arteries. Rest of the cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examination was normal. She did not have features of Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome or manifestations of connective tissue disorder.
Noncontract CT brain was done soon after the admission and was normal. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis, performed on day 2 to exclude a subarachnoid heamorrhage, was normal with absent cells, normal protein level and did not reveal xanthochromia. CT cerebral angiogram done on day 4 revealed generalized caliber reduction of right ICA. MRI done on day 23 showed significantly narrowed right ICA. Dissection of the right ICA was noted in the cavernous sinus, with a false lumen of 1.5 × 1 cm, which was thrombosed . The thrombosed lumen was of intermediate signal intensity in T1, T2 and Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images and did not enhance with contrast. This was compressing the right cavernous sinus. Multiple focal T2 and FLAIR hyper intensities with partially restricted diffusion, suggestive of acute infarcts, were also seen in the right parietal lobe . Following this we performed a cerebral digital subtraction angiogram, which showed total occlusion of the right ICA from its origin . Blood supply to the right middle cerebral artery was maintained via the anterior communicating and the posterior communicating arteries. Aneurysmal dilation and stenosis were also evident at the right proximal subclavian artery . The CT angiogram also revealed aneurismal dilatation (20 × 11 mm) and stenosis of the first part of the right subclavian artery . Tapering of the distal part of the right carotid bulb at the origin of the right ICA was seen and was suggestive of right ICA dissection with thrombosis. Rest of the angiogram was normal . Florescent angiogram of the retina was normal.
Full blood count showed neutrophil leukocytosis with low hemoglobin and normochromic normocytic anemia was seen in the blood picture . Liver function tests revealed low albumin with normal liver enzyme levels . Serum creatinine was 150 μmol/L (eGFR using MDRD = 35.8 ml/min/ 1.73m2) on admission and later came down to 100 μmol/L (eGFR using MDRD = 57.2 ml/min/73m2). Urine full report was normal and ultrasound revealed the kidney sizes to be 8.9 cm on the right and 8.7 cm on the left. Ionized calcium was 1.11 mmol/L (1.0–1.3) and phosphorus was 1.0 mmol / L (0.8–1.5). ESR was persistently high (130 mm in the first hour) and CRP was 95 mg/L, which later came down to 7 mg/L. She was negative for HIV serology and VDRL was non reactive. Mantoux test was negative and the chest x ray was normal. ANA, p-ANCA, c-ANCA and hepatitis B and C serology were negative. Fasting blood sugar, HbA1C, thyroid function tests and lipid profile were within normal range. Bilateral cervical ribs were noted in chest x-ray and in cervical x- ray.
Takayasu arteritis was diagnosed and she was started on high dose of prednisolone. (1 mg/kg). Aspirin was also started. Because of critical cerebral artery complication neurosurgical and vascular surgical opinion was taken. As the patient did not have any further neurological events and because of limited facilities available, no surgical intervention was planned. After 2 weeks of steroids her ESR came down to 50 mm in the first hour and after one month ESR was 30 mm in the first hour. Patient’s ophthalmoplegia and ptosis remained the same and we started to tail off steroids gradually and added azathioprine as a steroid-sparing agent. The difference between right and left brachial pulses reduced and the right arm blood pressure increased. She did not have any further vascular events and a follow up angiogram was planned in six months time. Authors followed the CARE guidelines when writing this case report.