An 85-year-old male, who had been able to walk with a wheeled walker and had no definitive cognitive problem, was admitted to our hospital because of mild disturbance of consciousness and right hemiparesis. He had no history of head trauma but had been taking oral antiplatelet agent for previous ischemic heart disease. Computed tomography (CT) revealed left CSDH with moderate rightward midline shift [, left]. Emergency irrigation and drainage through a left frontal burr hole was performed under local anesthesia. Thick outer membrane was observed during the operation. After removal of the hematoma with irrigation [, right], a drainage tube was placed posteriorly. His symptoms disappeared immediately and he was discharged after 12 days. He visited our hospital again because of headache and mild right hemiparesis 8 days after the discharge. CT revealed recurrence of the CSDH [, left]. Second irrigation and drainage was performed similar to the first operation. His symptoms improved, however, he was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital because of general muscle weakness 37 days after the surgery. The oral antiplatelet medication was stopped after the second surgery. Fifteen days after the transfer, he was admitted to our hospital again because of right hemiparesis. CT showed recurrent CSDH [, right], and hence we considered applying middle meningeal artery (MMA) embolization to him. However, because his previous imaging studies revealed severe arteriosclerosis, we abandoned the procedure. Instead, we performed third irrigation and drainage through the same burr hole. The hematoma cavity was irrigated with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The right hemiparesis disappeared after the surgery. The patient was admitted to observe any recurrence of CSDH as well as for rehabilitation. Twenty-seven days after the third surgery, he suffered gait disturbance, and CT revealed recurrent CSDH [ left]. Fourth irrigation and drainage through another burr hole on the left parietal convexity was performed. The drain was placed anteriorly to reduce postoperative air collection [, right]. Unfortunately, the CSDH recurred with mild right hemiparesis after 9 days [, left].
Fifth surgery was supplemented by a simple noninvasive treatment, fibrin glue injection into the hematoma cavity through the drainage tube. Fifth irrigation and drainage through the former parietal burr hole was performed, the hematoma was removed and the cavity thoroughly irrigated, and then a drainage tube was placed anteriorly toward the frontal tip, minimizing the hematoma cavity. On the following day, CT confirmed the collapsed hematoma cavity with minimum air collection [, right]. After obtaining informed consent, fibrin glue was injected through the drainage tube. The patient was placed in the left lateral position so that the affected side was lower. First, 12 ml of the residual hematoma was carefully evacuated through the drainage tube. Then, 5 ml of solution A of fibrin glue (Beriplast® P Combi-Set, Aventis Behring GmbH) was injected through the drainage tube and flushed with a few ml of saline, and subsequently 5 ml of solution B was injected. Finally, the drainage tube was slowly pulled away during flushing with a few ml of saline . No harmful event occurred during and after the procedure. CSDH did not recur after the procedure and the patient was discharged. No further recurrence was confirmed in 6 months after the treatment , and the patient has been free from symptoms for over 2 years.