A 74-year-old male was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of esophageal cancer. The patient had no symptoms with normal temperature at the time of admission. His past medical history included diabetes mellitus for 24 years. He underwent endoscopic submucosal dissection for early gastric cancer 4 years ago and video-assisted thoracic surgery for pulmonary adenocarcinoma in the right upper lobe 5 years ago. He occupation was making metal molds. He was ex-smoker: Brinkman index was 980. Laboratory studies showed white blood cells of 10.0 × 103/L, C-reactive protein of 6.07 mg/dL, hemoglobin A1c test of 8.8%, fasting blood sugar of 237 mg/dL on admission. Serum tumor markers, including CEA, CA19–9, SCC, CYFRA, were unremarkable. He underwent esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy for follow-up after endoscopic submucosal dissection for early gastric cancer. The upper endoscopy showed a 0-IIa lesion with relatively large granular nodules on the lower thoracic esophagus . The pathologic assessment of the biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. The esophageal 0-IIa lesion with relatively large granular nodules let us consider the depth of esophageal cancer was deeper than M3/SM1. Chest X-Ray was normal, however, chest CT revealed a 1.3 cm × 0.9 cm pulmonary mass in the lower lobe of the right lung a month before admission . PET/CT showed the pulmonary mass had maximal standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 3.88 (arrow) and part of the lower thoracic esophagus had SUVmax of 2.37 (arrowhead) 2 weeks before admission . Because the image of pulmonary mass had not changed between CT and PET/CT for 2 weeks and because he had no fever, even though he had inflammation reaction on laboratory studies, pulmonary mass was considered to be unlikely due to infection. Thus, he was initially diagnosed with esophageal cancer with a pulmonary metastasis or recurrence of a pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Considering the both possibilities, we started chemotherapy with cisplatin (CDDP) 70 mg/m2 day1 plus 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 700 mg/m2 day1–4 on the day 4 after admission. On the day 8, CT revealed a slight pleural effusion in the right side . On the day 9, to rule out carcinomatous pleurisy, an ultrasound-guided aspiration of pleural effusion was performed. The effusion was serous and contained no malignant cells. After the aspiration, the patient got a high fever. Laboratory test showed white blood cells of 18.6 × 103/L (90.8% of Neutrophil), CRP of 25.87 mg/dL. Considering that fever was due to respiratory infection after the aspiration, intravenous Sulbactam/Ampicillin (6 g/day) was administered. On the day14, his fever was persistent and he also had a cough. Because CT revealed an increased amount of pleural effusion , we considered the mass was lung abscess. By the second ultrasound-guided aspiration of the pleural effusion, we got a 50 ml of white suppurative effusion. The effusion turned out to contain Actinomyces israelii , and proved pulmonary mass-like lesion was pulmonary actinomycosis. The patient received intravenous penicillin G (24 million units/day) for 4 weeks, followed by oral amoxicillin 2250 mg/day for 6 months. The patient received four courses of chemotherapy (CDDP/5-FU) and curative radiotherapy (1.8Gy/total 50.4Gy) as esophageal cancer deeper than M3/SM1. The pulmonary actinomycosis disappeared six months after the treatment with antibiotics . After the chemoradiation therapy without any complications, the esophageal cancer was in complete remission.