An 83-year-old Taiwanese woman found a palpable mass in her right breast for 1 year. The lesion was approximately 1cm in greatest dimension last year and had got larger in the past 6 months. She had a history of type AB thymoma and was treated with complete tumor resection 10 years ago. The thymoma was 15cm in greatest dimension, encapsulated with focal pericardial adhesion and without pericapsular invasion . A mammography revealed a well-defined hypoechoic oval mass in 10 o'clock direction and 3.0cm away from her nipple, occupying the whole thickness of her breast, and measuring 4.0×3.2×2.6cm in size . A tumor excision was performed.
The specimen consisted of a piece of breast tissue partially occupied by an oval encapsulated mass that measured 5.0×3.8×3.5cm in size, with focal artificial disruption. The cut surface of the tumor was tan red and the focal was light yellowish. The tumor consistency was soft and fragile. On microscopic examination, the well-encapsulated tumor was composed of neoplastic cells arranged in solid sheets, vague fascicles or ribbons and few rosettes without lumen, and admixed with variable amounts of lymphocytes . The neoplastic cells set in the lymphocyte-rich background were oval, polygonal or short fusiform, and had small round-to-oval nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli . The spindle tumor cells were mainly seen in the lymphocyte-poor area. The two groups of neoplastic cells either separated with a discrete border or were intermixed together. Mild nuclear atypia was occasionally seen. Mitoses were scanty. Some aggregates of histiocytes and few dilating and mildly branching thin-walled vessels were also found. The neoplastic cells were diffusely positive for cytokeratin , partially positive for vimentin and smooth muscle actin, mostly positive for p63, and focally immunoreactive with epithelial membrane antigen. A few tumor cells were also positive for CD20 . Some spindle neoplastic cells were surrounded by collagen IV deposition. The tumor cells were negative for CD21 and CD34. The lymphocytes were positive for CD3, CD5, CD1a, and CD99 . Few scattered individual and small groups of interdigitating reticulum cells were seen by S-100 protein staining. From these features and past history, we diagnosed this tumor as a metastatic type AB thymoma to the breast.