On 3rd November 2009, the first MCGR was implanted in a 5-year-old girl with Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (type VI). This patient was born with generalized hypotonia and a flail right upper limb. She had a curve of 58.5 degrees at T1–9 and 72.8 degrees at T9-L4 with a single MCGR anchored at T3–4 and L3–4 . An extra short rod was placed on the other side to facilitate any additional MCGR without changing the foundation. At postoperative 13 months, the MCGR failed to distract between lengthening episodes due to unrestricted turning of the internal magnet. The rod returned to the pre-distraction state at follow-up indicating a loss of distraction. The unrestricted turning was observed through internal testing by the developer. There was increasing truncal shift and shoulder elevation. An external magnet was placed outside the skin to prevent the magnet from turning back . The rod was redesigned with an internal keeper plate added to prevent further loss of distraction . The overall balance was suboptimal and after the rod was used up, she developed proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) as well as a “crooked rod sign” .
At 9-years-old, a set of dual MCGRs with the new design were inserted with extension proximally to C7-T1. Her spinal balance improved and distractions continued. She subsequently developed adding-on below . At 15-years-old, the rods failed to distract with frequent rotor stalling. A “crooked rod sign” was again observed on radiographs . No further distractions were possible. Autofusion was also observed in the lumbar spine. Final fusion surgery was performed from C7-L4 leaving a residual tilt below to avoid fusion to the pelvis as she was a candidate for the para-Olympics table tennis team and we wanted to maintain mobility. Gross metallosis observed around the actuator and extendable portion of the rod was debrided .
The rods were extracted for visual inspection, X-ray examination and dissection . On the external appearance, from the anteroposterior (AP) view, the two MCGRs were aligned. However, from the lateral view, the piston rod in the left MCGR showed a “crooked rod sign” close to the barrel opening. Dissection of the left rod revealed that the “crooked rod” radiographic sign was caused by fracture of the stud close to the barrel opening . The rotor and stud could not drive the piston rod to extend due to this complete material failure. Part of the stud remained inside of the piston rod and the fracture site could have repetitive frictions caused by rod stalling during distraction sessions with magnet rotation. Corrosion could be seen at the stud fracture site and the barrel opening of the sleeve portion .
Additionally, the debris from inside of the sleeve was collected on petri dishes and observed under light microscopy . Morphologically, wear particles were seen for the left rod with fracture , whereas for the right rod, the debris was larger and had the appearance of screw thread tracks . The concentrations of elements (mg/kg) in the sample were measured by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometers (ICP-OES; Agilent 700 Series; Agilent Technologies, Inc.; US). The testing process followed the instructions from the manufacturer . The ICP-OES revealed the elements from the debris contained both metal wear particles (Titanium, Aluminum, Vanadium, Neodymium) and human tissues (Calcium, Phosphate, Potassium, Sulfur, Sodium) . For the left rod there was predominantly metal particles, whereas for the right rod, elements from human tissues were increased.
The patient is now more than 2 years after the final fusion surgery with maintenance of the Cobb angle correction. The overall balance remains unchanged without any loosening of the implant.