A 70-year-old female patient with a medical history of fibromyalgia, dystonia, and Sjogren’s disease, presented to our outpatient department complaining of unilateral right wrist joint pain with limited ROM, which worsened over several months. She reported tenderness over the scaphoid. Her active ROM was limited to 20° of dorsal flexion and 10° of palmar flexion, ROM stiffness was observed upon passive movement. A contralateral examination of the left wrist was unremarkable. Her symptoms began two years prior after sustaining a forceful dorsal impact to the wrist. She reported no pain and an intact range of motion before that injury. Initial radiographs did not demonstrate any acute fractures or other abnormalities. The patient was treated nonoperatively with non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs) and physiotherapy.

At follow-up one year later, the patient had mild improvement in symptoms, but pain persisted. Interval radiographs and computerized tomography (CT) were suggestive of arthritis and sclerosis at the proximal pole of the scaphoid. The scapholunate (SL) and lunotriquetral (LT) joint spaces were not altered. No acute or residual fractures were identified.

In retrospect, a CT scan revealed a subchondral crescent sign on the scaphoid, suggesting impending articular collapse due to osteonecrosis. The patient continued with non-operative management.

At two-years of follow-up, wrist pain had not improved. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and repeat radiographs demonstrated diffused altered marrow signals in the scaphoid, which were suggestive of AVN. There was marked flattening of the scaphoid with collapse of the cancellous bone. Once again, no evidence of a fracture was appreciated. The presence of AVN, associated pain, and worsening symptoms were indications for surgical management.

The patient was consented for proximal row carpectomy. The wrist joint was accessed by a minimally invasive dorsal approach over the fourth extensor compartment with preservation of the retinaculum. The scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum bones were excised. A neo-articulation between the capitate and lunate fossa of the radius was created. The scaphoid was excised en-bloc and was collapsed and flattened proximally with evidence of fragmentation, but no fracture.

Cross-section histological analysis of the scaphoid demonstrated diffuse AVN, suggestive of Preiser’s disease. These findings were supported by intramedullary fat necrosis of the bone with resulting acellular bone trabeculae. Histology further examined the cross sections of the scaphoid bone and discovered the presence of marrow fibrosis.

For histological analysis, the specimen was placed in 10% buffered formalin for a minimum of 24 h after the operation. Following fixation, the samples were placed in an adequate volume of demineralization solution (Cal-ExTM Decalcifying Fluid, Fisher ChemicalTM) and subsequently checked daily by a histotechnologist until deemed adequately demineralized for routine tissue processing, paraffin embedding, microtomy, and hematoxylin and eosin staining.

Postoperatively, the patient experienced pain relief and improved wrist function. Wrist range of motion was still limited, but improved to injury baseline, and hand therapy was recommended.

The Herbert and Lanzetta grading scale [9] is used to assess the four stages of Preiser’s disease, beginning with density (sclerotic) changes to the proximal pole of the scaphoid, to complete collapse of the carpal bones with osteoarthritis: Stage I – Normal radiograph and CT, may show MRI signal change; Stage II – Increased sclerotic density of proximal pole of scaphoid; Stage III – Fragmentation of proximal pole of scaphoid without pathologic fracture; Stage IV – Carpal collapse with osteoarthritis. MRI signal changes can be further graded using the Kalainov criteria, whereby Type I and II are differentiated by complete or incomplete necrosis of the scaphoid bone, respectively [10]. In line with these grading scales, our patient had Stage III Herbert and Lanzetta, with Type II Kalainov idiopathic AVN of the scaphoid.