A 48-year-old man presented with lateral pain in his left elbow. A diagnosis of lateral epicondylitis was made and the patient was initially treated conservatively with physiotherapy, elbow straps, and corticosteroid injections at another institution. However, the pain did not improve and the patient was referred to our hospital. Physical examination revealed tenderness over the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and pain induced by resistance to the middle finger or on wrist extension. He also experienced discomfort and catching around the posterior radiocapitellar joints during extension and flexion of the elbow. Although there were no restriction of range of motion of the elbow, the patient’s grip strength had decreased to 45 kg on the left side compared with 52 kg on the right side. A radiograph of the elbow showed no abnormal findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed increased effusion in the humeroradial joint, but there was no marked signal change at the origin of the ECRB tendon . No obvious intra-articular abnormal tissue, except for posterior synovial plicas, was identified on pre-operative MRI. Arthroscopic surgery was planned for debridement of the ECRB tendon and to examine the cause of posterolateral discomfort and catching in the elbow.
Intra-articular observation of the radiocapitellar joint was performed through the anteromedial portal. Degenerative changes in the lateral capsule with synovitis were observed, but there was no synovial plica interposed in the humeroradial joint . Debridement of the ECRB tendon and synovium was performed using a shaver inserted through the anterolateral portal . Subsequently, a posterior viewing portal was made 1 cm proximal to the midpoint of the line connecting the olecranon and the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. Posterior observation revealed a tendon-like abnormality running longitudinally along the articular surface from the humeroradial joint to the capitulum of the humerus . This structure was mobile during extension and flexion of the elbow. The abnormality was resected easily using a shaver inserted through the soft-spot portal .
The elbow joint was splinted at 90° of flexion for 1 week, after which active motion exercises were initiated. The discomfort and catching of the elbow disappeared immediately after cast removal. At 24-month postoperatively, the pre-operative visual analog scale and the patient-rated tennis elbow evaluation scores improved from 45 mm to 5 mm and from 48 points to 9 points, respectively. At 12 months postoperatively, MRI revealed decreased effusion in the lateral humeroradial joint compared with that on pre-operative MRI .