Clinical examination showed a patient with stable cardiopulmonary status and a pulse of 86/min and blood pressure of 140/85 mm Hg. Body temperature was 36.7°C. Respiratory frequency was 16 per minute with an oxygen saturation of 96% without supplementary oxygen. Auscultation of the lung found dry rales in the basal compartments. Examination of the heart and abdomen was unremarkable.

In the initial arterial blood gas analysis, Po 2 was 88 mm Hg with a saturation of 97.2%; Pco 2 was 20.7 with pH 7535. Laboratory findings showed a procalcitonin of 0.12 ng/mL (<0.05 ng/mL) and a C-reactive protein level of 4.19 mg/dL (<0.5 mg/dL) with normal leukocytes and a blood sedimentaion rate of 56 mm/h (<46 mm/h). The differential blood count showed monocytosis, and lymphocytes were normal. There was a normocytic and normochromic anemia. Other values were lactate dehydrogenase, 271 U/L (135-255 U/L); D-dimer, 2.04 mg/L (<0.8 mg/L); hs-troponin T, 19 pg/mL (<14 pg/mL) without further increase after 3 hours; myoglobin, 122 µg/mL (28-72 µg/mL); elevated creatinine, 2.13 mg/dL (0.67-1.17 mg/dL); blood urea nitrogen, 77.6 mg/dL (16.6-48.5 mg/dL); and glomerular filtration rate calculated for cystatin C, 22 mL/min. Hemoglobin A1c was 6.5%.

An initial electrocardiographic study had no pathological findings. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax showed distinct atypical opaque infiltration of the left lower lobe consistent with viral pneumonia. Swabs from throat and nose as well as sputum tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on the day of admission.

The patient with heart transplant due to coronary artery disease with ischemic cardiomyopathy was diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 infection with viral pneumonia.


TREATMENT

After establishing the diagnosis, we started a therapeutic trial with hydroxychloroquine with an initial dose of 400 mg twice daily for the first day followed by 200 mg twice daily. We refrained from therapy with lopinavir/ritonavir because of possible interactions due to the shared metabolization path via CYP3A4 with sirolimus. The patient preemptively received piperacillin/tazobactam and cotrimoxazole and ganciclovir because he had a history of CMV infections including colitis and pneumonia. In close cooperation with the transplant center (Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität), we modified immunosuppressive medication, replacing sirolimus with tacrolimus due to its potential lung toxicity.1 Once a steady serum level was reached, we withdrew mycophenolate.

The patient was monitored in an intensive care unit for 3 days and received 4 L oxygen supplementation via nasal cannula. Arterial oxygen saturation dropped as low as 89% with a Horovitz index of 169 mm Hg and an alveolar-arterial gradient of 162 mm Hg (age corrected <23 mm Hg) indicating a potential severe case with a moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and a consecutive V/Q mismatch. As there were no signs of further relevant deterioration, the patient was transferred to our normal ward. CT was repeated 4 and 9 days after admission, showing fluctuation of the opaque infiltrations on the first and a general decline on the second scan. The patient additionally presented with diarrhea, but stool samples showed a negative culture and multiplex PCR for pathological bacteria or viruses.

After 7 days, the patient started to show relevant improvement in the respiratory situation and required no further oxygen supplementation. There was no increase in procalcitonin or a left shift in granulocytes; thus, antibiotic treatment was discontinued. Respiratory symptoms declined after 9 days so we tested sputum as well as throat and nose swabs for SARS-CoV-2 on the following 2 days. PCR was negative in all specimens. A multiplex PCR in another sputum as well as serological results showed no clues for CMV reactivation or other viral or bacterial agents. The patient received hydroxychloroquine a total of 9 days. We were able to discharge the patient 12 days after admission.