The patient was an 84-year-old man who was admitted to the emergency room with a 24-h history of acute colicky abdominal pain. He denied other signs or symptoms. The relevant surgical history included old appendectomy and inguinal hernioplasty. The patient's medical history includes coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis, despite an otherwise healthy status. The patient was hemodynamically stable and in good general condition. Abdominal palpation led to pain in the left lower abdominal quadrant with no signs of peritoneal irritation. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed small-bowel loops with multiple air-fluid levels and dilated stomach with a large air-fluid level . Laboratory tests showed no significant alterations.
Decompression with a nasogastric tube was performed, and 1250 mL of light yellow fluid was evacuated. However, the symptoms persisted and he was admitted to the surgery department for further diagnostic testing, observation, and treatment. Despite stable vital signs, the patient experienced mild residual pain during palpation without abdominal distension. The patient stated that he periodically experienced mild abdominal pain for most of his adult life. Examination with an oral water-soluble contrast revealed small-bowel obstruction which remained unresolved over several hours of observation, leading to the suspicion of adhesive small-bowel obstruction . After receiving information regarding diagnostic laparoscopy and the potential for further surgical treatment based on intraoperative evaluation, the patient provided consent to the procedure.
Laparoscopy revealed multiple diverticula in the proximal small intestine with distinctly dilated jejunal loops. Given the extent of the disease and the high iatrogenic injury risk, the procedure was converted to open surgery. A midline laparotomy was performed, and chronic rotation of the mesentery (volvulus) was observed. Derotation of the small intestinal loops was performed. Further examination revealed extensive diverticulosis in the proximal 2-m section of the jejunum starting approximately 20 cm from Treitz's ligament . Chronic fibrous adhesions and strictures were also observed in the mesentery and the small intestine. The affected small bowel was resected to prevent recurrent volvulus and other complications, such as diverticulitis, perforation, and bleeding. Following the resection of the jejunal segment with multiple large diverticula, side-to-side entero–entero anastomosis was performed. No diverticula were observed in the remaining bowel.
The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 6. The histopathologic evaluation of the resected material confirmed substantial jejunal diverticulosis with chronic fibrosis, adhesions, and strictures.