A 49-y-old man admitted to an emergency department in 21 December 2005, with the complaint of drowsiness and quadriparesia. On admission, the patient was afebrile and had a blood pressure of 200/110 mmHg, pulse rate of 95/min and, a body mass index of 32 kg/m2. On physical examination, he had facial plethora, central obesity, pitting edema of limbs, without evidence of purple striae or hyperpigmentation. On neurologic examination, cranial nerves function was intact, proximal and distal force were 3/5, and tendon reflexes were diminished. Other examination was unremarkable. His problem was started a year ago with weight gain (4 kg), fatigue, proximal muscle weakness, easy bruising and hypertension. He didn’t complaint paroxysmal hypertension, headache, palpitation, or sweating. He had been smoker of 20 pack/y for almost 30 years, with no previous medical or surgical history, and no family history for endocrine disease. Initial work up on admission revealed marked hypokalemia (2.1 mEq/L), metabolic alkalosis (pH: 7.58, HCO3:57.2 mEq/L) and blood glucose of 330 mg/dL. Electrocardiogram showed long QT interval (0.52 s), inverted T wave, and prominent U wave in precordial leads. The patient admitted in coronary care unit. According to high suspicious of CS, 24-h urine for urinary free cortisol (UFC) was collected. Laboratory data revealed UFC greater than 1000 μg/24 h (reference value: 50–149 μg/24 h), serum ACTH 257 pg/mL at 8 AM (reference value: 9–46 pg/mL), and morning serum cortisol 57 μg/dL (reference value:5.5–26.1 μg/dL) . Following 8 mg oral administration of dexamethasone at 11 PM, no suppression was found at morning serum cortisol level (67 μg/dL). Considering ACTH-dependent CS, dynamic pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done that did not show pituitary adenoma; spiral chest and abdominopelvic computed topographies (CT) were unremarkable, except of the significant enlargement of bilateral adrenal glands. Treatment with ketoconazole, 200 mg every 12 h, was initiated to control hypercortisolism. According to persistent hypokalemia despite excess potassium supplement (> 120 mEq/day) 2 days after starting ketoconazole, the patient was scheduled for bilateral trans-abdominal open adrenalectomy on 28 December 2005. The weights and sizes of excised right and left adrenal glands were 18 g, 6× 3× 0.8 cm and 20 g, 6× 3.5× 1 cm, respectively. Microscopic examination revealed diffuse adrenocortical hyperplasia. Three days after surgery, 24-h UFC, morning serum cortisol and ACTH levels decreased to 27 μg/24-h, 2.2 μg/dL, 44 pg/mL, respectively, furthermore blood pressure and serum potassium and glucose levels were normalized. The patient was discharged on daily dose of 5 mg prednisolone and 0.1 mg fludrocortisone. All signs and symptoms of CS were resolved gradually during 4 months, and 24-h UFC was consistently less than 4 μg/24-h. He remained asymptomatic and during annual laboratory follow-ups results of serum ACTH and UFC were unremarkable, i.e. ACTH < 50 pg/mL, UFC < 4 μg/24-h. In November 2016, serum ACTH began to rise, and in November 2017 reached to 341 pg/mL . Reassessment for ectopic ACTH producing NET was performed using spiral neck, chest, and abdominopelvic CT-scans. A 2 cm mass in the middle lobe of the right lung was found and dynamic contrast enhanced pituitary MRI and Technetium-99 m-octerotide scan were normal . A CT-guided biopsy from the lung mass showed a tumor composed of solid nests of small monotonous cells with no atypia or mitotic activity, suggesting an ACTH-producing carcinoid tumor. Histologic examination of the resected right middle lobe revealed carcinoid tumor without involvement of hilar, subcarinal and intralobar lymph nodes. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed diffuse positivity for chromogranin, synaptofysine, and ACTH ; the proliferation marker of Ki-67 was positive in 1% of the neoplastic cells, with the final diagnosis of ACTH-producing carcinoid tumor. Postoperative course was uneventful, and serum ACTH level decreased to less than 100 pg/mL. Approximately 7 months later, serum ACTH level had an upward trend to 171 pg/mL . Spiral chest CT scan revealed at least 2 nodules measuring up to 5 mm in the lower lobe of the right lung. There were also suspicious lytic bone lesions in thoraco-abdominal CT. Subsequently, whole body bone scan with TC99 was performed suggesting multiple metastatic bone lesions at clavicles, ribs, iliac, temporal and parietal bones . CT-guided left iliac wing biopsy revealed thick sclerotic osteoid tissue, without neoplastic involvement, IHC staining for cytokeratin and chromogranin were negative, although serum chromogranin level was reported 2062 ng/mL (reference value: < 100 ng/mL). Hence, according to the high level of the chromogranin, as well as the presence of nodular lesions in the lung, the patient was managed as a metastatic NET, treatment with bisphosphonate and somatostatin receptor analogous was started.