An 81-year-old man presented with epigastric pain lasting for a month.
His pain increased after eating. He had undergone esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) at the previous hospital, which showed findings suggesting GLP. He was therefore admitted to our hospital for further examinations.
The patient had a history of postoperative benign prostatic hyperplasia and eradication of Helicobacter pylori.
He had no specific personal and family history.
His vital signs were normal, and the abdomen examination revealed mild epigastric tenderness and no guarding or rebound tenderness. He had no swollen Virchow's lymph nodes or parotid or lacrimal glands.
A blood examination showed that inflammatory markers, serum pancreatic enzymes, and total and direct bilirubin levels were normal . The levels of serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) and IgG4 were elevated (2556 U/mL and 280.5 mg/dL, respectively).
Endoscopy: EGD showed giant gastric folds and reddish mucosa; however, no epithelial changes were observed. The gastric lumen was not distensible by air inflation, making duodenoscopy impossible to perform . We suspected GLP, so seven specimens were obtained by a gastric mucosal biopsy, none of which showed malignancy .
Computed tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography: Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed thickening of the wall of the gastric body . Incidentally, CT showed diffuse enlargement of the pancreas and peripancreatic rim, suggesting the coexistence of AIP . No evidence of bile duct obstruction or dilation was observed. After fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/CT (FDG-PET/CT), the accumulation of FDG was found in both the gastric wall [maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax: 19.2) and pancreas (SUVmax: 4.9)] . No other organ involvement complicating AIP and no obvious metastasis of GLP nor swollen nodules in which FDG had accumulated were observed.
EUS and EUS-FNB findings: An EUS-FNB was performed for the histopathological diagnosis. With a linear array echoendoscope and a universal ultrasonography processor (EG-580UT and SU-1; Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan), the thickened third layer of the gastric wall (representing the submucosa) and the fourth layer (representing the muscularis propria) were observed , which was consistent with the findings of GLP. The thickness of the gastric wall as measured by EUS was up to 18.5 mm. The thickened fourth layer of the gastric wall was punctured a total of three times using a 19-gauge needle (SharkCore; Medtronics, Minneapolis, MN, United States) . EUS also revealed hyperechoic spots in the diffuse hypoechoic pancreatic parenchymal and duct-penetrating sign . These findings were consistent with AIP, and no obvious pancreatic tumor was observed. Puncturing the pancreas to obtain pancreatic tissue seemed undesirable because a transgastric puncture might cause seeding of cancer, and transduodenal puncture was impossible due to difficulty reaching the duodenum with the scope. No adverse event related to an EUS-FNB occurred.
Histopathology: The histopathological findings of the gastric wall showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma within the muscularis propria and the deeper site of the mucosa . No cancer cells were found in the shallow site of the mucosa. In the muscularis mucosae, fibroblasts had proliferated and were considered to be the cause of gastric wall thickening.