A 60-year-old Caucasian woman who had a silent clinical history with the exception of obesity and mild diabetes had routine blood count and chemistry tests at the recommendation of her family doctor. A slight lymphocytosis (range: 4.0 to 4.5 × 109/L) was observed. All the other blood parameters, including white blood cells, hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelet count, lactate dehydrogenase, plasma proteins, protein electrophoresis, and immunoglobulin levels, were within the normal range. Serum immunofixation was negative. Immunophenotyping of peripheral blood samples was carried out by flow cytometry using a FacsCanto II cytometer (Becton Dickinson) equipped with two lasers (488 and 633 nm). Samples (50 μL) were stained with fluorochrome-conjugated monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) specific for the following antigens: CD3, CD4, CD8, CD5, CD16, CD56, CD19, CD20, CD22, CD23, FMC7, CD103, CD11c, CD25, CD10, CD38, CD45 (purchased from Becton Dickinson), and K and λ immunoglobulin light chains (purchased from Dako). A six-color panel was used for each tube, associating MoAbs conjugated with FITC, PE, PerCP-Cy5.5, PE-Cy.7, APC and APC-Cy.7. At least 200,000 events were acquired and data were processed using FacsDiva software (Becton Dickinson). Lymphocytes were gated using CD45 expression and right angle scatter. A second gate included CD19+ events and was used to analyze the expression of the other markers.
Immunophenotyping showed an excess of B-lymphocytes (1.5 × 109/L) with bright expression of CD20 and CD22, restriction for the K light chain of surface immunoglobulins, and absence of CD5 and CD10 . At light microscopy, lymphocytes were not villous (not shown).
A whole body computed tomography showed splenomegaly (20 cm longitudinal axis), but no lymphoadenomegaly or signs of other organ involvement were found.
The patient was referred to the Division of Hematology for further observation and underwent bone marrow evaluation (morphology by myeloaspirate specimens, trephine biopsy, flow cytometry, molecular biology assays and karyotype).
Bone marrow trephines were fixed in Myelodec® reagent A (Bio-Optica) for two hours, decalcified in EDTA for two days, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 3 to 5 μm sections. Morphological evaluations were performed on hematoxylin-eosin, Giemsa and Gordon-Sweet for reticulin-stained sections. Immunohistochemical stainings were performed using a peroxidase-based system including antibodies specific for: CD20, CD3, CD5, CD23, DBA44, bcl2, bcl6, and cyclin-D1 (DSC-6). The spleen was sectioned and fixed in buffered formalin.
The bone marrow biopsy specimens showed a global cellularity of 50% with nodular-interstitial infiltration by CD20+ and bcl2+ lymphocytes, which accounted for 15% of cellularity and was negative for CD5, CD23, bcl-6, cyclin-D1 and DBA44 .
Flow cytometry of bone marrow blood showed 16% lymphocytes which were positive for CD19, CD20, CD22, CD103 and surface K light chain, and negative for CD5, CD23, CD10, CD11c, CD25, and surface λ light chain .
Mononuclear cells were separated by Ficoll/Hypaque gradient from bone marrow and peripheral blood samples, and suitable aliquots were utilized for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests after spectrophotometric quantitative evaluation. Fluorescent PCR reactions for IgH clonality evaluation were carried out with CDR3-specific VH consensus primer and analyzed by ABI PRISM 3100 (Applied Biosystems) ), whereas the results of FRI VH region rearrangement amplifications were run on a 3.5% agarose gel. Qualitative PCR detecting Bcl-1/JH rearrangements were performed according to the protocols established by the European network (BIOMED-2 Concerted Action) .
The molecular findings showed a single clonal rearrangement of the IgH gene and the absence of the bcl-1/JH translocation.
Karyotyping was carried out by conventional banding methods and no pathologic metaphases were detected by conventional karyotype.
Diagnosis of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, compatible with the MZL subtype, was therefore made.
The patient underwent splenectomy to remove a significant burden of disease and to confirm the initial diagnosis. Macroscopic examination showed that the organ was 23 × 15 × 8 cm, with a weight of 1350 grams. The spleen was sectioned and fixed in buffered formalin. Several samples were routinely processed to paraffin wax and sections of 3 to 5 μm were stained with hematoxylin-eosin for morphological evaluation. A panel of antibodies (CD20, CD3, CD5, CD10, CD23, bcl2, bcl6, cyclin-D1, CD10 and Ki-67) was applied to some samples using the ultraView Universal DAB Detection Kit and blue reagent with a BenchMark XT Automated Slide Stainer (Ventana).
The spleen was found to be infiltrated by a MCL; lymphocytes were positive for CD20, CD5, bcl2, negative for CD23 and CD10, had a low mitotic index (Ki-67: 5 to 10%), and showed a strong positivity for cyclin-D1 and a characteristic pattern of infiltration . The neoplastic lymphocytes were seen as small to medium-sized cells with irregular nuclear contours, giving rise to a mantle-fashion pattern of infiltration. DNA extracted from paraffin-embedded spleen specimens (EZ1 Advanced, Qiagen) was subjected to PCR assays, which showed a clonal IgH rearrangement, the same as found in the bone marrow .
At the end of our evaluation, the patient was diagnosed as suffering from the simultaneous presence of splenic MCL and bone marrow MZL with peripheral blood expression. Therapy with the cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin (vincristine) and prednisone - rituximab (CHOP-R) protocol was started and, after six courses and restaging by computed tomography and bone marrow and peripheral blood investigation, showed that complete remission was achieved.