A 39-year-old woman was admitted complaining of sudden-onset headache, nausea, and vomiting for 1 day. She had a history of hypertension for 10 years and denied any history of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, autoimmune diseases, or other remarkable illnesses. She was alert and could correctly obey commands. Physical examination was unremarkable except for neck stiffness. Her blood glucose, electrolytes, blood cell counts, coagulation test, and antinuclear antibody series were within normal limits during laboratory investigations.
Head computed tomography (CT) showed a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) concentrated in the perimesencephalic cistern . CT angiography (CTA) showed that the bilateral ICAs were absent in the skull base . The bilateral MCAs and anterior arteries were normal. An aneurysm was identified in the PCA region .
Head digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed that the bilateral internal maxillary arteries and ascending pharyngeal arteries were confluent with the cavernous portion of the ICAs at the skull base. And the bilateral ICAs above the cavernous portion of the ICAs, the MCAs, and the anterior cerebral arteries were normal . The right vertebral artery (VA) was fine, while the left VA was well developed . Moyamoya-pattern collateral vessels could be seen in the bilateral PCAs region, the distal part of the PCA was composed of abnormally fine vessels, and an aneurysm was clearly identified in the left moyamoya-pattern collateral vessels .
She was diagnosed as bilateral carotid RM, moyamoya-like vessels in the PCA region, intracranial pseudoaneurysm, and SAH. Management of the aneurysm was difficult, and wait and see management was adopted. The patient experienced an uneventful recovery and was discharged 1 week later. Follow-up CT performed 44 days later showed complete resolution of the SAH . Head DSA revealed that the pseudoaneurysm disappeared spontaneously while the moyamoya-pattern collateral vessels were unchanged, the distal part of the PCAs became finer and smaller, and the transdural compensation of the posterior meningeal artery was visible . The patient was in good condition during follow-up, she returned to her normal activities.