A 20-month-old Japanese boy presented with pectus carinatum with no relevant past or family medical history (including no history of metabolic/storage disorders) and as the second child in the family. He had presented to his family physician at 6 months of age with left rib protrusion, and at 18 months of age with left torticollis. At this time, chest X-ray showed deformity and protrusion of ribs (pectus carinatum), but there were no other symptoms suggestive of Morquio A syndrome; for example, joint contracture and peculiar facies were not present and there were no problems with sleep or respiration. The patient was referred to our department (Department of Pediatrics, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan).
At the time of initial consultation in our department, the patient presented with normal growth for his age (height 83.3 cm, body weight 11.0 kg; 0.4 and 0.2 standard deviations, respectively, relative to growth standards for Japanese children ). On physical examination, we observed genu valgum, kyphosis, and pectus carinatum. Clear contracture of the elbow and knee joints was not observed. As part of our differential diagnosis based on these physical findings, and to rule out possible storage/metabolic diseases, we initiated a workup and measured urine GAG levels. We performed a quantitative urine mucopolysaccharide test and detected an elevation in GAGs: 97.7 µg/mL compared with a normal range of 5.3–34.0 µg/mL. The patient was admitted to the hospital for further examination.
On admission at 22 months of age, the patient presented with similar height and body weight and normal vital signs (body temperature 36.6 °C, blood pressure 94/- mmHg, heart rate 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate 35 breaths/minute). As at the initial consultation, genu valgum, kyphosis, and pectus carinatum were present . Detailed clinical examination did not reveal adventitious lung sounds or heart murmur, hepatosplenomegaly, neurological abnormalities, coarse facial features, macroglossia, tonsillar hypertrophy, or umbilical hernia. Ophthalmic examination did not reveal any corneal opacity. Blood tests did not reveal any abnormalities. Chest X-ray showed the flattening of ribs , thoracolumbar X-ray showed kyphoscoliosis and ovalization of the thoracolumbar vertebral body , and carpus X-ray showed short and stubby phalangeal bones with mild metaphyseal cupping and strikingly short metacarpals with proximal coning . Echocardiography revealed very slight tricuspid, pulmonary, and mitral valve regurgitation. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not reveal any clear abnormalities in the parenchyma.
Given these findings, blood enzyme activity for MPS I, MPS II, MPS IVA, and MPS VI was measured (Advanced Clinical Research Centre & Asian LSD Centre, Institute of Neurological Disorders, Tokyo, Japan). GALNS enzyme activity, indicative of MPS IVA, was found to be at very low levels (0.05 pmol/punch/hour) compared with normal levels (1.21–1.87 pmol/punch/hour). The enzyme activity levels for MPS I, MPS II, and MPS VI were within the normal range.
Given the low levels of GALNS enzyme activity in the blood, we strongly suspected a diagnosis of MPS IVA disease. To definitively diagnose, we measured GALNS enzyme activity in dermal fibroblasts; this assay showed a clinically significant low level (0.01 nmol/hour/mg protein) compared with normal levels (7.48–9.52 nmol/hour/mg protein). This finding established a definitive diagnosis of MPS IVA , also known as Morquio A syndrome.
At 30 months of age, treatment with elosulfase alfa enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) at 2 mg/kg/week was initiated and continued throughout the reported follow-up period (36 months after the start of treatment). Treatment did not begin before this date because ERT in Japan had not been approved. Both acetaminophen (10 mg/kg) and loratadine (5 mg) were given 30 minutes prior to ERT administration to reduce pain, fever, and allergic reaction.
For this report, the progress of the patient was followed for 36 months, during which time he was adherent to treatment and assessed yearly.
Urine KS levels at the start of ERT were high (71.05 µg/mg creatinine) compared with the reference range (1.75–6.81 µg/mg creatinine) and decreased over time: 69.5%, 36.8%, and 47.1% of the pre-ERT level at 12 months, 24 months, and 36 months of treatment, respectively.
The patient grew 14.5 cm during the 36-month treatment period. To assess spinal deformity, a thoracolumbar MRI after 24 months of treatment showed deformity and hypoplasia of the vertebral body, hypoplasia of the odontoid process, and spinal canal stenosis at C2–C4 and Th2–Th4 (which worsened at 36 months). However, no neurological abnormalities were observed.
To assess physical endurance and exercise performance, a 6-minute walk test and a 3-minute stair climb test were conducted. The initial 6-minute walk test was conducted 12 months after the start of treatment; at 36 months the walking distance had increased by 68 m. The 3-minute stair climb test was conducted 24 months after the start of treatment; at 36 months the number of steps taken had decreased by 31.