A 69-year-old male patient presented to our cardiology clinic complaining of intermittent shortness of breath upon moderate exertion in the absence of chest pain, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, orthopnea, dizziness, palpitations, or lower limb edema for a couple of months. The patient’s past medical history was significant because of a history of pericarditis associated with pericardial effusion 6 years prior to his presentation at our clinic, which was resolved with appropriate pharmacological treatment consisting of NSAIDs and colchicine and of which he had not complained since. Also, he had an anterior wall myocardial infarction dating to several years ago, which required immediate intervention and stenting to his left anterior descending artery. Additionally, the patient is a heavy smoker and is diabetic, and hypertensive, both conditions are under pharmacological intervention and well-controlled.

At first visit, the patient’s results were as follows: blood pressure 131/67 mmHg, heart rate 85 bpm, respiratory rate 18bpm, oxygen saturation rate 95%, and oral temperature 36.5 C. A cardiopulmonary examination showed normal S1 and S2 with no murmurs and clear lung fields to auscultation bilaterally. Laboratory tests included negative outcomes for tuberculosis, ANA, and rheumatoid factor double-stranded DNA thus making any rheumatological disease less likely. ECG showed a sinus rhythm with q waves in the anteroseptal leads. Subsequently a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed and revealed an ejection fraction of 60%, no wall motion abnormality and mild left ventricular hypertrophy. Additional findings noted were grade 1 diastolic dysfunction, moderate aortic stenosis, mild aortic regurgitation and a moderate pericardial effusion moderately circumferential with an anterior pocket of 1 cm and a posterior pocket of 1.8–2.4 cm with no evidence of cardiac tamponade physiology. At that point, the patient was prescribed colchicine for 3 months and NSAIDS for 14 days with a follow-up visit. Then the patient improved, and his pericardial effusion improved.

Three months following his initial presentation, the patient started complaining again of occasional symptoms of chest pain not related to physical activity or stress. However, the patient reported that his shortness of breath had diminished with time. Based on this clinical picture, the possibility of coronary artery syndrome was suspected and needed to be ruled out. The patient underwent a pharmacological myocardial perfusion stress and rest scan. The test showed no significant evidence of ischemia and a subtle decrease uptake in the distal anteroseptal wall, which represents apical thinning rather than a true perfusion defect. The ECG portion of the study was normal. The patient was treated with another course of colchicine and steroids.

Six months later, the patient presented with a third relapse of shortness of breath. Upon inquiring further, the patient revealed that he had, unfortunately, discontinued the colchicine prior to completing the intended period of six months. TTE showed relapse of pericardial effusion and an echo-dense lesion in the pericardium of the anterior wall, which was more prominent than had been seen on the previous echo. This led to performing a CMR, which revealed an echo-dense lesion in the pericardium of the anterior wall between the right atrium and the right ventricle. It was accompanied by moderate pericardial effusion consisting of multiple layered fibrous bands that were more pronounced at the right ventricle, with a maximum thickness of 26mm and the appearances of fibrotic pericarditis (non-constrictive pericarditis) with delayed enhancement. Accordingly, the diagnosis of a fibrous pericardial mass was established. The patient was treated with a prolonged course of colchicine.