The patient, a 29-year-old female, was admitted to the hospital with a 3-d postural headache.
Three days prior to admission, the patient had a headache after waking up in the morning. The headache was located in the bilateral temporal and occipital areas, with persistent, severe, and unbearable distending pain. The headache was accompanied by a pulling pain in the back of the neck, which worsened with sitting or standing positions, and improved in a lying position. The patient also endorsed nausea and vomiting several times. She denied loss of consciousness, fever, limb convulsions, incontinence, slurred speech, and limb weakness.
The patient had no pertinent past illness history.
The patient had no pertinent personal or family history.
At admission, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: Temperature 36.3℃, pulse 64 beats/min, respiration rate 19 breaths/min, and blood pressure 137/79 mmHg. No significant abnormalities were seen in the heart, lungs, or abdomen. The patient was clearly conscious, fluent in speech, and had normal orientation. The pupils were round and equal in size (about 3 mm in diameter) with a sensitive light reflex and no nystagmus. There was no facial tongue palsy and the pharyngeal reflex was present. The muscle tone of the extremities was normal and the muscle strength was grade 5. Sensory examination was normal. Bilateral pathological signs were negative, meningeal stimulation signs were negative, and tendon reflexes of all 4 limbs were present and symmetrical.
The following blood tests were performed: Liver function, renal function, serum electrolytes, thyroid function, coagulopathy, markers of myocardial injury, syphilis, HIV, glycosylated hemoglobin, lipids, rheumatoid factor, C-reactive protein, antistreptolysin-O, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, immune panel, and tumor markers. All laboratory values were within reference ranges. An electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus bradycardia.
Computed tomography of the head suggested a nodular, linear high-density shadow in the right parietal cerebral cortex, superior parietal sagittal sinus with a differential of venous embolism or vascular malformation with thrombosis . No abnormality was seen in brain parenchyma, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with magnetic resonance venography (MRV) was recommended . Computed tomographic venography of the head and neck suggested a hypodense filling defect in the cortical veins of the right parietal sagittal sinus, consistent with venous thrombosis .