An 8-year-old girl presented in August 2015 to the Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children’s Accident and Emergency department with headache for 2 months. These had been increasing in intensity and frequency for the preceding 3 weeks requiring her to take paracetamol on a daily basis. At times the headache was associated with redness and watering of her left eye. She attended her optician due to the headaches who noted an abnormal appearance of her left fundus. She denied any visual loss or any other visual symptoms. There were no previous eye problems known.
Systemic enquiry revealed she had occasional nosebleeds. There was no foreign travel except for a family holiday in Spain twelve months previously. As her grandfather was from South Africa, she had received the Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine. Her family had a pet dog that lives outside. There were no cats and she did not live on a farm. There was no history of tick bites or cat scratches. She reported no recent viral illness or vaccinations and no recent pyrexia, fatigue, cough or sore throat. She had no known underlying medical conditions. She was not on any medications except for paracetamol as required for her headaches.
Aged 7, she had previously been admitted for investigation of pyrexia and left knee swelling. At that time, mum described her as having a bruise-like rash around the affected left knee. She was extensively investigated as a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan showed abnormal changes in and around both knees. Bilateral bone marrow trephine of each posterior iliac crest and bone morrow aspirate and biopsy of the affected distal femur were all negative. Haematological malignancy was excluded. Of note, at that time her C-Reactive Protein (CRP) was 69 mg/L and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) was 110 mm/hr. but otherwise blood testing did not identify any specific underlying diagnosis for her peculiar presentation.
The examination findings at presentation are shown in Table and Fig. .
She was admitted with findings of left posterior uveitis and mild vitritis for further investigation. A differential diagnosis of unilateral chorioretinitis included infectious chorioretinitis such as toxoplasma, toxocara, tuberculosis, syphilis, borriella burgdorferi (B.burgdorferi) and post-streptococcal syndrome and inflammatory chorioretinitis such as sarcoidosis, multifocal choroiditis and other white dot syndromes. An infiltrative cause was also considered.
Extensive investigations, as presented in Table , failed to identify a specific cause for her unilateral chorioretinitis.
Over the following 4 months, without treatment, her vision increased in the left eye to 6/12 unaided and the fundal appearance improved showing reduced sub-retinal infiltration; however, a focal circular area of chorioretinitis developed along the superotemporal arcade . One month later, the circular area of chorioretinitis had faded but a new active area of chorioretinitis was noted superior to the disc. Within this area, an elongated, white, glistening nematode was identified with an estimated size of 1500 μm when compared with the optic disc diameter . Ocular coherence tomography horizontally through this new area of active chorioretinitis indicated a nematode with tapered end curling upwards from subretinal space into deep retinal layers . This led to a working diagnosis of diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis (DUSN).
Following diagnosis of DUSN, diode laser was performed under general anaesthetic to the superior area of active chorioretinitis and presumed nematode. The patient was also commenced on oral albendazole 200 mg twice daily for 1 month and a reducing course of oral prednisolone starting at 25 mg daily and tapered over 30 days. After another month, her visual acuity had improved further to 6/9 and the treated area of chorioretinitis superior to the optic disc had disappeared. However, new areas of chorioretinitis had appeared temporal to the superotemporal arcade and in the inferonasal fundus . A further course of oral albendazole 200 mg twice daily and oral prednisolone 7.5 mg was commenced and planned for 30 days but was discontinued by the patient after 2 weeks. After a further 2 months, the fundal appearance had changed once again and new areas of chorioretinitis had appeared in the superotemporal retina with resolution of the areas inferonasally and temporal to the superotemporal arcade . Further laser was administered to the new superior lesion where a nematode was suspected. Despite additional anti-helminthic treatment with ivermectin, recurrence of active chorioretinitis lesions continued and electrophysiology testing indicated significant left retinal dysfunction.
A specialist uveitis opinion was sought from a tertiary centre in London that concurred with the diagnosis of DUSN; but it was thought that a secondary immune-mediated inflammatory response might be contributing to the clinical picture. Another tapering course of oral prednisolone along with mycophenolate mofetil was trialled without success. At last review, 19 months from initial presentation, the fundal appearance continued to change and a new area of focal chorioretinitis had appeared at the temporal macula .