A 72-year-old Caucasian man presented to his local primary care physician with a one-year history of worsening dyspnea on exertion, along with edema of the legs. He reported recent paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea and orthopnea, which required him to sleep in a reclining chair and an inability to walk more than a few steps without becoming considerably short of breath. He had no known history of coronary artery disease, and was not experiencing chest pain. Multiple tests for cardiac enzymes were negative. Echocardiograms performed eight months earlier showed mild dilation and hypokinesis of the right ventricle. Previous treatments for suspected obstructive lung disease and antibiotics for erythema and the leg edema had proved ineffective. The edema could not be attributed to deep vein thrombosis or to any marked obstructive pathology in the lungs, abdomen or pelvis.
Our patient was referred to our institution for a second opinion. On physical examination at rest, his temperature was 37°C; blood pressure 126/75 mm Hg, heart rate 95 beats/minute, respiration rate 20 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation 91% on room air. During a visit to our outpatient clinic, our patient appeared cyanotic, and was taken to the emergency department for evaluation of his hypoxia. With ambulation, his oxygen saturation dropped to 87%, and he was later admitted to hospital.
Extensive examinations were performed. Electrocardiography showed left atrial enlargement and non-specific T-wave abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) revealed nodular thickening of the pericardium and pleura bilateral . The echocardiographic findings were consistent with constricting pericarditis. The inferior vena cava (IVC) was severely dilated with a central venous pressure (CVP) of 30 mm Hg. Intrahepatic venous dilation was also indicative of constrictive pericarditis . There was marked septal shift with respiration and right ventricular compression . Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) also showed restrictive movement of lateral ventricular walls with septal bounce . Mitral flow was decreased during inspiration, due to a reduced pressure gradient between the pulmonary vein and left atrium, and reduced left atrial filling . As a result, the right atrium was significantly dilated.
Based on the CT findings, extensive malignancy or infection was suspected, as well as constrictive pericarditis. Examination of bronchial lavage and interventional biopsies failed to provide a definitive diagnosis. Therefore, pleural and pericardial biopsies were obtained by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. Dense adhesions and aged hematoma were found, and histopathological examination showed acute and chronic inflammation and fibrous thickening, with no evidence of malignancy. Results of serology testing for fungi, smears for acid-fast bacilli, culture for mycobacteria, and Gram staining were all negative, and white blood cells were rare in the biopsied tissues. These findings were consistent with pericarditis that was unlikely to be caused by microbial infection or immune disorder.
Selective cardiac catheterization, which revealed three-vessel coronary artery disease, was performed once extensive malignancy was excluded, and based on the results, we deemed a pericardiectomy was necessary. Our patient underwent emergency total pericardiectomy and triple coronary artery bypass. A standard median sternotomy was used for access and pericardiectomy performed off bypass. The pericardium was found to be grossly adherent, with thickening of up to 30 mm in some areas. Constricting layers of the epicardium were removed wherever possible. Evidence of an old hematoma was found throughout the diaphragmatic recess, and evidence of previous mediastinal haemorrhage was seen.
After the pericardiectomy, our patient's transesophageal echocardiographic findings showed an immediate response towards normalization, with resolution of tamponade. At the inferior cardiac-diaphragmatic sulcus, a large (60 mm), well-organized hematoma was entered and debrided. Cultures and gross specimens were sent for examination, and found to be negative for any infectious or oncologic source, consistent with the earlier findings. Heparinization and cardiopulmonary bypass was then initiated for saphenous vein grafting of the three coronary arteries found to have significant obstruction on catheterization. Our patient was weaned from bypass without complication on dobutamine 3 mg. He was extubated and stable within 12 hours of surgery. His post-operative recovery was unremarkable.
After recovery, our patient experienced improvement of all his previous symptoms. No further possible cause of his pericarditis was identified, except that on further conversation with our patient, he recalled falling and striking his anterior lower sternum and chest wall on the edge of a trailer hitch around 12-24 months previously. The accident had incapacitated him for several days, but he had not sought any medical therapy related to the trauma.