A 75-year-old non-Hispanic White male with past medical history significant for hypertension and dyslipidemia presented with 1-month history of flu-like illness characterized by fever reaching 38.5 °C, nonproductive cough, weight loss, and occasional night sweats. The patient denied any skin rashes, change in bowel movements, urinary symptoms, or joint pain. The patient is a nonsmoker with no history of alcohol intake and additionally reports no family history of malignancies. Physical examination on presentation was pertinent for diffuse wheezing and rhonchi in addition to abdominal distention and bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy; the patient had no apparent skin changes. The patient had no financial difficulties and was addressed with his preferred native language of Arabic. Upon admission, his complete blood count (CBC) showed elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (18,400/μL) and low hemoglobin (Hb) (6.4 g/dL), for which he received 2 units of packed red blood cells (pRBCs). Notably, he was found to have an elevated creatinine level (5.9 reaching 6.5 mg/dL) and low albumin (2.8 g/dL). Hemolytic work-up was negative .
A computed tomography (CT) scan showed features of pneumonia, bilateral abnormal axillary lymph nodes (LN), splenomegaly (22 cm), and scattered abnormal LN across the abdomen and pelvis. Ultrasound (US)-guided axillary LN core biopsy revealed cells positive for CD5, CD20, CD 23, and cyclin D1 but negative for CD3 and CD10, with Ki-67 of 15% suggestive of MCL. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avid supra- and infradiaphragmatic lymphadenopathy as well as splenic and lung involvement as well non-FDG-avid outer parenchymal right kidney mass . Bone marrow biopsy was performed, showing disease involvement. Molecular studies for t(11;14) were negative, and cytogenetic studies showed normal karyotype. His MCL international prognostic index (MIPI) was high (6.8).
Work-up for elevated creatinine was pursued. US of the kidney showed increase in cortical echogenicity with normal thickness, denoting renal parenchymal disease. Serum protein electrophoresis and immunofixation showed protein bands of restricted mobility in the gamma region, corresponding to a monoclonal IgG-lambda as part of an oligoclonal pattern of IgG kappa and lambda. Urine analysis was positive for proteins, Hb, and numerous RBCs. Due to the unclear etiology of renal disease, CT-guided kidney biopsy was done, revealing mesangial hypercellularity, tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, focal chronic inflammation with few plasma cells, and atypical lymphoid infiltrate positive for CD20 and cyclin D1. Immunofluorescence study showed diffuse mesangial positivity for IgA . Such findings were consistent with acute tubular injury and acute interstitial nephritis due to renal involvement by a known MCL.
The patient received six cycles of alternating vincristine, rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and prednisone (VR-CAP) and rituximab, dexamethasone, high-dose cytarabine, and oxaliplatin (R-DHAOx). His treatment was complicated by recurrent admissions for pneumonia and febrile neutropenia. Disease evaluation after four cycles of treatment by PET scan showed resolution of supra- and infradiaphragmatic disease with a Deauville score of 1 . End-of-treatment evaluation showed no FDG-avid disease, with complete resolution of the kidney mass with uptake in the upper poles of the kidney. Follow-up studies showed improvement in kidney function as evidenced by a creatinine level now ranging between 3.1 and 3.6 mg/dL. He was started on rituximab maintenance. After 3 months of follow-up, PET scan showed increased uptake in the kidneys without another lymphadenopathy. He was started on ibrutinib, a Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in addition to continuation of rituximab. PET scan after 3 months of ibrutinib with rituximab showed complete remission with a Deauville score of 3. A timeline of the patient’s disease course is presented in Fig .