The proband was a 6-year-old Caucasian female referred to our center for neurodevelopmental disorder, history of hypotonia, and minor face anomalies. The family history was negative for intellectual disability or genetic conditions. She was born to non-consanguineous parents at 39 weeks of gestation after a normally conducted pregnancy until the seventh month when there was an onset preeclampsia, and a caesarian section was performed. She was deemed adequate for her gestational age: birth weight was 3460 g (75th percentile), length 50 cm (50–75th percentile) and head circumference 35 cm (75–90th percentile). The Apgar score at 1 and 5 min was 8/9. Clinical evaluation at 6 months revealed hypotonia and, successively, delay in the acquisition of the stages of psychomotor development. Auditory, visual, somatosensory, and motor evoked potentials were normal. A brain MRI, performed at 9 months, showed minimal gliotic changes in bilateral occipital periventricular white matter. Control MRI, performed a year later, showed improvement of the alteration of the posterior periventricular signal in relation to myelination phenomena, low-signal stria in the supratrigonal area from a likely vascular element, and modest ectasia of the regional perivascular spaces. The childhood neurological and neuropsychiatric visits ended with psychomotor delay and general developmental disorder characterized by the absence of language, a tendency to isolation, with little interest and inconsistent visual engagement. Autistic traits characterized by poor participation, repetitive behaviors, unusual interest in objects, symptoms that resemble attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and mild macrocrania, motor stereotypies, and broad-based walking were also found. Cardiac evaluation performed at 2 and 6 years revealed patent foramen ovale and abdominal ultrasound was normal. Neuropsychiatric control, performed at 5 years, established a definitive diagnosis of childhood autism and developmental delay. Peripheral blood karyotype analysis was 46, XX (female, normal). To exclude the presence of small cytogenetic anomaly, we performed high resolution array-CGH, which was revealed to be very small at 2p16.3 microdeletion (87 kb) with maternal transmission, involving part of the first intron, part of the second intron, and the second exon of the NRXN1 gene, without a clear pathogenetic role considering size, transmission with a large presence in other family healthy controls (mother, 2 of 3 brothers of the mother and 2 of 5 maternal cousins of proband), and incomplete penetrance of the NRXN1 deletion syndrome. No mutations were found sequencing the NRXN1 and ZEB2 genes. To rule out Angelman syndrome, methylation and MLPA tests of chromosome 15q11–13 were also performed and were normal. Whole exome sequencing of the patient and her parents was performed on genomic DNA obtained from peripheral blood leucocytes, identifying the de novo c.9244C > T; p.Pro3082Ser missense variant. According to the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion score (CADD score 22) and according to the American College of Medical Genetics score (PS2, PM2, PP3) [5] this variant can be considered as likely pathogenic. CADD has become one of the most widely used tools to assess human genetic variation and values > 20 indicate that a variant is more likely to have deleterious effects. The final diagnosis for the patient was Kleefstra syndrome 2. The last examination at 6 years and 9 months still revealed the absence of both language and independent walking. Irritability, hyperactivity, self- and hetero-harm were observed. The child showed macrocephalic facies, broad and rounded forehead, hypertelorism, nose with a saddle bridge and bulbous tip, slight telelia, ligamentous hyperlaxity, and a café au lait spot on the left thigh,