A 45-year-old male patient was diagnosed as subarachnoid and intracerebral hemorrhages in the left fronto-parieto-temporal lobes and underwent decompressive craniectomy with coiling of a ruptured aneurysm of the left middle cerebral artery at the neurosurgery department of a university hospital. Brain computed tomography showed subfalcine and transtentorial herniations . At three months after onset, he was diagnosed as hydrocephalus and underwent ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunting via the right parietal approach with cranioplasty. After five months after onset, he was transferred to the rehabilitation department of our university hospital. At that time, the patient exhibited a persistent vegetative state and had a Coma Recovery Scale-Revised (CRS-R) score of 4 (auditory function: 0, visual function: 0, motor function: 1, verbal function: 1, communication: 0, and arousal: 2) [, ]. Moreover, brain magnetic resonance images showed leukomalactic lesions in the left fronto-parieto-temporal lobes . At five months after onset, he began comprehensive rehabilitative therapy that included drugs for recovery of impaired consciousness (levodopa 750 mg, amantadine 200 mg, bromocriptine 10 mg, zolpidem 10 mg, and baclofen 75 mg), physical therapy, occupational therapy, and rTMS using a MagPro stimulator (Medtronic Functional Diagnostics, Skovlunde, Denmark) . The right dorsolateral prefrontal lobe (Broadmann area 9) was subjected to rTMS at a frequency of 10 Hz with an 80% motor threshold intensity and 160 pulses over an 8-min period twice a day and with seven TMS sessions per week [–]. At seven months after onset (i.e., after 2 months of therapy), the patient recovered to a minimally conscious state (CRS-R score = 13; auditory function: 1, visual function: 3, motor function: 4, verbal function: 1, communication: 2, and arousal: 2). He was then transferred to a local rehabilitation hospital and underwent a reduced level of drug rehabilitation, with no rTMS, until 9 months after onset. His dopaminergic drug treatment was decreased due to aggravated spasticity (levodopa 500 mg, amantadine 150 mg, and bromocriptine 3.75 mg). After two months of such treatment, his CRS-R score (13) was unchanged. At nine months after onset, he was readmitted to our hospital and underwent similar drug treatments (same medications and doses) but also underwent rTMS. At 10 months after onset, although his CRS-R score remained at 13, his higher cognition indicators were improved; for example, he could blink his eyes the correct number of times when he was asked to blink his eyes as many times as the number presented. The patient’s wife provided signed and informed consent for participation in the study, and our institutional review board approved the study protocol.
DTI scanning was performed four times (at five, seven, nine, and ten months after onset) using a 6-channel head coil on a 1.5 T Philips Gyroscan Intera system (Philips Healthcare, Best, Netherlands) programmed for single-shot, spin-echo, echo-planar imaging. Imaging parameters were as follows: acquisition matrix = 96 × 96; reconstructed to matrix = 192 × 192; field of view = 240 mm × 240 mm; TR = 10,398 ms; TE = 72 ms; parallel imaging reduction factor (SENSE factor) = 2; EPI factor = 59; b = 1000 s/mm2; and slice thickness = 2.5 mm. The Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB) software library was used to analyze the DTI data. Eddy current correction was applied to correct for head motion effects and image distortion. FMRIB diffusion software with the routines option (0.5 mm step lengths, 5000 streamline samples, curvature thresholds = 0.2) was used. For examination of the upper ARAS, the seed region of interest (ROI) was the intralaminar thalamic nucleus and the target ROI was the cerebral cortex . Tract volume (TV) was determined for the upper ARAS.
On the 7-month post-onset DTT, theneural tract of the right prefrontal lobe in the upper ARAS was increased compared to that on the 5-month DTT. However, thesame neural tract was decreased on the 9-month DTT, but it was again increased on the 10-month DTT . Similarly, on the 7-month DTT, the TV of the same neural tract (TV = 6506) was higher than that on the 5-month DTT (TV = 1158). However, the TV of this neural tract was decreased on the 9-month DTT (TV = 4119), but it had again increased on the 10-month DTT (TV = 7195) .