A 12-year-old Italian boy, 34 kg body weight, was referred to the PED with a 24-hour history of intermittent chest pain, cough, wheezing, and mild fever. His medications prior to arrival consisted of 0.2 mg of inhaled salbutamol every 3 hours, initiated the previous day without medical advice (overall 1.4 mg/24 hours). The last administration had been performed 1 hour before arrival. No inciting exercise was reported, and use of hypoallergenic material was reported in his bedroom. Salbutamol inhaler had been prescribed by his pneumologist as part of patient’s asthma action plan. Noteworthily, montelukast treatment was discontinued 5 days earlier on the advice of his pneumologist, after a 3-month period without asthma exacerbations.
Past medical history included intermittent asthma induced by exercise and by dust mites diagnosed 1 year earlier. Only one mild exacerbation occurred 9 months following diagnosis, which did not require hospitalization. At that time, hypoallergenic material was not available in his bedroom.
At presentation, vital signs were as follows: heart rate 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate 38 breaths per minute, 94% oxygen saturation on room air, and temperature 37.1 °C.
Physical examination showed intercostal and substernal retractions, diffuse reductions in normal breath sound, and end-expiratory wheezing. His ability to speak was not affected. A pediatric asthma score of 9 was then calculated . Blood gas test results at presentation as well as other blood examination results and vital signs are listed in Table .
The patient was diagnosed with moderate asthma attack and was therefore treated with 40 mg intravenous methylprednisolone and 3.75 mg (0.11 mg/kg) nebulized salbutamol together with 0.5 mg ipratropium bromide at 20-minute intervals. Three oxygen-driven nebulizations were performed because of persistent wheezing, retractions, and moderate hypoxia (oxygen saturation between 90% and 95% on room air).
Five minutes after the end of the third nebulization, a presyncope episode occurred. At onset, vital signs were normal, apart from tachycardia (140 beats per minute); on physical examination, he had tremor in his hands, looked pale, and was eupneic, with normal breath sounds and weak radial pulse. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was obtained [aspecific alteration of ventricular repolarization, corrected QT (QTc) interval 467 ms], together with blood samples, showing normal troponin-T serum level. Therefore, a normal saline infusion was started.
Clinical conditions swiftly worsened in the following 30 minutes as the patient suffered faintness, extreme pallor, and cold extremities. His vital signs revealed 84% oxygen saturation on room air, hypotension (90/40 mmHg), and tachycardia (140 beats per minute). A blood gas test was conducted, showing metabolic acidosis with elevated blood lactate levels, hypokalemia, and hyperglycemia. As these findings were consistent with β2-receptor-agonist side effects, salbutamol was discontinued. Consequently, two boluses of Ringer’s acetate were administered, each over 20 minutes, because of persistent hypotension; hypokalemia was treated with 500 mL normal saline and 40 mEq/L of potassium chloride at 70 mL/hour rate of infusion in 3 hours; oxygen supplementation was started with Venturi mask providing a maximum FiO2 of 0.3.
The patient was subsequently admitted to our intensive observation unit. During the observation period, the patient remained eupneic without expiratory wheezing. Hypokalemia quickly reverted, whereas lactic acidosis (peak concentration 8.1 mmol/L) and lower DBP persisted for a longer time. Oxygen supplementation was discontinued overnight, maintenance normal saline was continued, and diuresis remained normal. Fluid boluses had been stopped because of persistent lower DBP with normal systolic blood pressure. Ipratropium bromide was administered alone as bronchodilator treatment at 4-hour intervals.
Twenty-four hours later, another 12-lead ECG was performed (sinus rhythm, normal QTc). A pediatric cardiology consultation excluded any evidence of compromised left ventricular function and cardiac output and suggested that the aforementioned ECG alterations might have had a multifactorial origin (mild fever, hypokalemia, and β2-agonist toxicity).
The patient was eventually discharged in good clinical condition with oral betamethasone 1 mg/kg for 3 days and nebulized ipratropium bromide 0.5 mg four times a day. A drug challenge with 0.2 mg of inhaled salbutamol with spacer performed 1 week later was uneventful.