We describe the case of a 25-year-old black Cameroonian woman of Bakossi origin with basic primary education, gravida 3 para 1 (G3P1010), who lost a child in 2012 following complications of neonatal infection and later had an abortion in early 2015. She presented to a district hospital in the South-West Region of Cameroon for her first antenatal visit with a 21-week pregnancy. Her blood pressure was 107/66 mmHg and she had a uterine fundal height of 26 cm.
She was requested to do some paraclinical examinations including blood group, hemoglobin level, glycemia, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), syphilis, toxoplasma, rubella serology, stool analysis, urine analysis, and a fetal ultrasound. Most of these tests were done and were found to be normal. However, toxoplasma and rubella immunoglobulin G (IgG) serologic tests were both reactive; analysis was done with the aid of ImmunoComb® IgG and ImmunoComb® II IgG serologic tests, respectively. She also had a proteinuria of 100 mg/dl; her blood group is AB rhesus positive. She did not benefit from a morphologic fetal ultrasound partly because there was none in the hospital and because of the financial constraints she presented, which limited her movement to the nearest regional referral hospital located approximately 100 km from the site of her antenatal clinic via a poorly accessible road. She was, however, put on daily 65 mg of elemental iron and 5 mg of folic acid supplement, and she received anti-tetanus vaccine, intermittent preventive treatment against malaria, and a long-acting insecticide-treated bed net. She was encouraged to consult a gynecologist-obstetrician at the nearest referral hospital.
By her next antenatal visit 4 weeks later, she had not consulted the specialist physician and was still unable to attend the paraclinical examination requested earlier. Emphasis was placed on the risk of her baby sustaining life-threatening malformations and she was advised to continue with the supplements and follow-up visits. She was again encouraged to undergo a fetal ultrasound and to consult a gynecologist-obstetrician. Adding to the challenges faced by this expectant mother, the district hospital did not have an ambulance that could have helped the health care provider to overcome the road accessibility and financial challenges she faced.
During her 34th week of pregnancy she returned to the hospital in labor pains with a blood pressure of 110/68 mmHg, uterine fundal height of 40 cm, and was at 8 cm cervical dilation with bulging membranes. After placing her on a 5% glucose infusion, the membranes were ruptured, and a turbid amniotic fluid of approximately 2000 ml oozed out. This was followed by the delivery of an anencephalic recently dead baby boy weighing 1600 g. Active management of third stage of labor was done (Additional file ).
The devastated mother and her partner received psychosocial care for 3 days; she was discharged from hospital and scheduled for routine psychosocial follow-up. She was further counseled on the need to consult a gynecologist-obstetrician before her next pregnancy.