A male Chinese patient, aged 58 years, visited the cardiology clinic with recurring episodes of syncope for 20 days. He experienced episodes of transient loss of consciousness, each lasting approximately 30 seconds, accompanied by chest pain. The most recent episode of syncope occurred in the early morning and was characterized by dizziness and a temporary loss of consciousness. He had a history of hypertension.
He smoked one pack of cigarettes daily for about 20 years with frequent alcohol intake. During the examination of the patient’s cardiac system, auscultation indicated normal heart sounds and no murmurs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain, laboratory tests measuring cardiac enzymes, and electrocardiogram (ECG) were normal.
A transthoracic echocardiogram provided confirmation of the left ventricle’s size and function being within normal parameters. Approximately 16 hours after admission, about at 5 a.m., during sleeping, the patient experienced a recurrence of sudden chest pain, diaphoresis, and subsequent syncope. Physical examination indicated a heart rate of 37 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 62/38 mmHg. The ECG revealed dynamic ST-segment elevation of 0.1 mV in leads II, III, and augmented vector foot (aVF; Fig. ). Syndromes spontaneously improved within a few minutes, the ECG returned to baseline and blood pressure improved to normal later . Cardiac troponin I enzyme levels were negative. Coronary angiography (CAG) was not performed immediately due to the symptom relief. However, following the doctor’s advice, he had CAG examination 4 days later. Subsequent CAG confirmed diffuse coronary slow flow (thrombolysis in myocardial infarction flow grade 2), without any substantial flow-limiting lesions . The patient did not agree to undergo coronary vasospasm provocation testing due to possible adverse event risk, and refused further examination to further confirm the cause due to financial reasons. However, based on the patient’s symptoms, ECG findings, and coronary angiography, a diagnosis of CAS and presumptive CMD was established. The patient was prescribed diltiazem sustained-release capsules (30 mg, four times daily), nicorandil (5 mg, three times daily), and atorvastatin (20 mg/day).
During the 3-month follow-up conducted on our outpatient basis, the patient successfully ceased smoking and effectively controlled his hypertension. Furthermore, he did not experience a recurrence of the previously reported chest discomfort, syncope, or any other symptoms.