A 63-year-old female with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, hypertension and dyslipidemia on oral medication presented with 3 episodes of back-to-back GTC seizures, each lasting for approximately 5 minutes, in a background of mild on-and-off headache for several months but without any weight gain, visual impairment or features of pituitary hormonal abnormalities. The seizures were associated with loss of consciousness, frothing, eye deviation and tonic and clonic movements of all four limbs followed by postictal drowsiness lasting for 2 to 3 hours. She was admitted to the A&E department and thereafter transferred to the intensive care unit, where she was managed with Levetiracetam to which she responded.

The neurological examination was unremarkable except for a bitemporal quadrantanopia on the visual field assessment. Moreover, the rest of the physical exam did not elicit any features of pituitary hormonal excess or deficiency. The patient was further assessed by a consultant ophthalmologist, where bitemporal pallor and cupping in addition to bitemporal upper quadrantanopia were detected.

Magnetic resonance imaging was subsequently used to detect a large pituitary tumour measuring 6.0 cm (craniocaudal) × 3.8 cm (transverse) × 4.0 cm (anteroposterior) with suprasellar extension through the third ventricle into both lateral ventricles, causing significant mass effects and impending hydrocephalus (Wilson-Hardy classification: IVC, Knosp classification: 0; Goel classification: IV). Blood investigations that were also carried out revealed normal serum electrolytes and endocrine panels.

Upon stabilizing her and achieving significant glycemic and blood pressure control under the supervision of a consultant endocrinologist, she underwent neuro-navigation-guided endonasal transsphenoidal subtotal resection 2 weeks after her initial presentation. Histology revealed a null cell adenoma with a Ki-67 index of 3%. She was discharged one week after surgery, and at 3 months of follow-up, she was initiated on adjuvant radiotherapy but was well and seizure free (while on Levetiracetam) without any visual deficits. She is being closely followed up by the endocrinology team headed by a senior consultant endocrinologist and has not shown to have clinical or biochemical indicators of pituitary dysfunction. Close monitoring by MRI imaging will be performed at 3 months of completion of radiotherapy and at regular intervals thereafter to assess the growth of the residual tumour for a total cumulative period of 15 years (as per unit protocols).