24-month-old male patient with no significant perinatal history. During growth he achieved motor milestones up to crawling on his own, but at 8 months of age he began to develop floppy hypotonia of the lower limbs associated with marked weakness, with loss of the ability to crawl and subsequently required support to sit. Therefore, neurological evaluation was performed and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) was performed to detect the number of copies present or deletion of multiple genes for SMN1, SMN2 and NAIP in the samples. The result of the test showed homozygous deletion of the SMN1 gene and presence of only three copies of the SMN2 gene, as well as deletion of the NAIP gene. To evaluate the clinical response, three main outcomes were measured: motor function, respiratory function and swallowing function. For motor function, the CHOP INTEND scale and the extended Hammersmith scale (HFSME) were used. Also, measurement of respiratory function with pCO2 values, clinical symptoms and complex pulmonary function tests could not be performed due to the patient's age limitations. Swallowing function was evaluated by swallowing tests with water-soluble contrast.

Therapy
Initial treatment at the center was with nusinersen (Spinraza, Biogen, MA USA) at 18 months. Administration was intrathecal, 12 mg/5mL in four occasions, for drug impregnation every 14 days. The patient subsequently increased baseline scores in the CHOP INTEND scale by 30 points and in the HFMSE scale by 17 points.

Following administration of intrathecal nusinersen, the patient did not experience any adverse effects related to the medication and two months after administration of this medication, the patient showed a significant increase in CHOP INTEND and HFMSE scores.

In December 2020, when the patient was 23 months old, after evaluating the progress in motor function, the possibility of having an additional improvement with the application of onasemnogene abeparvovec-xioi was agreed with the parents. They were explained the absence of evidence and the possible adverse effects. After evaluating the risk and the benefit, it was decided to administer onasemnogene abeparvovec-xioi (Zolgensma, Novartis, Switzerland), 1.1 x 1014 of viral particles per kilogram of weight, 5.5 mL/kg in infusion for 60 minutes. The application of the therapy was performed in hospital and the patient presented as adverse effects fever, thrombocytopenia and elevation of AST and ALT twice in their normal value.

Subsequently, monthly assessments of motor function were performed using the CHOP INTEND and HFMSE scales and the patient progressed very favourably to being able to walk with support.

Follow-up and outcomes
The patient is currently in the process of normalizing AST and ALT and intrathecal nusinersen is planned to be continued in the coming months; the patient continues to gain motor skills over time.
