A 66-year-old male patient presented with exertional chest tightness, shortness of breath, and right lower limb weakness for two weeks. He was diagnosed with a cardiac mass two months ago in another hospital. He had a history of hypertension from last 20 years which was under control with treatment. He underwent radical rectal surgery for rectal cancer five years ago and experienced intermittent fecal incontinence after surgery. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 124/67 mmHg, temperature 36.6 Co, pulse 64 bpm, RR 20/m. On percussion, the dullness of the left heart border was slightly extended indicating left heart enlargement. On auscultation, heart sounds were normal in all areas with normal rhythm and moist rale in both lung fields. Abdominal ultrasound revealed liver and left renal cyst. The prostate gland was mildly enlarged with calcified plaques. Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed without any remarkable findings. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a mitral valve hypoechoic space occupying lesion with clear borders. Color doppler showed no blood flow signals around or inside the cystic mass. Contrast enhanced echo showed no contrast medium perfused into the cyst with moderate mitral regurgitation (MR) and ascending aortic dilation as shown in Fig. . Computed tomography (CT) examination revealed an elliptical low-density filling defect in the mitral valve area of the left atrium with a cross-sectional size of about 2.9*1.2 cm as shown in Fig. . Based on echocardiography, and CT report a preliminary diagnosis of cardiac cystic tumor was made. He underwent thoracoscopic surgery under general anesthesia and a cardiopulmonary bypass. The arterial and venous cannulation was done through the right femoral artery and vein respectively. A 4 cm incision was made in the 4th intercostal space (ICS) at the right anterior axillary line, a 3 cm incision in the 3rd ICS in the mid auxiliary line, and a 3 cm incision in the 2nd ICS in the midclavicular line. The aorta was cross-clamped and the cardiac arrest was achieved with the help of cardioplegia infused through the aortic root. There was no thrombus found in the left atrium. A cyst of about 20*20 mm at the P1 position of the posterior mitral leaflet was observed with mild enlargement of the mitral annulus. The mitral valve showed moderate regurgitation. The cyst was removed and the posterior leaflet of the valve was repaired with a complete semirigid 28 mm annuloplasty ring placed. The saline leakage test showed good competency of the mitral valve. The postoperative histopathology report showed a 2.5*2*0.7 cm gray and white cyst with smooth inner and outer wall. The tissue presented cyst like structure with no clear coated epithelium. There was fibrous hyaline degeneration and mucous degeneration of cystic wall and small foci of hemorrhage which confirmed the diagnosis of the mitral valve blood cyst . The patient recovered well without any complications. The postoperative echocardiography showed no MR. Patient was doing well and was asymptomatic on six months follow up.