The disease manifested in a healthy 53 years old female patient 7 weeks prior to the initial visit to our center with sudden onset of blurred vision, dizziness, disturbed gait and coordination impairment. Before the manifestation of symptoms patient was healthy, no prior dementia cases in patient’s family history were recorded. Two weeks after initial symptoms presentation patient was hospitalized in the Department of Neurology of Regional Hospital. Neither ophthalmologic examination nor blood test revealed any significant changes. Brain computed tomography (CT) and MRI were evaluated as normal. Although after retrospective reevaluation of MRI, slight increase in the occipital DW signal was found . EEG was performed on the 6th week since initial disease presentation did not show any specific changes. Initially, the patient was diagnosed with primary hypertension (blood pressure was 150/70 mmHg): Spironolactone 25 mg per day for arterial hypertension and Clonazepam 0,5 mg once a day for insomnia, Betahistine 3 mg three times a day were prescribed. On the sixth week after initial symptoms due to complaints of dizziness, impaired memory, insomnia, emotional lability, the possible causes were differentiated among cerebrovascular and somatoform/conversion disorder. As the symptoms progressed significantly, on the 7th week after the onset of symptoms, the patient was referred to the University Hospital. Clinical course of the disease and the major diagnostic tests are presented in Fig. .
During the hospital admission the patient complained of weakness, difficulties standing up and walking due to dizziness and visual impairment as well as difficulties concentrating during the interview. A neurological evaluation revealed vertical gaze palsy, extrapyramidal type increased right body side muscle tonus, involuntary stereotypical movements (purposeless raising and lowering of the left hand), weaker reflexes on the left side and ataxic gait. Arterial blood pressure was 160/90 mmHg. Ophthalmologic examination revealed severely impaired vision, a disability to distinguish between light and darkness, without any congestive changes in the retina. The evaluation of mental state revealed typical symptoms of organic brain disease: disorientation in time, slower thought processing, concentration difficulties and disturbed short-term memory. Mini-Mental State Examination score 20/30 revealed dementia with moderate cognitive decline, two in date and two points in place orientation were missed, three in recall, two in attention and calculation, one in repetition. Due to episodic anxiety, agitation and fearful gaze, visual hallucinations were suspected. Physical examination of other systems did not reveal any significant abnormalities.
During the next two weeks blood tests were carried out to rule out infectious, endocrine and rheumatologic diseases, metabolic conditions and secondary autoimmune central nervous system vasculitis since they are common causes of dementia; genetic testing, urine analysis and a liver biopsy were performed in search for Wilson’s disease, but all the tests were negative. Standard examination of CSF did not reveal significant deviations from the normal range. Despite antihypertensive treatment, arterial blood pressure was ranging between 160/100 and 140/85 mmHg.
EEGs performed on the 10th and 14th weeks after the onset of symptoms showed non-specific diffuse slowing activity with rhythmic delta activity in frontal brain regions (FIRDA), predominantly in the left side. Only at the 18th week EEG showed periodic (repeated every 1 s) sharp wave complexes (PSWC) in frontal regions .
The MRI, done on the 9th week showed in T2W increased signal intensity (SI) zones in cortical gray and subcortical white matter, especially on the right side without restriction in DWI sequence, in the parietal-occipital area supplied by the posterior cerebral artery, leading to the conclusion of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). The typical imaging finding is vasogenic oedema in the subcortical white matter of the parietal and occipital lobes . As an experience with PRES grows, atypical presentations of PRES are being increasingly described: the cases with atypical vasogenic oedema patterns of distribution, such as frontal lobe, cerebellum, basal ganglia or brain stem involvement [–]. This non-specific radiological pattern in our case also raised a new diagnostic challenge. Normalization of blood pressure due to antihypertensive treatment and other symptomatic treatment did not improve neurologic symptoms. During the period of the next two weeks all possible causes (vascular, ictal, infectious) of PRES were ruled out . A diagnosis of CJD was suspected the first time.
In MRI, repeated after four weeks, on the 13th week symmetrical lesions in the basal ganglia (head of nucleus caudatus, putamen) were found. The previous lesions in the cortical/subcortical area were absorbed. The lesions found in the basal ganglia led us to suspect CJD or extrapontine myelinolysis [, ].
Within 14th week of the disease onset and the symptomatic treatment, the patient’s condition significantly deteriorated. Severe psychomotor retardation with hyper tonus of neck and arms flexor muscles, jerky myoclonic movements, repeated episodes of agitation and severe insomnia were observed. Condition progressed to akinetic mutism with severe cognitive impairment. The blood pressure reversed into hypotensive state. There was no possibility in Lithuania to test the 14–3–3 protein, most widely used CSF biomarker for CJD and one of the WHO criteria, for probable CJD. Taken into account a rapidly progressive dementia, clinical manifestation of myoclonus, visual changes, ataxia, muscle hyper tonus, akinetic mutism, symmetrical MRI findings of basal ganglia, on the 14th week of the disease the decision to take brain biopsy was made.
The brain tissue biopsy from occipital brain lobe and head of caudate nucleus was performed. Histological evaluation was performed in the Division of Neuropathology of the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London: the abnormal prion protein deposits (detected with antibodies ICSM35, KG9 and 12 F10) were seen in all the grey matter areas . No specific features in small biopsy samples were found to suggest iatrogenic or inherited forms of prion disease. Patient had not received any past treatment with human cadaver derived growth hormone, undergone neurosurgery with human cadaver derived dural graft or scleral transplant, patient had not received blood transfusion, which suggests a possible sporadic case of CJD. The neuropil in the grey matter of caudate nucleus showed mild but widespread micro-vacuolar degeneration. In the neuropil of occipital cortex mild micro-vacuolar degeneration is patchy. Immunostaining for the abnormal prion protein revealed diffuse strong synaptic labelling in all the grey matter regions. In the white matter there are freaquent granular deposits but no convincing filamentous labelling. Histopathological and immuno-histochemical findings of prion protein (scrapie) (PrPSc) and summarizing all the data, we confirmed prion disease, compatible with sCJD. The patient eventually died 13 months after disease onset. Autopsy was not carried out.