A 41-year-old male was referred to our tertiary cardiovascular center for advanced evaluation of HF.
He had a history of progressive dyspnea, orthopnea, bilateral leg swelling, and palpitations for 6 months.
A coronary angiography procedure had been performed 12 months earlier via the left transfemoral access. The initial vital signs recorded included a heart rate of 130 beats per minute, blood pressure of 135/78 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 36 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 88% at room air. Bilateral, severe, pretibial pitting edema and inspiratory rales auscultable at the base of the lungs were the main findings of his physical examination.
Additionally, a palpable, continuous thrill at the right lower quadrant of the abdomen was confirmed by auscultation as a grade-5, systolodiastolic murmur over the left iliac artery. An electrocardiogram revealed nothing unusual other than sinus tachycardia. A chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly, pulmonary arterial (PA) enlargement, and pulmonary congestion consistent with high-output HF. Echocardiography also revealed enlargement in the PAs, right atrium, right ventricle (RV); a D-shaped septum at diastole; severe tricuspid regurgitation; and moderate mitral regurgitation with a normal left ventricle ejection fraction. The estimated PA systolic pressure from the tricuspid regurgitant jet was 55 mm Hg. In addition, a continuous shunt flow from the left common iliac artery (LCIA) to the left common iliac vein (LCIV) was detected on a Doppler examination. Computed tomography (CT) angiography disclosed an enlarged inferior vena cava (IVC), and an AVF between the LCIA and the LCIV. Right and left heart catheterization and coronary angiography was performed in order to both exclude coronary artery disease and to perform further evaluation of the PH. Systolic, diastolic, mean, and wedge PA pressure was measured as 63, 33, 46, and 14 mm Hg, respectively. The Qp/Qs ratio of 2.5 was consistent with hemodynamically significant systemic to pulmonary shunting via a large AVF. The pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and systemic vascular resistance (SVR) were 2.7 and 15 Wood U, respectively. The diagnosis was high-output HF with PH due to a peripheral AVF, and it was decided that the shunt would be closed percutaneously.
Using the left femoral arterial access, a 6-F right Judkins catheter was engaged at the site of the AVF, and a 0.035-mm hydrophilic guidewire was crossed over the defect and advanced to the IVC. A snare was advanced from the right femoral vein to the IVC, and following the capture and retrieval of the guidewire, a veno-arterial (VA) loop was created between the right femoral vein and the left femoral artery systems. The delivery sheath of the occluder was pushed forward through this VA loop to the LCIA. Initial attempts to use a 16-mm Amplatzer patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) occluder device (St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) to close the AVF failed to close the shunt. The use of an Amplatzer atrial septal defect (ASD) occluder (St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) also failed as a result of malorientation of the device within the LCIA. Finally, shunt closure was achieved with the original 16-mm Amplatzer PDA occluder device in another effort. The signs and symptoms of AVF and high-output HF were markedly relieved immediately after device implantation. A 90th-day control CT and conventional angiography confirmed the stability of device without any significant leakage or luminal narrowing in the LCIA. The invasively evaluated mean PA pressure was determined to be 30 mm Hg, the PVR was 3.1 Wood U, and the Qp/Qs ratio was almost 1.0. Due to the borderline PVR measures, pulmonary arterial hypertension-targeted treatment with bosentan 62.5 mg twice daily followed by 125 mg twice daily was initiated to be accompanied by periodic follow-up. His initial clinical, echocardiographic, hemodynamic, and neurohormonal measurements showed marked and progressive improvement after the procedure.