A 35 year old primiparous woman underwent an emergency caesarean section due to failure to progress in the second stage of labour. After a successful operative delivery, mother and child were discharged three days later, having had an uneventful recovery.
Eighteen days post caesarean section, the mother presented to hospital with continuous vaginal discharge necessitating pad changes every hour. The discharge was clear, consistent with urine. She underwent a computed tomography intravenous urogram (CT-IVU) which suggested a diagnosis of a uretero-uterine fistula .
Two days later, an examination under anaesthesia, and a cystoscopy and ureteroscopy, were performed. A small amount of blood was found on vaginal examination and cystoscopy revealed normal bladder and ureteric orifices. A guidewire inserted in the right ureter under imaging would only advance approximately 6 cm up the ureter. Retrograde ureterography was performed and showed the passage of dye from the right ureter to the uterus . The procedure was abandoned and a nephrostomy was inserted post-operatively to help divert urine away from the fistula.
After a two months interval, the mother returned to clinic for follow-up and reported that she had not experienced any further vaginal leakage of urine. In order to assess the condition of the ureter and fistula, a nephrostogram was performed which showed complete blockage of the ureter . Following the nephrostogram, vaginal discharge of urine recurred indicating persistence of the fistula.
Six weeks later she underwent re-implantation of the right ureter and JJ-stent insertion. A suprapubic and urethral catheter were inserted and the nephrostomy clamped. The urethral catheter was removed five days post-operatively and a cystogram performed 10 days post-operatively showed no evidence of an anastomotic leak. The nephrostomy tube was removed under radiological guidance, and was inadvertently accompanied by the JJ-stent. One week later, an IVU revealed both right and left ureters to be draining well with no evidence of obstruction or fistula . The patient went on to make a full recovery.