A 64-year-old Caucasian male originally presented to his primary care physician due to gradually increasing right hip pain for more than two months. He denied any significant weight loss, night sweats, heart palpitations, or other systemic symptoms. His past medical history was significant for a parathyroidectomy with resection of a single parathyroid adenoma and well-controlled arterial hypertension. Family history included prostate cancer in his father. On exam, the patient had reproducible right hip pain with passive and active motion. Due to concerns for musculoskeletal pathology, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine was obtained and had demonstrated mild degenerative changes in the spine and an 11.2 cm mid-abdominal retroperitoneal mass. Contrasted enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was obtained to characterize the mass; this showed an 11 cm ovoid, solid, enhancing mass in the right mid-abdominal mesentery with no associated lymphadenopathy . Given a low suspicion for a catecholamine-producing tumor (which would have necessitated further workup), the decision was made to proceed directly to an image-guided biopsy to establish a diagnosis and guide treatment. The biopsy demonstrated an atypical epithelioid and spindle cell neoplasm. The patient underwent an elective exploratory laparotomy for removal of the mass. Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to be adherent to the head of the pancreas and to the confluence of the superior mesenteric and portal veins. The tumor was resected en-bloc with a margin of pancreatic tissue and the portal vein defect was repaired primarily.
Histologic evaluation of the tumor showed evidence of neoplastic cells arranged in nests and trabeculae within the tumor’s vasculature. Round to oval cells with moderate to abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm were found within the tumor bulk. Tumor was metastatic to one of the lymph nodes. The tumor immunohistochemistry demonstrated a Ki-67 index < 1%, positive succinate dehydrogenase subunit A (SDHA), SDHB, chromogranin A, and S-100 stains, and negative cytokeratin CAM 5.2 and human melanoma black-45 (HMB45) stains. These findings were consistent with a PGL with metastasis to the lymph node.
Once the diagnosis was obtained, urine catecholamines were immediately measured. The patient had elevated urine metanephrines 382 mcg/24 h (normal range 44 - 261 mcg/24 h) and urine normetanephrines 650 mcg/24 h (normal 138 - 521 mcg/24 h) demonstrating a functional PGL. Gallium-68 DOTATE scan showed no evidence of distant metastatic disease. Genetic analysis was performed on a peripheral blood sample using a hybridization-based protocol to enrich for regions of interest. Amplicons from the coding exons of 34 genes of interest were created using real time polymerase chain reaction, and subsequently sequenced using Illumina® technology. When compared to a reference sequence, a RET gene variant of unknown significance [c.731C>T (p.T244I)] was identified. Screening thyroid ultrasound did not demonstrate any suspicious thyroid nodules. At his three month follow up, our patient reported full recovery from the surgery with no further symptomatology and his metanephrines had normalized. At his one-year follow-up, he reported he was doing well. However, a suspicious left renal mass, concerning for renal cell carcinoma, was seen on his screening CT abdomen and pelvis. There was no evidence of recurrent disease from his metastatic PGL on imaging. At this time, patient is undergoing further work-up with urology.