A 33-year-old man without a previous medical or surgical history presented with chief complaints of abdominal pain and vomiting. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the lower abdomen. Laboratory data were unremarkable: C-reactive protein level, 0.16 mg/dL; white blood cell count, 9600 /μL; neutrophil count, 91.3%; and lymphocyte count, 5.4%. Ultrasonography and radiography revealed no findings that could cause abdominal pain. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a 45-mm-sized mass with partial calcification in the ileum , without any signs of invagination, obstruction, or volvulus. No other findings suggesting the cause of abdominal pain were observed on CT. The patient was diagnosed with an ileal tumor. After the examination, the patient’s condition improved spontaneously. Several weeks later, for detailed examination of the tumor, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which revealed a tumor with hypointense signal on both T1-weighted (T1WI) and T2-weighted images (T2WI), and isointense signal on gadolinium-enhanced T1WI . Based on these findings, the differential diagnoses were a gastrointestinal stromal tumor, chronic distending hematoma, leiomyoma, and CFT.
Laparoscopic surgery was performed for the pathological diagnosis and treatment. Two 5-mm ports were placed through a vertical 4-cm skin incision in the umbilicus using EZ access and Lap Protector (Hakko Medical, Nagano, Japan). Intraoperatively, a white-colored tumor was found in the ileum, 100 cm from the terminal ileum . Careful observation of the entire abdominal cavity did not detect any other tumors, lymph node metastasis, or dissemination. After careful observation, the tumor was lead extracorporeally through the umbilical incision and a partial resection of the ileum was performed. Reconstruction was performed with a functional end-to-end anastomosis. Macroscopic findings revealed that the tumor was pedunculated and located on the antimesenteric side. Microscopic findings revealed that the tumor extended from the muscularis propria to the subserosa. A few spindle cells and infiltration of lymphoplasmacytic cells were observed with dense hyalinized collagen and interspersed calcification in the background . Immunohistochemical findings revealed negative or nearly negative results for CD34, c-kit, DOG-1, desmin, S100, anaplastic lymphoma kinase, vimentin and smooth muscle actin. Factor-XIIIa was positive. The MIB-1 labeling index was less than 1%. Over 40% of the plasma cells in the stroma were IgG4 positive. The tumor was eventually diagnosed as a CFT. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7 without any complications. No recurrence has been observed in the 6 months since the surgery.