A 39-year-old woman visited to our hospital complaining of worsened right low back pain and fever in 1 month before her first visit. She had experienced the occasional similar pain for several years and had an experience of pyelonephritis 10 years ago. Her initial laboratory data had no abnormal findings. Her urine test was clear, and her urine cytology was negative. Ultrasound imaging revealed right gross hydronephrosis. CECT also detected right gross hydronephrosis, but the right ureter was unclear . CECT was reconstructed to 3D imaging with Osirix® (Pixmeo SARL, Geneva, Swiss), imaging analysis software, which found out an aberrant blood vessel contacting with the right ureteropelvic junction . According to these examinations, UPJO was preoperatively diagnosed due to the aberrant blood vessel. Tc-99m MAG3 renal scan confirmed that the right kidney exhibited obstructive pattern and poor diuretic response (T1/2 of the left and right kidneys was 4.62 and 21.07 min, respectively) . The right kidney function was similarly preserved to the left kidney function (MAG3 clearance of the left and right kidneys was 184.9 and 163.7 ml/min/1.73 m2, respectively).
Surgical treatment was indicated because of the symptomatic disease. Preoperative RP showed that the right ureter shifted inward compared with the normal position, which suggested the coexistence of the retrocaval ureter . RALP was conducted by a three-port transperitoneal approach, with putting port position more medial than usual to facilitate detachment around the right ureter . The swollen right renal pelvis and the aberrant blood vessel were identified . The right ureter was peeled downward and was confirmed to be positioned behind the IVC . The renal pelvis was dissected, and the ureter was repositioned anterior to the IVC. After removing the strictured ureteropelvic junction, the ureter and the renal pelvis were spatulated, inserted with 6-Fr double-J stent, and reanastomosed in a tension-free fashion by interrupted suture technique with 5-0 sutures; 10-Fr BLAKE Silicon drain was put into the anastomosis place. Blood loss was uncountable. The operation time was 403 min, and the robot console time was 301 min. We represent edited surgical video in Video .
The urethral catheter and the drain were removed 5 and 6 days after surgery, respectively. No perioperative adverse events were found. The double-J stent was removed 2 months after surgery. No recurrence of the symptoms was observed, and her right hydronephrosis improved in 2 years after surgery.