A 32-year-old male driver by profession presented to the cardiology department complaining of chest discomfort and a history of pain radiating to his back and left shoulder, which had gotten worse following four days of weight training. There are no comorbidities. History of similar complaints in the past with the first episode at the age of 10 years and similar such complaints are noted on lifting heavy weights, climbing uphill and on exertion. There is no history of concomitant surgical operations or substance abuse. There is no family history of ischaemic heart disease. Clinical assessment is normal. Routine blood tests and cardiac markers are normal. On presentations, vitals were heart rate of 164 beats per minute (tachycardia), blood pressure of 130/84 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 24 cycles per minute (tachypnoea), with normal blood glucose sugar level and showing normal ECG findings.
The patient was directed to the radiology department for additional assessment. The chest X-ray indicated a normal apex and left heart border but a lucent region, as well as lung tissue between the left hemidiaphragm and heart base . The patient was referred for echocardiography, which revealed substantial cardiac mobility with a high degree of levorotation, normal left ventricle size, normal systolic function, and a 60% ejection fraction. The next day, the patient was suggested to undergo a cardiac MRI, which revealed significant levorotation of the heart and lung tissue interposition anteriorly between the main pulmonary artery and aorta. An analogous interposition of lung tissue occurs between the left ventricle and the diaphragm. The left atrial appendage protrudes outward along the lateral face of the aortic arch. A 6-mm defect in the middle atrial septum is seen, most likely of the secundum type with left-to-right blood shunting. Hence, a suspicion of pericardial agenesis was made.
The left inferior pulmonary vein seems to have a restricted calibre as a result of compression between the descending aorta and left atrium, most likely caused by significant levorotation . On the left, the superior and inferior pulmonary veins measure 7 mm superior to the inferior and 4 mm inferior to the superior. On the right side, they were 18 mm and 12 mm.
Investigations on the mobility of the walls of the left and right ventricles show excessive cardiac mobility is defined by a 1.5-to-2 mm displacement of the heart apex. The normal pulmonary artery diameter is 25 mm. The rest of the heart looks normal. Pleural or pericardial effusion is absent with normal ventricular walls .
A chest HRCT was performed, revealing the absence of the pericardium on the left side. Lung tissue may be recognised between the aorta and the primary pulmonary artery . Lung tissue was observed between the left hemidiaphragm and the heart's base, as well as an abnormally expanded left atrial appendage. The following day, with the same concerns, a repeat chest X-ray revealed a leftward migration of the heart apex (wandering cardiac apex) . The patient was treated conservatively with regular follow-up in the outpatient clinic and is advised not to lift heavy weights.