A 23-year-old male patient came to the emergency department at Universitas Airlangga Hospital presenting fever, anosmia, headache, and nausea 5 days before. He was diagnosed with COVID-19, confirmed by the RT-PCR amplification of SARS-CoV-2 virus nucleic acid on a nasopharyngeal swab. The patient had abnormal laboratory findings, such as lymphopenia, neutrophilia, thrombocytopenia, and high CRP, with a normal chest X-ray . The patient was treated with Favipiravir at 1600 mg per 12 h on day 1, then 600 mg per 12 h on day 2-day 5, intravenous drip of paracetamol 1000 mg every 8 h, oral vitamin C 500 mg per 8 h, and oral vitamin D 1000 IU per day according to Indonesian national COVID-19 treatment guidelines. After 10 days of treatment, the patient was still PCR positive despite no complaints. He was then discharged to continue self-quarantine at home.
He returned to the hospital two weeks later with general weakness and fever. The fever did not resolve during his self-quarantine, was raised intermittently every 2 days, and was marked by a chilling-fever-sweating cycle. The fever temperature measured was around 39.7°–40 °C. The fever improved when the patient took paracetamol, but the fever returned 6 h later. The fever was accompanied by malaise and muscle pain. The next day the patient was fever-free and able to carry out his daily activities. The physical examination revealed a body temperature of 38 °C, a blood pressure of 112/72 mmHg, a heart rate of 93 bpm, a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/minute, and oxygen saturation of 98% under ambient air. The patient weighs 65 kg with a height of 170 cm (BMI 22.5 kg/m2). Other physical examinations were normal.
The laboratory results reflected a white blood cell count of 8750/µL with 76.3% neutrophils, 13.5% lymphocytes, and 0.6% eosinophils. Haemoglobin level and platelet counts were 12.2 g/dL and 231,000/µL, respectively. CRP and D-dimer levels were 41.51 mg/L and 9.52 mg/L, respectively. Serum electrolytes and renal function tests were normal, with urea and creatinine serum 6 mg/dL and 0.4 mg/dL, respectively. The liver enzymes test was normal, with ALT being 14 IU/L and AST being 25 IU/L. Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm and axis. The chest X-ray was unremarkable . The RT-PCR amplification of the SARS-CoV-2 virus nucleic acid test from the nasopharyngeal swab was still positive.
From the previous history, he said that he traveled to Timika District, Papua, for office work for the last 2 years. In May 2021, the patient was infected with P vivax, with initial symptoms including fever, dizziness, nausea, and muscle pain. The patient was treated until declared fully cured. A laboratory test for malaria was performed. The rapid malaria test was positive for PAN antigen, and microscopic diagnosis on blood smear revealed Plasmodium vivax on ring form, trophozoite, and gametocyte stage . Based on anamnesis, physical examination, and laboratory results, the patient was diagnosed with confirmed COVID-19 with hypercoagulopathy and malaria vivax relapse . According to Indonesian National Guidelines for Antimalarial Treatment , he was treated with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHP) 4 tablets per day for 3 days and primaquine 2 tablets per day for 14 days. The G6PD status was not tested. The patient was given an intravenous drip of paracetamol 1000 mg every 8 h and a subcutaneous injection of heparin 5000 IU every 12 h during treatment. After six days of treatment, the patient had no complaints, and the results of laboratory tests had improved. The patient was discharged from the hospital, continued self-isolation at home, and followed up with the internal medicine outpatient clinic two weeks later. Furthermore, the patient was called later and reported feeling healthy with no complaints.