The patient was a 43-year-old woman with recurrent but non-documented right leg DVT during past 13 years. She used intermittent oral anticoagulation some years after first episode of her DVT and she complained of worsening right leg swelling, pain, formation of new varicose veins, and fatigue.
She had no specific medical or surgical illness and she have had 2 successful and uneventful pregnancies with normal vaginal delivery in spite of poor compliance to medical surveillance and lack of anticoagulant regimen during pregnancy period.
The patient was referred to our endovascular clinic for further assessment. In her physical examination, the right lower extremity was edematous with some hyperpigmentation and.
telangiectasia on her right leg. Additionally, prominent varicose veins were noticed on the right side. There were no active or healed ulcers on either lower extremity. Other cardiovascular examinations were unremarkable especially in terms of right-sided heart failure. The Villalta score for the further assessment of post-thrombotic syndrome based on its latest variables was 12, indicating a moderate post-thrombotic syndrome score (Kahn ; Kahn et al. ).
The patient underwent a Doppler ultrasonography of both lower extremities, which revealed chronic post-thrombotic changes in the deep venous system with evidence of blunted pulse-Doppler waves of the right-sided veins. For detailed imaging of these findings, we had a computed tomography (CT) venography of both lower extremities depicted .
Unpredictably, the reconstructed image showed chronic post-thrombotic changes in the right lower extremity including right femoro-popliteal veins with the formation of a left-sided IVC after the union of both iliac veins, which extended to the hemiazygos vein. As the patient’s symptoms persisted enduringly, we decided to perform venography to determine the precise pathology of these changes. Preprocedural cardiac evaluations showed no abnormal echocardiographic or electrocardiographic findings. As is shown in Fig. , the lower extremity venous system after the iliac veins formed the left-sided IVC. Chiming in with the CT venography findings, the left-sided IVC extended to the hemiazygos vein and terminated at the SVC. On the other side, there was a suprarenal right-sided IVC, which joined the hepatic venous system and finally drained into the right atrium. There was also some evidence of compression on the right iliac vein and the proximal part of the left-sided IVC, suggesting the atypical MTS as the main cause of the patient’s chronic symptoms. We decided to perform balloon venoplasty for symptom relief and we deferred the stenting for next session if the patient symptoms does not relieve with venoplasty and compression therapy. The final venography demonstrated the acceptable outflow of both IVCs. The balloon venoplasty of the compressed venous system improved our patient’s venous hypertension as was reflected by improvements in both her subjective symptoms and her Villalta score. The patient was discharged the following day with oral anticoagulants, and she was asked to return for a follow-up the next month for the final approach like stenting if her symptoms persist.