A 22-year-old female was referred to our out-patient clinic for follow-up on her asymptomatic mitral valve prolapse (MVP), which was discovered incidentally when she was 6 years old. She had never previously experienced dyspnea, chest pain or syncope. Physical examination revealed a grade 3/6 systolic murmur at the upper left sternal border. Her electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with left anterior fascicular block and T wave inversion in leads I and aVL. All laboratory tests, including cardiac troponin, N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-pro BNP) and autoantibodies, were unremarkable.
In addition to the anterior mitral leaflet prolapse (A2) with moderate mitral regurgitation and a mildly dilated left ventricle (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter: 56 mm) with a preserved ejection fraction , transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a retrograde blood flow from an extremely dilated left coronary artery (LCA) . Coronary angiography also revealed an enormously dilated and tortuous right coronary artery (RCA) originating from the right coronary cusp, with many collateral vessels filling the LCA (Additional file: Video 3), but failed to locate the orifice of LCA. Further coronary computed tomography angiography confirmed the diagnosis of ALCAPA .
Given her high risk of left ventricular dysfunction, heart failure and malignant ventricular dysrhythmias, surgical correction was scheduled. Intraoperatively, her coronary arteries were found to be extremely dilated, the left ventricle and mitral annulus were mildly dilated, and anterior mitral leaflet appeared apparently thickened with rolled edges. More importantly, a chordae tendineae connecting the anterior leaflet (A2) was ruptured and markedly shortened . Therefore, reimplantation of the LCA into the aorta and concomitant mitral valve replacement were performed. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged from the hospital 2 weeks later. Three months following surgery, an echocardiogram revealed that her left ventricle had returned to normal (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter: 47 mm).