A 10-year-old male child presented to our surgery clinic on October 2021 with a chief complaint of abdominal pain and vomiting for the past ten months. The pain was frequent, colicky, postprandial, and generalized. It was aggravated by eating and associated with vomiting, anorexia, and weight loss. There was no history of hematuria, rectal bleeding, or diarrhea. There is a history of chronic constipation and environmental exposures to unclean water. The patient lived in a village and owned a dog and cheeps, which he kept in the house. In addition, he has a family history of lymphoma in his brother.

On physical examination, the patient looked ill with no pallor or jaundice. There was a nonmobile, non-tender, palpable right iliac fossa mass on abdominal examination.

The laboratory data were as follows: total white blood cell count: 12 ×103/mL, hemoglobin:14.4 g/dl, blood urea nitrogen: 35 mg/dl, creatinine: 0.9 mg/dl, serum albumin: 4.2 g/dL, serum bilirubin: 1 mg/dL, and negative for viral hepatitis. The urinalysis and stool examination were normal.

Ultrasonography (US) of the abdomen showed a segmental wall thickening of the ascending colon and 10×3 cm intraluminal sigmoid mass suggestive of an intestinal tumor or lymphoma. The computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen showed that the sigmoid is redundant and seen on the right lower abdominal quadrant before its cross midline and joins the descending colon, diffuse circumferential wall thickening of the sigmoid colon, and 10×3 cm intraluminal mass with significant lumen narrowing. There were multiple perilesional lymph nodes; the largest one was measuring 1.4x1cm. There was hepatomegaly with heterogenous contrast enhancement without a definite lesion. In addition, there were multiple para-hepatic, and pulmonary lymph nodes enlargements. Based on the CT findings (extranodal lymph nodes enlargements and multiple general lymphadenopathies) and the family history of malignancy, the possibility of malignancy could not be excluded. After a multidisciplinary discussion, the decision was made for an open surgical exploration.

After general anesthesia and lower midline incision, the abdominal cavity was opened, revealing a sigmoid colon attached to the abdominal wall at the right lower quadrant, a large sigmoid mass measuring about 15 cm, and multiple mesenteric and paraaortic lymph nodes enlargements. Sigmoidectomy with a safety margins and primary anastomosis were performed, and the specimen was sent for pathologic assessment.


Follow-Up and Outcome
The postoperative period was uneventful, and he was tolerating a regular diet. The patient was discharged home on the fifth postoperative day. The histopathology reported that numerous non-caseating granulomas formed of bilharzial ova (Schistosoma mansoni) and multinucleated giant cells. The patient was referred to the pediatric infectious disease clinic and was treated with three doses of praziquantel (60 mg/kg). Within five months of follow-up, the patient remained symptom-free.