An 8-year-old boy presented with pain in his left hip joint that had persisted for several months. His height was 112.5 cm (−2.93 standard deviation), and his weight was 21.5 kg, from which body mass index was calculated to 67.1 percentile for age and sex. His growth had started to slow at 4 years of age . He presented with hirsutism, dry skin, and bradycardia. Hip joint radiography revealed Trethowan’s sign bilaterally in the frontal view and a posterior tilting angle of 34° on the left side and 25° on the right side in the Lauenstein view . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the hip joint showed separation of the proximal metaphysis of the femur. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with chronic bilateral SCFE (mild on the right side, moderate on the left side).
Blood tests revealed hepatic dysfunction and hypercholesterolemia, with a very low free thyroxine level of 0.10 ng/dl and a very high thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of 1789 μIU/ml. The anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody level was >600 IU/ml, and the anti-thyroglobulin antibody level was 1720 IU/ml. At the age of 8 years 7 months, the bone age (assessed by the Tanner–Whitehouse 2 radius, ulna, short bones method) was 3 years 4 months. Ultrasonography showed marked atrophy of the thyroid, and color-flow Doppler sonography revealed decreased thyroid blood flow. Cardiac ultrasonography disclosed slight retention of pericardial fluid. MRI scans of the head showed that the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland was enlarged to a height of 17 mm. Although the pituitary gland displaced the optic chiasm superiorly, there were no visual acuity or field abnormalities. Hyperplasia of the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland caused by the overproduction of TSH was suspected. Therefore, atrophic thyroiditis was diagnosed.
For SCFE treatment, the patient was admitted and kept at rest, with the lower limbs in traction. Oral levothyroxine therapy was initiated with a low dose, followed by gradual dose increases. About 2 months later, the free thyroxine levels had increased to the normal range. In addition, the hirsutism, dry skin, and bradycardia had diminished, and his growth velocity had improved. MRI scans of the head showed reduction of the swollen pituitary gland. An arginine stimulation test (0.5 g/kg infused intravenously over 30 min) showed a normal growth hormone response (peak 7.26 ng/ml). Also, a human corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test (1.5 μg/kg infused intravenously) showed a normal adrenocorticotropic hormone response (peak 48.4 pg/ml) and cortisol response (peak 14.4 μg/dl). After 2 months of thyroxine treatment, the patient’s thyroid levels had stabilized, at which time surgery was performed for bilateral SCFE.
The CARE guidelines were followed in this case.