A 71-year-old man treated for chronic kidney disease, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) and chronic heart failure experienced cardiopulmonary arrest due to unexpected ventricular fibrillation (VF). Fortunately, owing to prompt bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the patient completely recovered without any neurological disabilities. Upon admission in the previous institution, serum potassium levels were revealed to be significantly decreased to 3.3 mEq/L; therefore, it was speculated that VF was induced by incidental hypokalaemia. The patient was subsequently referred to our institution for further evaluation.
Medical history taking revealed that the patient had a heart murmur throughout his childhood, yet this matter was not further evaluated. At the age of 19 years, the patient was diagnosed with TOF and underwent palliative Blalock–Taussig shunting at the age of 21 years. Although radical intracardiac surgery was recommended, the patient refused further surgical treatment. For a while, he worked and enjoyed playing golf without any heart failure symptoms; however, he was eventually admitted due to heart failure at 50, 70, and 71 years of age.
Upon referral, his blood pressure was 114/58 mmHg, heart rate was 69 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation was 89% (ambient air). On visual inspection, he had lip cyanosis and clubbing; however, no peripheral oedema was observed. Cardiac auscultation revealed a harsh systolic ejection murmur in the 2nd to 4th intercostal space of the left sternal border. Laboratory findings revealed polycythaemia with a haemoglobin level of 18.0 g/dL and a haematocrit of 52.6%. His serum creatinine levels were 1.8 mg/dL, and brain natriuretic peptide concentration was significantly increased at 697 pg/mL. Chest radiography showed a ‘boot-shaped’ heart with bilateral pleural effusion , and electrocardiography revealed an AF rhythm . Transthoracic echocardiography showed the overriding of the aorta on a large ventricular septal defect (VSD) that was 32 mm in diameter (, white arrow, Video 1) and right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy, along with pulmonary stenosis (PS; Video 2), all of which were indications of unrepaired TOF. On colour Doppler echocardiography, a bidirectional shunt flow through the VSD was clearly observed . Moreover, the pulmonary valve was markedly calcified, making leaflet mobility significantly restricted (Video 3). Continuous wave Doppler echocardiography showed a significant pressure gradient of 77.8 mmHg across the pulmonary valve, confirming the presence of severe valvular PS . Left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction decreased to 46.8%, and the base-to-mid posterior and inferoseptal wall motion abnormality was observed. To assess the detailed intra- and extracardiac anatomy of this patient, the patient underwent multidetector-row computed tomography, and the findings of the acquired images were consistent with the characteristics of unrepaired TOF. The findings revealed a large VSD with aortic overriding (, white arrow), severe PS (, red arrow), and RV hypertrophy. Although major aortopulmonary collateral arteries were absent, a relatively restrictive Blalock–Taussig shunt was clearly observed (, yellow arrow). Functional assessment using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed RV dilatation (end-diastolic volume, 192 mL; end-systolic volume, 146 mL) and reduced RV ejection fraction (RVEF, 24%). Cardiac catheter examination revealed a pulmonary arterial pressure of 23/14 mmHg (mean, 18 mmHg), an RV pressure of 96/7 mmHg (end-diastolic pressure, 12 mmHg), and a pulmonary vascular resistance of 1.45 wood unit. Pressure waveforms and oximetry run results are presented in , respectively. Coronary angiography showed the total occlusion of the mid-portion of the right coronary artery (, white arrow) and the proximal portion of the left circumflex coronary artery (, yellow arrow) and the critical stenosis of the diagonal branch of the left anterior descending artery.
To improve the unstable haemodynamics, electrical cardioversion was performed on the 6th day of hospitalization. To maintain a normal sinus rhythm and suppress ventricular arrhythmia, amiodarone (100 mg/day) was introduced. Because the patient had multiple comorbidities, radical intracardiac repair was not performed due to significant surgical risk. Regarding the less invasive transcatheter intervention, coronary reperfusion therapy was withheld due to the absence of inducible ischaemia on the basis of the findings of stress myocardial scintigraphy. On the other hand, because it was expected that palliative transcatheter intervention for PS could even impair exquisite haemodynamic balance for this patient, transcatheter pulmonary valvuloplasty was not applied for this case. Alternatively, for the secondary prevention of lethal ventricular arrhythmia, a subcutaneous implantable cardioverter-defibrillator was implanted. After obtaining a normal sinus rhythm, β-blocker use and oral diuretic titration, his haemodynamics significantly improved. Eventually, the patient was discharged on the 55th day of hospital admission.
One year after discharge, his heart failure symptoms improved to New York Heart Association functional class 2.