A one-month-old girl of African origin was admitted to the local emergency pediatric unit for high fever, trilineage blood cytopenia and hepatosplenomegaly. Natural killer cells analysis showed a lack of perforin expression. The diagnosis of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) was confirmed by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) analysis on peripheral blood DNA, showing the presence of genomic variants c.50delT and c.1130G>A in PRF1 gene, both heterozygous. NM_005041 (PRF1): c.[50delT1130G>A], p.[Leu17ArgfsTer34Cys377Tyr]. These variants, both homozygous and compound heterozygous, are described as related to HLH., The patient started treatment with dexamethasone and cyclosporine, followed by emapalumab, a monoclonal antibody anti-interferon gamma. She underwent HLA-matched unrelated donor HSCT at the age of 6 months (HLA-A, DRB1, permissive DPB1 allele mismatches). Conditioning regimen: busulfan (3×3,2 mg/kg/day), fludarabine (3×50 mg/m2/day), thiotepa (2×5 mg/kg/day) and rabbit antithymocyte globulin (ATG GenzymeTM) (3×4,5 mg/kg/day). The patient received 4.14×108/kg bone marrow total nucleated cells and 7.37×106/kg of CD34+ cells. GVHD prophylaxis was based on cyclophosphamide (2×50 mg/kg) and cyclosporine and low dose of prednisone (0,4 mg/kg/die). The pre-engraftment period was complicated by Pseudomonas aeruginosa sepsis (day + 10) and right lobar pneumonia (day +13). The engraftment occurred at day +16 with no sign of aGVHD. Therapy with ciclosporin was interrupted three months after HSCT, and she started therapy with tacrolimus. The prednisone given as GVHD prophylaxis was interrupted at month +7 post-HSCT. Full donor chimerism was found at day +50 and confirmed at month +8 post-HSCT. At 17 months the child was admitted to the hospital for lack of appetite, elevated liver enzymes with alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 850 U/L and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 499 U/L (normal value 5–45), and polypnea. Presuming GVHD-related symptoms, she was treated with methylprednisolone at the dose of 2 mg/kg/die with no clinical improvement. The child rapidly developed respiratory failure that required mechanical ventilation. An extensive diagnostic work-up was performed: blood analysis revealed an increased value of creatine kinase (CK) of 13830 U/L (normal value 25–190), creatine kinase (CK)-MB 555 ng/L (normal value < 6) and troponin of 2601 ng/L (normal value < 45); tacrolimus through blood level was in range; immunoglobulin levels were normal whilst the peripheral blood lymphocyte subpopulations showed an increase in the content of B-lymphocytes (2544,34 cells/ul, normal value 123–349); echocardiography showed a normal biventricular function; electroencephalography (EEG) revealed no abnormality; serological test and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay revealed no evidence of recent parvovirus B19, Adenovirus, Enterovirus, Cytomegalovirus, Human herpesvirus 6, Human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus or Epstein-Barr virus infection; cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) findings resulted negative for bacterial and viral infections; electromyography (EMG) showed a normal pattern of the motor unit action potential (MUAP) waveform with normal values of F wave and only sporadic myopathic MUAPs were found; an extensive screen for autoantibodies related to autoimmune and neuromuscular disease was negative. In suspicion of a GVHD-related myositis, a biopsy from vastus lateralis muscle was performed showing necrotic and degenerating muscle fibres, basophilic regenerating fibres and inflammatory infiltrates predominantly around vessels .
Inflammatory cells were predominantly composed of CD3+ CD8+ T cells; some CD4+ T cells and a few CD68+ macrophages, CD20+ B cells and CD57+ natural killer cells were observed; only rare CD 138+ cells were present .
These findings indicated immune-mediated polymyositis; therefore the immunosuppression treatment was potentiated with methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg for three days, rituximab (105 mg/m2 once weekly for four doses); tacrolimus was replaced with sirolimus because of its potential neurotoxicity. In the following days the clinical conditions of the child improved, with a decrease in CK, CK-MB, AST, ALT and troponin values; she was weaned from mechanical ventilation after 25 days. In the following weeks the girl presented a progressive clinical improvement with complete normalisation of the neuromuscular disease in about two months. The girl was treated with sirolimus (ongoing), and low dose of prednisone (0,2 mg/kg/die) gradually tapered off over nine months. Currently, after 15 months, the girl is asymptomatic in very good general conditions without any neuromuscular alteration. The values of CK-MB, AST, ALT and troponin are average while CK persists slightly abnormal (1.5 times above the normal upper range).