A 64-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our office for the assessment of a gigantic left neck mass . The patient reported that she had started to feel a paratracheal node 34 years previously, and that it had grown progressively during the subsequent three decades. She had undergone an operation in the area 24 years previously, although the surgery had to be terminated due to massive bleeding from the mass. During surgery, the mass was diagnosed as most likely a glomus tumor. No further surgeries to remove the mass were attempted, and it had been allowed to grow steadily.
In May 2013, the patient was referred elsewhere for further study of the mass. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a hypervascularized mass with a maximum diameter of 4 cm located at the bifurcation of the left carotid artery and causing the forward displacement of the external carotid artery and the backward displacement of the internal carotid artery. The patient refused surgery at that time and remained asymptomatic for almost 3 years. She then decided to consult a physician again due to the enlargement of the mass, which caused discomfort and mild compression symptoms when swallowing.
In 2016, angio MRI showed a 9 cm paratracheal mass on the left cervical side that laterally displaced the sternocleidomastoid muscle and 2 cm of the trachea. The mass was pulsatile and slightly painful. No Horner syndrome or Hering–Breuer reflex was noted. A carotid occlusion test and a complete angiography were also performed, and these confirmed the permeability of the Willis polygon and the diagnosis of the mass.
Due to the change in the behavior of the tumor, which had doubled in size within 3 years after remaining relatively stable for almost three decades, the size of the tumor, which had started causing compression symptoms, and the Shamblin grade II classification, the maxillofacial team at Ruber International Hospital decided to remove the tumor surgically after embolization.
The surgery was performed in February 2016. The tumor was approached through a wide cervical exposure after identifying the primitive carotid artery .
The tumor was gently dissected from the carotid bifurcation in a subadventitial plane , with great emphasis placed on maintaining hemostasis.
The surgeons would like to note that a partially blunt Freer periostotome is the best tool to use in high-risk areas. The vagal nerve was readily identified and separated from the mass. The hypoglossal nerve and major neck vessels were also preserved . The mass was then removed from the bifurcation uneventfully. Two small nodes adhering tightly to the internal carotid adventitia and the posterior torn hole were left in place to avoid any potentially life-threatening complication.
The postoperative phase was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 6 days after the surgery with moderate hoarseness, which was resolved within 1 month. The final biopsy confirmed the initial diagnosis of carotid body paraganglioma and showed a Ki-67 expression of 19%.
Due to the aggressive growth behavior and high Ki-67 expression of the tumor, the patient was referred to the CyberKnife Unit of Ruber International Hospital for treatment of the remaining nodes. A thermoplastic mask was made to ensure that the patient remained immobilized during the treatment. A T2 MRI and computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast were performed to locate the above-mentioned remaining nodes of the paraganglioma. The treatment was performed separately in each affected area on two consecutive days. A coverage dose of 14 Gy and an isodose of 83% were administered using 5- and 7.5-mm collimators. The maximum dose used was 16.87 Gy. The medullary canal received a dose of less than 4 Gy, and the left VII and VIII nerves received a dose of less than 5 Gy . The treatment course was uneventful, and no complication occurred during or after treatment.
After a 48-month follow-up period, no lesion recurrence or surgery-related complications have occurred. Some minor scar revision due to the tracheostomy was performed under local anesthesia. The patient is otherwise completely symptom free .