A 6-year-old boy presented to the neuro-ophthalmic clinic with swelling over the lateral aspect of his left eye for 15 days. The swelling was not painful, but had been progressive and associated with lacrimation and drooping of the eyelid. Concurrently, an asymptomatic midline swelling was evident over the patient’s neck which had been present for 2 months. A history of occasional low-grade fever and a decrease in appetite were also reported. There was no history of bleeding tendency or similar swellings elsewhere, neither of cough or hemoptysis.
On examination, visual acuity was 6/6 in the right eye and 6/24 (6/6 with pinhole) in the left. The left upper eyelid demonstrated fullness over its lateral aspect with erythema of the overlying skin. A minimally mobile, non-pulsatile, non-compressible, diffuse and firm mass with mild tenderness was palpable in the lateral upper lid. There was mild ptosis and the eyeball was displaced inferomedially. Both the palpebral and bulbar conjunctivae were congested. Anterior and posterior segments in both eyes were normal. The pupils were 4 mm in diameter, with brisk direct and consensual light reactions and no relative afferent defect. The neck swelling was soft, fluctuant, non-tender and moved on deglutition.
Ultrasonography (US) of the orbital lesion showed low reflectivity, while contrast-enhanced computed tomography demonstrated a ring-enhancing, low density lesion in the lateral extraconal space with medial displacement of the globe and lateral rectus . The lacrimal gland could not be separately visualized. Sections obtained from the brain were normal.
Laboratory investigations revealed hemoglobin level of 9.3 g/dL, leukocyte count of 15,000 cells/mm3, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 48 mm in the first hour. Thyroid function tests demonstrated high levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), 25.75 milliunits per liter (normal, 0.3 to 5.0 mU/L), with T3 and T4 within standard limits. US of the neck revealed a cystic swelling measuring 3 × 2 cm in the left lobe of the thyroid gland. A technetium-99 scan was performed which revealed a hypofunctioning nodule involving the lower third of the left lobe, extending to the isthmus.
US-guided fine needle aspiration of the orbital lesion was performed and the specimen underwent microscopic examination, and culture for bacteria, mycobacteria and fungi. Cytology demonstrated lymphocytes and a few giant cells, but no micro-organisms. Cultures remained sterile after 2 weeks. Fine needle aspiration from the neck mass revealed acid-fast bacilli, together with lymphocytes, and epitheloid and giant cells . Mycobacteria grew on the culture media incubated with the thyroid specimen. Chest X-ray and abdominal US were normal.
Eventually, a diagnosis of thyroid gland TB with coexisting tuberculous orbital abscess was made and the patient received a 3-drug antitubercular regimen. The orbital and neck swelling resolved after 6 months of therapy and the child remained asymptomatic up to one year .