A 72-year-old male was transferred to our institution presenting temporary dysarthria and consciousness disorder. Diffusion-weighted image (DWI) revealed several small infarctions and magnetic resonance angiography showed a decrease of flow signal of the right intracranial arteries , which was due to partial disappearance of the high cervical portion of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) . Furthermore, a three-dimensional computed tomography angiogram (3D-CTA) revealed an elongated styloid process stenosing the nearby ICA . The arterial spin labeling study revealed a remarkable decrease in cerebral blood flow (CBF) , with mural hematoma around the stenotic ICA on thin slice T1-weighted images. Angiogram examination again revealed severe stenosis of the left ICA [ and ] at around the elongated styloid process. The final diagnosis was a case of carotid artery dissection due to the elongated styloid process (Eagle’s syndrome).
As the patient’s neurological symptoms recovered during the initial assessment, medical treatment was chosen, and the patient was treated conservatively by aspirin (100 mg/body/day). Oral administration of clopidogrel (loading 150 mg/day, maintenance 75 mg/day) and intravenous infusion of argatroban were added later on, as the patient suffered from repeatedly appearing transient neurological deficits with no change in DWI. Systolic blood pressure was also maintained above 160 mmHg to counteract the cerebral hemodynamic stress. CAS was performed 15 days after admission. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia, and an eight French temporally occlusion balloon catheter (OPTIMO, Tokai Medical Products, Japan) was delivered proximal to the stenotic lesion. A micro-guidewire was passed through the lesion right after balloon inflation. The blood from the distal ICA was flowed out through to the femoral vein. After percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) for stenosis, A 6 to 8 mm tapered Carotid WALLSTENT (Boston Scientific, Boston, USA) was placed at the stenotic lesion after PTA . MRA 3d-tof improved the signal intensity compared to before CAS . Post stenting angiogram showed no distal embolization at the intracranial arteries and postoperative iodoamphetamine single-photon emission computed tomography (IMP-SPECT) showed recovered left CBF . The blood pressure target was decreased to under 120 mmHg just after stent placement to prevent cerebral hyperperfusion syndrome, and the patient showed neither hyperperfusion nor ischemic symptoms. The patient was discharged to a rehabilitation hospital at a modified Rankin Scale of 2.