A 69-year-old Caucasian woman with a past medical history of low back pain, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia presented with a chief complaint of a dorsal ulnar-sided left hand-wrist mass that had been growing slowly over the previous 10 years. The patient stated that the mass had become progressively more painful over time, being particularly tender when she wore a watch. There had been no history of preceding trauma nor constitutional symptoms. On physical exam, the skin on the hands and wrist was intact with normal musculature. In the left dorsal ulnar wrist, near the extensor carpi ulnaris tendon, there was a small palpable mass that was semi-firm and not mobile; quite tender to palpation. A hand-wrist X-ray showed marked osteoarthritic changes. An initial clinical diagnosis of a probable ganglion cyst was made, and the patient underwent surgical excision of the mass.
The pathology of the soft tissue fragments revealed a biphasic neoplasm composed of spindle cells admixed with neoplastic glands . No necrosis or active mitotic activity was seen. The tumor cells were positive for TLE1, focally positive for CK19, CK7, and S100, and negative for CDX2, SMA, CK20, and TTF-1 . Due to tissue fragmentation, surgical margins could not be assessed; although they appeared to be involved by the neoplasm. FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) for SS18 (SYT) gene break-apart rearrangement on chromosome 18q11.2 was performed , and the SYT gene rearrangement was detected in 71% of cells; thus confirming the diagnosis of synovial sarcoma.
CT (computed tomography) of the thorax/abdomen and pelvis were without evidence of metastatic sarcoma. The tumor was classified as AJCC (American Joint Commission on Cancer) Stage IIA. A wide re-excision of the tumor was performed with en-bloc resection of the distal ulna. The resected tissue showed an ill-defined 1.0 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm firm mass involving the soft tissue without involving the bone. The histopathologic exam confirmed the prior diagnosis. The patient received adjuvant radiotherapy and had regular follow-ups for 5.5 years with no evidence of any local recurrence of the tumor or distant metastases. The timeline of the episode of care is summarized in Fig. .