A 37-year-old man presented to our emergency department (ED) with recent history of fever . He was born in Sierra Leone and of African ethnicity, and had lived in the Netherlands since 2005. History revealed that the patient had fallen on his left knee 3 days ago after he collided with a car while riding a bicycle. He had a superficial skin defect just below his left knee from scraping the pavement. There was no penetration of the knee joint. Since then he had a swollen left knee and a sore right hip. In the days prior to presentation to the ED, the pain increased and he developed progressive dyspnea. His prior medical history included posttraumatic stress disorder, alcohol abuse, and epilepsy, of importance he reported no prior joint swelling or pain. Furthermore, he had no recent travel history and he did not smoke or use drugs.
During examination there was a free airway with a respiratory rate of 39/minute with oxygen saturation of 81% on room air. Chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion with bilateral peripheral consolidations . His blood pressure was 109/85 mmHg with a pulse of 145 bpm. Transthoracic ultrasound showed normal left and right ventricular function without any valve abnormalities. Despite a mildly decreased Glasgow Coma Scale of 13, no other neurologic symptoms were observed, in particular no sign of meningism or other neurological abnormalities such as symmetric paralysis of limbs, head, and facial musculature. Glucose levels were normal. Initially, the temperature was 37.1 °C but a few hours after admission temperature rose to 39.3 °C. The most remarkable finding during physical examination was an extremely painful, swollen left knee with an abrasion on the left lower leg.
Laboratory findings on admission revealed a C-reactive protein of 460 mg/L, leukocyte count of 11.8 × 109/L with severe acute renal insufficiency (creatinine 245 µmol/L), arterial blood gas with metabolic acidosis based on a lactate of 6.6 mmol/L and a bicarbonate level of 19.0 mmol/L. X-ray of the left knee showed osteolytic bone lesions of the tibia and gas in the suprapatellar pouch . No blood samples were taken on admission to measure ethanol levels. Based on these findings, we concluded that he developed severe shock with organ dysfunction, but without meeting the definition of septic shock at that moment according to the Sepsis-3 guidelines . This was probably caused by bacterial arthritis or as a differential diagnosis as a result of pneumonia based on the dyspnea and chest X-ray. Pulmonary embolism and tuberculosis were ruled out by computed tomography (CT) angiography of the chest.
The patient was treated according to the Surviving Sepsis guideline . Blood cultures were taken, and cefuroxime was administered within an hour after presentation at the emergency department, as well as administration of a tetanus vaccine. Based on physical examination and X-ray of the left knee, a bacterial arthritis was deemed most likely. Therefore, an arthroscopy was performed to confirm the diagnosis and perform a debridement. During the procedure, high quantities of pus were removed. Antibiotic treatment with flucloxacillin was started, according to the local empirical treatment of septic arthritis. In addition, thiamine was given due to the history of alcohol abuse. Postoperatively he developed severe septic shock with rapidly progressive multiorgan failure including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) with severe hypoxemia . We treated the hypoxemia with mechanical ventilation and the shock by resuscitation with fluids and high doses of norepinephrine. Despite all efforts, the patient died. Blood cultures (Biomerieux Bact/ALERT®), on admission and day 1, and synovial fluid cultures (local routine culture methods) grew C. botulinum after 1 day of incubation without any other pathogens. Sequencing (16S) of aspirated synovial fluid of the left knee showed C. botulinum. Autopsy was performed, no other cardio, pulmonary or internal organ abnormalities were found. A small superficial abrasion just below the tense swollen left knee showed yellow pus. Cross section of the tibia behind the abrasion showed a lytic lesion.