M is a 15years old male who was delivered at home. Pregnancy and immediate post-partum period were uneventful. It was noted soon after birth that the right lower limb was progressively increasing in size when compared with the rest of the upper and lower limbs. He had an uneventful childhood except that he spent a lot of time at home and was withdrawn from other children. He was healthy but soon the limb began to be too heavy for him to move around with and he could no longer afford proper foot wears. His mother who raised him abandoned him which led him to the streets. He was soon recognized by a friend of his father and was rescued from the street. He presented at the University of Calabar Teaching Hospital for the first time at the age of 15 years. He was initially managed at the pediatric dermatologic clinic as a case of suspected elephantiasis and later referred to the Pediatric Surgery Unit where an initial diagnosis of congenital gigantism was made. He was referred for x-rays and Doppler studies of both lower limbs. The diagnosis of typical KTWS was made on the basis of clinical and radiological findings which included the following:
Skin: Port wine stains on both hands and feet .
Musculo-skeletal system: Marfan like hands and feet, no significant limb length discrepancy. There were marked differences in the circumferential dimensions of the lower limbs . The right lower limb showed significant enlargement of the soft tissues of the leg and foot, worse distally, odematous right leg and foot as well as significant sclerosis of right foot with numerous hemangiomas ( and ). There were no differences in circumferences of the upper limbs (mid-upper arm circumference 18.5 cm, mid-forearm circumference 18 cm.
Cardiovascular system: Significant right lower limb varicosities, multiple sinuses in which clear but foul smelling lymph was noted to be draining .
Genitourinary System: enlarged peni-scrotal organ with subcutaneous oedema .
All other systems were essentially normal. Patient in addition was asked to carry out multi detector computerized angiography which has not been done due to financial constraint.
Firm bandaging of the affected limb was applied in order to reduce lymphatic flow and prevention of infection. Antibiotics and pain relief were also prescribed. Patient is still being awaited as the managing team have decided to bear the cost of the rest of his investigations and treatment. Surgical debulking of the right foot is being envisaged at the moment.