The patient was a 42-year-old female, with one previous pregnancy, with a history of cesarean section seven years previously and resection of endometriosis of the cephalic scar (Pfannenstiel) two years previously at another service, for which a histopathological diagnosis of abdominal wall endometriosis was made.
Her condition evolved with progressive expansion in the region previously resected, for eight months, leading to presence of a bulging mass in the right side of the anterior abdominal wall, with cyclical local pain. During the investigation period, the patient said that she did not have any genitourinary or gastrointestinal symptoms, or any presence of lymph nodes or systemic symptoms.
Physical examination revealed a solid mass of approximately 10 cm x 6 cm in the anterior wall of the abdomen bordering the pubis. It extended inferiorly to the umbilical scar and laterally to the upper border of the iliac crest. At the time of the physical examination, there was no lymph node swelling in the inguinal region.
Laboratory tests and tumor marker investigations (CA 125, CA 19-9, CEA and alpha-fetoprotein) were requested and these were found to be within normal limits. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a heterogeneous expansive formation that was predominantly hypoattenuating, with images suggestive of internal septation. It measured around 10.6 cm x 4.7 cm x 8.3 cm along the major transverse, anteroposterior and longitudinal axes, respectively, and was located in the anterior pelvic wall, with the largest axis to the right of the midline, involving the rectus abdominis muscle .
The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy by means of a Pfannenstiel incision, followed by block resection of the abdominal mass with margins to the peritoneum, along with lymphadenectomy of the external and inguinal iliac chains. The abdominal wall was reconstructed to reconstitute the defect caused by resection of the tumor, using a semi-absorbable tissue-separating screen composed of a polypropylene parietal face and a visceral face coated with carboxymethyl cellulose. This rectangular sodium hyaluronate mesh measured 20.3 cm x 30.5 cm (Sempramesh IP Composite Bard Davol Inc.).
Histological analysis on the abdominal mass revealed infiltration by malignant epithelioid neoplasia into soft tissues, thus confirming the immunohistochemical profile of adenocarcinoma with clear cell components . The antigens investigated in the immunohistochemical evaluation are listed in . Lymphadenectomy showed metastatic involvement of an external iliac chain lymph node (1/8), and that other lymph nodes of the iliac and inguinal chains presented lymphoid hyperplasia (0/11).
Our patient is in her second postoperative month, without having presented any clinical or surgical intercurrence to date. She is being followed up by the oncology sector and an adjuvant chemotherapy scheme has been indicated.