A 47-year-old female Asian with intermittent involuntary movements of the left upper limb was admitted to our facility. The limb shaking was coarse, rhythmic and flapping wing-like, accompanied by neck torsion while sparing the face and trunk (Supp2.Video.). The first episode occurred 14 h before admission when the patient had arisen from supine position, and another episode also occurred when a similar postural change occurred soon after admission. Both episodes lasted 2–3 min and stopped 20 s after the patient changed back to the supine position. The patient had no consciousness disturbances, urinary incontinence, dystonia posture or tongue biting during the attacks. The patient reported a nonremarkable personal history and had no history of epilepsy, stroke, hypertension and other cerebrovascular disease risk factors, together with no report of any major trauma, surgery or any other events in the previous 6 months. Physical examination showed no neurological deficits except mild weakness in her left limb (Medical Research Council scale: 4). The neuropsychological evaluation was normal. Cardiological evaluations, including echocardiography, electrocardiography and cardiac biochemical markers (pro-brain natriuretic peptide, creatine kinase MB isoenzyme, troponin T), were without apparent abnormalities. Video-electroencephalogram and diffusion-weighted imaging were performed immediately after admission with no remarkable findings, whereas time-of-flight imaging magnetic resonance angiography (TOF-MRA) revealed multiple irregular stenoses of the right ICA accompanied by multiple filling defects . On native source TOF-MRA images, a "dual lumen sign" with an intimal flap was detected in the right ICA . Spontaneous right ICA dissection was suspected. Before further investigation, statin therapy with dual antiplatelet therapy (hydroclopidogrel, 75 mg per day, combined with aspirin, 100 mg per day) was administered for three days with no recurrence of limb shaking. More examinations were performed afterwards. On contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (CE-MRA) and sagittal black-blood T1WI, an intravascular haematoma with irregular lumen stenosis was observed, which overall indicated right ICA dissection . The fact that TIA occurred in a relatively young female with no cerebrovascular risk factors led us to evaluate the cervical and cerebral vasculature more thoroughly and precisely. Thus, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed. The DSA further confirmed the dissection because a "line-like" change was observed , while the renal artery was normal. Meanwhile, in the left ICA, we detected a “string-of-beads” appearance , which led to a suspicion of FMD. Although the ICA dissection related to the limb shaking TIA was not at the same site as the “string-of-beads” appearance, we still highly suspected that the ICA dissection was probably secondary to FMD. Sustained dual anti-platelet therapy was prescribed after discharge, and we suggested that she measure her blood pressure daily. Three months later, the patient returned to our department with no recurrence of limb shaking or neurological deficits. High-resolution magnetic resonance vessel wall imaging (HRMR-VWI) was performed to detect pathological changes in the vessel wall. The previous dissection in the right ICA had been mostly resolved, and only a few spotted intramural haematomas were left . Notably, a characteristic "string-of-beads” appearance was observed on the right ICA at this time . Considering the overall clinical data, the patient was diagnosed with limb shaking TIA due to ICA dissection with FMD.