The patient was a 25-year-old male who had sustained sudden severe pain in the left lower back and radiated to the scapular area for 4 h, accompanied by breathing difficulties with shock. The CT scan confirmed a ruptured TAAA (Crawford type IV). Bilateral lens exchange surgery was operated 1 year ago. According to features like age, the past ocular damage, C-reactive protein level of 71.5 mg/L and calcitonin level of 0.414 ng/L, TAAA rupture caused by BD was highly suspected.
Emergent arteriography demonstrated a huge ruptured TAAA with the maximal diameter of 102 mm. The proximal end of the aneurysm was parallel to the top of the celiac artery. The distal end was 20 mm below the opening of the right renal artery, while was proximal to the inferior mesenteric artery. The ruptured location of TAAA was near the opening of the right renal artery. The celiac artery, left renal artery and superior mesenteric artery were occluded, while the collateral circulation was from the inferior mesenteric artery . The maximal diameter of proximal aorta above the celiac artery was 21.2 mm, the diameter of distal aorta below the right renal artery was 15.2 mm and that of the proximal right renal artery was 6 mm measured by arteriography and CT.
Because of the different upper and lower diameters of the abdominal aorta in the lesion, we chose a bifurcated stent-graft (ENDURANT, Medtronic, USA, 23–16-145 mm). The main body of the abdominal aortic stent-graft was deployed on the back table in the operating room. Fenestration (6*6 mm) was then performed at 5 cm from the proximal top of the stent graft, and in the 9 o’clock direction with the radioactive “8” mark at the edge of the hole. The short bifurcated component of the stent-graft was occluded. The in-vitro fenestrated stent-graft was re-sent into the delivery system. The stent-graft was delivered from the right femoral artery to the aorta over the super-stiff guidewire, then deployed in the right position of the fenestration facing to the opening of the right renal artery. The arteriography demonstrated that the right renal artery was patent from the fenestration, but still with lots of endoleak. Then a covered stent (Viabahn, GORE, USA, 6*20 mm) was put into the right renal artery via the fenestration.
A 5F vertebral catheter was preloaded into the aortic aneurysm sac for filling treatment from the left femoral artery before the aortic stent-graft was deployed. A Coda balloon (Cook Medical, Bloomington, Ind) was used to block proximal blood flow. Then, 30 ml fibrin sealant (Shanghai RAAS Blood Products Co, Ltd., Shanghai, China), including 15 ml fibrinogen (90 mg/ mL) and 15 ml thrombin (500 IU/mL) solutions, was injected into the sac of aneurysm. After the balloon was withdrawn, the arteriography was performed that the proximal end of the stent-graft was above the diaphragm and the distal end of the stent-graft was above the inferior mesenteric artery. The length of the proximal and distal landing zone was more than 4 cm. The right renal artery was patent without any endoleak, and the collateral circulation of the left renal artery and superior mesenteric artery was static from the patent inferior mesenteric artery. the patient was transferred to ICU after the surgery.
After the endovascular treatment, the patient had no postoperative complications, such as renal insufficiency, ischemic intestinal symptoms and paraplegia. The hemodynamic function was kept stable. Tetracycline and dexamethasone were used for BD pulse therapy for 3 days. The patient kept taking prednisone for 1 year. The CTA follow-up 1 year after the surgery showed that the diameter of the aortic aneurysm was reduced even to the normal diameter of the artery and retroperitoneal hematoma was absorbed without any endoleak. The right renal artery and the collateral circulation from the inferior mesenteric artery were patent . The ESR and CRP values were within the normal range.