57-year-old male patient, born in Chile, with a history of Beta-thalassemia in pharmacological treatment with oral folic acid and iron, with a history of BCG vaccination in childhood, eutrophic.

During 2021, he presented a case of a year-long evolution of significant weight loss, loss of appetite and abdominal pain of a colic type. The initial laboratory study showed a normocytic, normochromic anaemia with a negative serological study of hepatitis B and C viruses and a non-reactive HIV. Complementary study: Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis: segmental thickening of the ascending and descending colon with adjacent inflammatory changes; upper gastrointestinal endoscopy: no significant alterations. Incomplete colonoscopy without ileocecal evaluation: two ulcerated lesions in the ascending and sigmoid colon, suggestive of neoplasia. Colon mucosa biopsies reported chronic active colitis with the presence of granulomas, and negative Ziehl Neelsen and Kinyoun stains. A PET/CT FDG scan was performed due to suspicion of neoplasia, which reported a distal ileal and inflammatory ascending and descending colon segments, and hypermetabolic ileocolic lymph nodes, suggestive of IBD. Subsequently, an MRI enterography was performed, which reported images compatible with ileocecal involvement in Crohn's disease. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of inflammatory phenotype of Crohn's disease with ileocolonic involvement was made, and corticosteroid therapy (prednisone 1 mg/kg with progressive tapering in 8 weeks) and azathioprine were initiated for 2 months.

Patient develops clinical deterioration characterised by abdominal pain, dysenteric diarrhea and fever of 38 °C. Laboratory highlights haemoglobin of 8.9 g/dl, white blood cells of 2,490, C reactive protein of 30.18 mg/dl, VHS 15 and severe hypoalbuminaemia of 2.6 g/dl. He is hospitalised for severe crisis of Crohn's disease and eventual need of biological therapy.

On admission, intravenous corticosteroid therapy was initiated and a pre-biological study was requested. Abdominal CT with inflammatory ileocolonic involvement, Quantiferon TB positive, with chest radiography and chest CT without alterations.

A new ileocolonoscopy was performed which reported: "active Crohn's colitis with ulcerative involvement of the ileum, sigmoid and rectum". Staged biopsies reported necrotizing granulomas with positive Ziehl Neelsen staining in all samples. Corticosteroids were de-escalated and anti-tuberculosis therapy was initiated with a standard scheme with a good early clinical response.
