A 42-year-old Indonesian female, presented at Hamad General Hospital in Doha, Qatar complaining of an on and off lower abdominal pain mainly in the right iliac fossa. She had a normal delivery 15 years ago, had regular menstrual cycles, and no previous medical illnesses.
She was vitally stable, with no significant lymphadenopathy or pedal edema. Abdominal examination revealed midline palpable firm mass with mild tenderness. The mass arose from the pelvis, extending 2 cm below the umbilicus. There was no ascites. Complete blood picture, renal and liver function tests were normal except for hemoglobin of 11.7 g/dl, and CA 125 was elevated (251 KU/L).
Abdominal ultrasound showed a large solid cystic mass in the right adnexa region, reaching the midline (≈6 × 13 cm) with mild vascularity in the solid component. Both ovaries were not separately visualized. There was mild left hydrosalpinx and mild ascites. Transvaginal ultrasound did not show the left ovary, but the right ovary was visualized separately (2.5 × 2.1 cm) and confirmed the presence of complex solid cystic mass in the middle of the pelvis. The mass (13.5 × 9.8 cm) extended to the left adnexa, with cystic area (9.2 × 5.9 cm) and a solid component (9.1 × 7 cm) that had increased vascularity. Further chest/abdomen/pelvis CT and MRI confirmed the size and solid/ cystic nature of the mass and showed no metastatic lesions, and also deviation of uterus to the left side.
The patient’s clinical picture was discussed at our gynecologic multidisciplinary meeting and total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH), bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy (BSO) and lymphadenectomy were decided. Patient underwent TAH + BSO plus infracolic omentectomy. During surgery, a freely mobile left ovarian mass was found with irregular surface and intact capsule. Right adnexa and uterus were normal. Patient had a smooth post-operative recovery and was discharged. Microscopic examination revealed an 11.0 cm left ovarian papillary thyroid carcinoma arising in SO , with metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma to the right ovary. No malignancy was found in right fallopian tube, uterus or cervix and there were negative lymph nodes. Following the histopathology results, patient had thyroid function tests (TSH, free T4, thyroglobulin) that were all normal. Thyroid ultrasound revealed 7 × 11 mm complex nodule, a 6 × 6 mm complex nodule and a 3 × 4 mm cyst in the left thyroid lobe. No lesions were observed in the right thyroid lobe. The patient’s clinical findings were discussed at our thyroid multidisciplinary meeting where total thyroidectomy and radioactive iodine therapy were decided; however the patient refused further surgical management, and was lost to follow up as she left the country.
Upon histopathologic examination, a papillary thyroid carcinoma was identified arising in SO tumor (11.0 cm in greatest dimension) of the left ovary , and a small metastatic focus measuring 0.1 cm in the right ovary. There was no malignancy in right fallopian tube, uterus or cervix and negative lymph nodes. Thyroglobulin immunohistochemical stained section highlighted the thyroid tissue in a background of ovarian tissue with SO, and confirmed the origin from thyroid tissue . AJCC Pathologic tumor staging was p T1b and FIGO stage was IB.