A 53-year-old Chinese lady, with a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus and chronic depression, presented with an 8 month duration of severe medial right knee pain associated with varus knee deformity. Pain was exacerbated on walking and standing. She was initially treated conservatively with a course of non-steroidal inflammatory drugs, intra-articular visco-supplementation, physiotherapy and weight loss regime. Despite a two-year trial of non-surgical therapy, she continued to experience a deterioration in her symptoms with limitation ofher functional status requiring a quadstick as a walking aid. Clinical examination revealed bilateral genu varum. Range of motion was limited to 0 to 110° with no fixed flexion deformity found bilaterally. Significantly, there was medial joint line tenderness and absence of lateral joint line and patellofemoral tenderness. Minimal effusion was found in the right knee. No limb length discrepancy or varus knee thrust was found. Bilateral weight-bearing knee and long limb radiographs were performed . Significant medial compartment radiographic osteoarthritic changes were noted in the right knee, corresponding to Kellgren-Lawrence grade 3 osteoarthritis. These changes included loss of medial joint space, varus knee deformity and the presence of marginal osteophytes. The femoral-tibial angle measured was 175° and the anatomical lateral distal femoral angle was 86°. We performed a diagnostic knee arthroscopy and then proceeded to an opening wedge high tibial osteotomy using the Tomofix plate after a failed two year trial of conservative therapy . Arthroscopic findings include medial compartment Outer bridge grade 4 lesion with degenerate radial tear of the posterior horn of the medial meniscus. The lateral compartment had no cartilage or meniscal tear. Intra-operative correction with the opening wedge osteotomy was guided with the use of radiographic imaging. Post-operatively, she was started on a rehabilitation programme, progressing to partial weight bearing at about 6 weeks.
However, she continued to experience pain over the osteotomy site up till 6 months post operatively. Pain was exacerbated on standing and ambulation. Repeat radiographs showed minimal callus formation over previous osteotomy site . She was treated conservatively with continued protected weight bearing. However, her symptoms deteriorated and she developed a fix flexion deformity of her right knee. A computed tomogram performed 8 month postoperatively revealed non-union of the osteotomy site with hardware failure and loss of correction . Three proximal screws were broken and 1 screw had back-out. The proximal tibia was angulated laterally in varus and anteriorly increasing the tibial plateau slope. Inflammatory markers were not elevated.
The patient subsequently underwent revision plating with autologous bone graft. The surgical approach was similar to the index surgery. Intra-operatively, findings were consistent with CT scan results. The screws were completely removed together with the Tomofix plate. Bone edges were freshened and the alignment was corrected under radiographic imaging guidance. Autologous cancellous iliac crest bone grafts were harvested and compacted into the osteotomy site. A proximal tibial locking plate was placed on the posteromedial aspect and locking screws were used to secure the fixation. The previous plate was medial. Intraoperative cultures sent were negative for infection. Post-operatively, the patient progressed from non-weight bearing to partial weight bearing at 3 months and full weight-bearing at 6 months post-operatively. She no longer experienced pain at the osteotomy site and repeat radiographs performed at 1 year post-operatively showed union . She was able to ambulate without any walking aids and no longer has any limitations in her daily activities.