Patient information: A 64-year-old housewife with no significant medical history presented with dysphagia to solids accompanied by a foreign body sensation in the pharynx for one month, which had not improved with symptomatic treatment. She had no respiratory difficulties or dysphonia. Her general condition was stable and she had no fever.

Clinical findings: On clinical examination, no abnormality or peripheral adenopathy was found. Nasofibroscopy showed a pink polypoid tumour with a smooth surface and healthy mucosa, located on the left ary-epiglottic fold and its attached pedicle in the left retro-crico-arytenoid region.

Diagnostic evaluation: cervical-thoracic CT scan revealed a well-defined polyploid mass of homogeneous tissue density that was enhanced in the post-contrast phase, located at the posterior wall of the hypopharynx. It extended anteriorly to the supraglottic level and was in contact with the laryngeal aspect of the epiglottis. Direct laryngoscopy under general anesthesia with multiple biopsies revealed a pink polyploid mass at the supraglottic level. Histological analysis revealed a large lymphoid cell infiltrate with irregular nuclear outlines and multiple prominent nucleoli. Immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor cells showed a positive expression of CD20, but not CD5, CD7, CD23, CD10, cyclin D1, LEF1, and Bcl6. Scattered plasma cells were identified, which retained CD138, but were present in a limited number. Proliferation index, evaluated with Ki67 marker, was 25%. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of a low-grade B lymphoma, consistent with a marginal zone lymphoma, was made. The laboratory findings were normal, including a complete blood count, inflammatory markers, and LDH. Extensive examinations, including a thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT scan and a bone marrow biopsy, revealed no abnormalities, which allowed the disease stage to be determined as IEBa according to the Ann Arbor classification.

Therapeutic intervention: The patient received four courses of R-CEOP chemotherapy, which consists of a mixture of rituximab and various products, including cyclophosphamide, etoposide, vincristine and prednisone. After each course, appropriate intervals were observed, followed by radiotherapy. Radiotherapy was administered over a period of four weeks, with a total dose of 40 Gy. It was divided into five sessions of 2 Gy per week, targeting the tumour site as well as the adjacent lymph nodes, including the upper mediastinum.

Follow-up and results: the side effects of the treatment were minimal. After three months of treatment, the dysphagia had completely disappeared. The endoscopic and tomodensitometric control examinations performed six months later revealed normal results. The evolution was favorable, without any sign of local recurrence. The follow-up period extends over two years.
