A 42-year-old Asian woman, gravida 0, para 0, underwent laparoscopic cystectomy for a suspected ovarian chocolate cyst at Kaiser Hospital in southern California, USA, in March 2014. Pathology revealed clear cell carcinoma. An optimal debulking operation was subsequently performed, and the patient was found to have FIGO stage II disease. She was administered adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin for 7 cycles. However, an increasing serum CA-125 level and recurrent pelvic tumors were noted in January 2016. She underwent a secondary debulking operation, followed by administration of adjuvant chemotherapy using carboplatin and gemcitabine. However, secondary recurrence deep in the pelvic cavity close to the sigmoid colon, rectum, and bladder was found in September 2017. Her recurrence progressed despite the administration of salvage chemotherapy, including liposomal doxorubicin and topotecan. In February 2019, she presented to a medical center in Taiwan and underwent a third debulking surgery including resection of the sigmoid colon, rectum, and bladder, followed by small bowel bypass, T-colostomy and bilateral percutaneous nephrostomy. Tumor recurrence occurred, with two major masses observed in the pelvis and abdomen soon after surgery. Palliative treatment was suggested because she was refractory to cancer treatment. Immune cell therapy with unknown immunological cells was attempted at a clinic but was ineffective.
She presented to our hospital with a high CA125 level, a pelvic mass with resultant vaginal bleeding, and severe cachexia in April 2019. Based on her history, genetic analysis of more than 300 genes was performed (Foundation Medicine, FoundationOne CDx) and revealed a stable microsatellite status, low mutation burden, and two mutations in ARID1A . Immunohistochemical staining of PD-L1 was negative . After discussion, the patient and her family agreed to treatment with a checkpoint inhibitor combined with bevacizumab, with the understanding that the checkpoint inhibitor alone would not effectively treat EOC based on previous clinical trials. The patient was administered pembrolizumab (200 mg) combined with bevacizumab (15 mg/kg; 400 mg) every 3 weeks. Her serum CA-125 level dramatically decreased from 1236.6 to 639.2 U/mL after 1 cycle of treatment; her CA-125 level reached the normal range (35 U/mL) after 7 cycles . Computerized tomography (CT) scanning also showed significant regression of recurrent masses and a partial response at 3 months after beginning treatment. The patient’s disease achieved complete remission after 9 cycles . She recovered from cachexia to a normal body mass index , as evidenced by an increase in subcutaneous fat and muscle in axial view CT images, as shown in Fig. . There were no adverse effects, such as hypertension, pneumonitis, colitis, or hepatitis, except for small joint arthritis in both hands in later cycles. As of the time of preparation of this manuscript, the patient has remained disease-free.