We report the case of a 37-year-old man with a 6-month history of headaches and blurred vision. Our patient had been followed by an otorhinolaryngologist for 2 years for cervical lymphadenopathy and a right submandibular swelling. The cervical lymphadenopathy biopsy was non-diagnostic twice, showing a non-specific inflammatory disease. He had no other medical background and no personal or familiar history of an autoimmune disease.
On examination, he had significant swelling of the right hemi face and the neck with trismus and a decrease in the visual acuity of the right eye. The dilated fundus examination showed a right papillary paleness.
Peripheral blood markers of inflammation were elevated. Screening for immunodeficiency and mycobacterial infections was negative.
Cerebral MRI showed a pseudotumoral lesion developing in the right pterygoid-palatine fossa spreading to the orbital and the intracranial cavity through the superior orbital fissure. The intracranial portion forms a temporal extra-axial mass mimicking a meningioma that infiltrates the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus. The lesion was strongly enhanced after the injection of gadolinium . CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were normal.
The patient was operated through a pterional approach. Our first strategy was a gross total resection of the intracranial portion of the tumor. Regarding its very firm consistency, we opted for a large biopsy of the extra-axial lesion. The tumor was solid, well-delineated, and strongly adherent to the temporal lobe.
Histological examination showed dense lymphoidplasmacytic infiltrate with storiform fibrosis [ and ]. Immunohistochemical staining revealed an increased number of IgG4-positive plasma cells . The inflammation is often focal, predominantly in a perivascular location.
Our patient received high doses of corticosteroids (0.6 mg/kg/day) followed by progressive tapering. His neurological manifestations gradually improved and resolved after 2 months. A cerebral MRI was done 1 month after a well-conducted treatment and showed a reduction of the tumor’s size .