A 27-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 0, with no history of previous disease and no family history of congenital anomalies, smoker and with a BMI of 18.3 received a diagnosis of spontaneous twin pregnancy at 12 weeks. The assessment of chorionicity in this gestational age was however hampered by the presence of an hematoma measuring 44 × 38 mm separating the two membranes, thus preventing the identification of the “lambda” or “T” sign.
The anatomy scan at 20 weeks revealed two female fetuses, both presenting isolated levocardia (IL) with normal heart and situs inversus abdominalis with a left-sided liver and right-sided stomach and spleen . Noteworthy, in one fetus (A) the gallbladder was not visible.
An amniocentesis was performed, with conventional cytogenetic evaluation indicating normal karyotype 46XX for both fetuses. No genetic anomaly was reported with the Chromosomal Microarray Analysis (CMA). Zygosity was assessed by microsatellite analysis; as shown in Table , twins share only a fraction of paternal and maternal alleles, indicating dizygosity.
At 36 weeks one fetus was diagnosed to be growth restricted, having an abdominal circumference and an estimated fetal weight less than 3rd centile. At 37 weeks and 1 day, the pulsatility index (PI) of the umbilical artery of the growth restricted fetus, with an estimated fetal weight of 2171 g (below the 3rd centile, according to Hadlock growth chart), was 0.89 (corresponding to 46° centile), while the PI of the middle cerebral artery was 1.45 (26° centile). By contrast, the other twin had an estimated fetal weight of 2521 g with normal Doppler parameters. At 37 weeks and 3 days the mother underwent a scheduled cesarean delivery. The birthweight of the two female neonates were 2430 g and 2185 g.
The histological analysis of the placenta confirmed the monochorionicity of the twin pregnancy, revealing the juxtaposition of an amnion on each surface of the dividing membrane . The chorion was not visible between the two amnion surfaces, thus excluding the rare occurrence of partially fused placentas [, ]. Postnatally, by using DNA extracted from blood samples, the molecular analysis confirmed the dizygosity of the twins, as already previously determined through amniocentesis.
Moreover, the two babies turned out to have the same situs anomaly, with IL and situs inversus, thus confirming the prenatal diagnosis. In order to identify possible genetic causes of such a concordant abnormal phenotype, the twins were subjected to clinical exome analysis with evaluation of 17 genes known to be associated to situs inversus. However, according to the variant classification ACMG (The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics), no pathogenic or probably pathogenetic variants have been identified. By opening the analysis to the whole clinical exome (4490 genes), the twins did not share pathogenic or probably pathogenetic variants. In addition, the twin whose gallbladder was not visualized prenatally, developed jaundice with acholic stool in her neonatal period.
The complete abdominal scan performed at 20 days of extrauterine life showed a left sided, damage-free liver with regular size (lateral diameter of 6,3 cm), a reversed relation between superior mesenteric vein and artery and right-placed inferior vena cava in relation to the aorta. These findings perfectly fit with abdominalis situs inversus with isolated levocardia. The scan revealed for the first time a shriveled gallbladder, which led to the diagnosis of biliary atresia type IV associated with splenic malformations syndrome . The clinical exome analysis was unable to identify the genetic cause of these abdominal abnormalities.
The twin with BASM at 38 days of extrauterine life underwent Kasai portoenterostomy, second-hand appendectomy and Ladd bridle dissection. Later, during the fifth month of extrauterine life, the baby was diagnosed to have a subclinical acute cholangitis, which was treated with continuous infusion of piperacillin tazobactam during hospitalization. Unfortunately, the baby had recurrent cholangitis during the whole first year of extrauterine life, and these are still occurring.