A 72-year-old woman had a mass in the right frontal region for 3 years. Due to the appearance of unsteadiness when walking, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 6 months previously, and she was diagnosed with frontal cranial tumor. Two months earlier, the patient experienced left hemiconvulsive seizures with impaired consciousness and was started on anticonvulsant medication. Subsequently, she was referred to our hospital for treatment. She had no neurological symptoms on examination but had mild cognitive dysfunction . Electroencephalography (EEG) revealed a tendency toward slowing of background and rhythmic delta activities in the right frontotemporal region of Fp2, F4, C4, F8, T4, and T6. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 10.7 × 10.0 × 5.5-cm mass from the right frontal to the parietal bone, expanding into the diploic space, and partly extending beyond the sagittal suture to the contralateral side [ and ]. Perfusion CT-indicated increased blood flow and volume [ and ]. Furthermore, the venous phase of four-dimensional CT angiography revealed that the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) was occluded due to the tumor . MRI revealed a high signal on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and T2-weighted imaging and signal suppression on fat-suppressed T1WI, suggesting a tumor with a fat component [-]. There was no signal change in the brain parenchyma, but it was accompanied by a midline shift . The right external carotid artery angiography revealed marked tumor staining from the right middle meningeal artery (MMA) . The tumor was fed mainly from the anterior branch of the MMA, and the other feeders were the posterior convexity branch of the MMA, deep temporal artery (DTA), and superficial temporal artery. Furthermore, the draining veins were highly dilated within the tumor and formed varices . A couple of the drainers were also delineated in the arterial phase, suggesting the presence of an AVF . The right internal carotid artery angiography revealed vascular loss at the tumor site and partial disruption of the SSS. There was no feeder from the right ICA, and there was a small amount of tumor stain from the anterior branch of the left MMA and the peripheral part of the left occipital artery. In view of the radiological findings, a provisional diagnosis of an intraosseous hemangioma was established. Since it was symptomatic and the patient and her family wanted surgical treatment, we decided to perform the surgery.
Preoperative endovascular embolization was performed with N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) and particles through feeding arteries. First, we introduced the microcatheter to the anterior branch of the right MMA and DTA and injected the NBCA diluted with contrast medium to 16.7–20.0%. Next, the MMA main trunk was also embolized with Embosphere® and fibered coils. Finally, the tumor stain was dramatically reduced after embolization . Two days after embolization, the patient underwent craniotomy. A thick DTA ran under the temporal muscle and was determined to be a feeding artery; therefore, we cut it after thorough coagulation. When the flap was inverted, the tumor was partially exposed on the bone . The tumor was fragile and easily bleeding. Many entry burr-holes were made on the surrounding normal bone to avoid cutting into the tumor. Since we found that the dura mater was firmly adherent to the inner table of the cranial tumor, the outer table of the tumor was first removed piecemeal. The diploe layer, containing a large amount of fat, bone tissue, and blood vessels, believed to be the main components of the tumor, was resected. During the operation, profuse bleeding from the inner table and dura near the SSS was encountered, and a blood transfusion was performed. The bleeding was controlled by removing the inner table and attaching dura, but a small part of the tumor near the SSS was left behind to preserve venous return [ and ]. After the resection, osmotherapy was performed to prevent cerebral edema. Cranioplasty was performed using a custom-made titanium mesh plate 1 month after the tumor resection [ and ]. After the tumor resection, E3V4M6 disturbance of consciousness and MMT4/5 left paralysis appeared transiently, but those symptoms disappeared after cranioplasty. The patient’s cognitive dysfunction also improved . MRI performed 2 years after the surgery showed no tumor recurrence, the occluded SSS was refluxed, and the midline shift had disappeared [-]. The EEG findings also improved, and although the anticonvulsant was discontinued 1 year after resection following the patient’s desire, the patient has remained seizure-free.
Histological examination revealed that the intracranial tumor was composed of mature adipocytes with various-sized dilated vessels [ and ]. There was no fibrin thrombus formation characteristic of cutaneous or soft-tissue angiolipoma. The abnormal vessels in the tumor had varices with a mild chronic inflammatory cell infiltration in the adventitia [ and ]. Immunohistochemically, these adipocytes were negative for MDM2 and p16. Taken together with the lack of cytological atypia of adipocytes and vessels , there were no findings suggestive of malignancy; thus, the patient was finally diagnosed with angiolipoma.