This case concerns an 86-year-old man who used to be a soldier. He found a mass on the right thigh with a 2.5×2.0×1.2 cm red nodule at the beginning of May 2017. Surgical resection was performed at the local People’s Hospital. The results of pathological examination after surgery in local hospital showed a right thigh subcutaneous small cell malignant tumor of about 2.5×2.0×1.2 cm . The pathology immunohistochemistry in our hospital indicated CK-L+, Syn++, CgA+, CD56++, Ki67+, CK-H−, CK7−, CK20+, TTF-1−, CD20−, CD3−, and S100−, implying MCC. According to the pathology and immunohistochemistry, he was diagnosed with MCC T2N1M0.
In mid-July 2017, multiple red masses appeared in the surgical incision area, of which the largest was hard and about 1.5 cm in diameter . A metastatic lymph node was found in the right inguinal region on computed tomography (CT), ~2.2 cm in diameter without distant metastasis . Next-generation sequencing from his peripheral blood showed KDM5AG931D mutation, which may have been associated with oncogenesis.
Due to his old age, the patient and his family members refused radiotherapy and chemotherapy. As MCC is closely related to neovascularization, antivascular therapy can be an effective treatment. As such, endostar 30 mg was administered intravenously on day 1–4 as the first cycle from August 2, 2017. After two cycles, the diameter of the major mass in the right thigh had reduced to 1 cm, and the remaining masses gradually subsided . According to the RECIST standard, efficacy reached partial response. Before the third treatment, the masses became protruding, with a recurrent trend . On CT, there was no change from before . Therefore, apatinib was added at 250 mg every other day from the third cycle beginning October 22, 2017. After the next three cycles of treatment, the masses were disappearing , while the diameter of the lymph node in the right inguinal region had reduced to 1.3 cm . In summary, after nearly 5 months (five cycles) of endostar and apatinib treatment, clinical efficacy had reached a partial response. During treatment, common adverse reactions of endostar and apatinib, such as proteinuria, hypertension, hand– foot syndrome, and hematological toxicity, did not appear.
However, from the beginning of the sixth cycle on February 14, 2018, there was a new lesion of 1.2 cm diameter at the right thigh , which indicated progressive disease. He then continued to receive endostar and apatinib. At the same time, everolimus 5 mg daily and tegafur 50 mg twice daily were administered. However, he stopped taking everolimus due to serious adverse effects of weakness and vomiting after 2 months. Three treatment cycles later, the diameter of the mass had gradually increased to 3 cm . The latest CT on March 5, 2018 showed no significant changes compared with previously . The patient was followed up for about 12 months. Finally, he died of infection at the beginning of June 2018. Progression-free survival was 6.5 months and overall survival 13.0 months.
The patient’s family provided written informed consent for publication of this report and accompanying images. We confirmed with the institutional review board of the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University that institutional approval was not required to publish this case report.