A 32 year old woman, gravida three para one with a history of cervical incompetence, polycystic ovarian syndrome, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APLS), and tubal factor infertility, conceived with frozen embryo transfer of a single blastocyst resulting from standard insemination technique; intracellular sperm injection was not performed. They did not opt for preimplantation genetic screening. The embryo was originally frozen in 2013, 2 years before the first identification of a Zika case in Haiti. Embryo transfer occurred in April of 2016. Her husband was actively traveling back and forth to Haiti for work before and during the pregnancy.
Her history of two mid-trimester losses was managed with an abdominal cerclage placed pre-pregnancy. She was treated with prophylactic low molecular weight heparin for APLS and insulin for her type two diabetes mellitus. She received betamethasone in the early third trimester for an episode of threated preterm labor. At delivery she was euglycemic.
Endemic Zika was identified in Haiti per the CDC early in the epidemic . When recommendations were issued regarding the possibility of sexual transmission of Zika virus in August 2016, her maternal fetal medicine provider counseled her to use condoms or refrain from intercourse with her husband, whose business travel continued through the pregnancy . She herself never left the greater Boston area prior to or during the pregnancy. She had not been to her native Haiti in over 10 years. There has never been any local transmission of Zika virus in the state of Massachusetts. Additionally, interview with the couple after delivery confirmed that neither of them ever experienced any symptoms of Zika infection. In the absence of symptoms in either partner, it was not our practice to recommend Zika serology during the pregnancy to screen for sexual exposure.
The patient underwent extensive fetal surveillance because of her multiple morbidities. She had a level II fetal survey at 18 weeks that revealed normal intracranial anatomy and head circumference (HC), and occipitofrontal diameter (OFD) measuring only 2 days smaller than her best dates. Biometry performed at 29 and 33 weeks was normal, and neither the HC nor the OFD measured less than 5%ile for gestational age. There was never any evidence of intracranial calcifications, ventriculomegaly, or abnormal posturing on antenatal ultrasound. She delivered in the 37th week via scheduled cesarean section. Her baby boy had APGARs of 8 (− 2 for color) and 9 (− 1 for color) at 1 and 5 min. He weighed 2775 g (30%ile by Fenton curve), was 49.5 cm long (65%ile) and had a head circumference of 29.2 cm (0%ile). The placenta was sent for conventional pathologic analysis given the maternal comorbidities. In addition, in light of the small measured neonatal HC and possible Zika virus sexual exposure, samples were sent to the CDC for evaluation. The timing of the IVF cycle relative to the Zika epidemic in Haiti was discussed with the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and CDC at length and the frozen embryo was determined not to be the source of infection.
The baby had a normal hearing screen and was discharged on day of life (DOL) 6. His workup for microcephaly included serum and urine Zika RT-PCR and IgM, both of which were ultimately negative; CMV, head ultrasound and MRI were also negative. Head ultrasound performed in the first week of life was notable for bilateral mineralizing vasculopathy but no intraparenchymal calcifications and otherwise normal anatomy. A subsequent head MRI was normal. The mother was rubella immune and had negative testing for other relevant TORCH infections. Approximately 3 months after delivery, confirmation was received from the CDC that all placental samples were positive for Zika RNA, thus supporting the diagnosis of congenital Zika syndrome. By the time the placental results from the CDC had been received, both parents were too far removed from the time of suspected infection to be able to do serology. HC at a pediatric visit shortly after receipt of the CDC report revealed an interval increase in HC, although it was still less than third percentile for his age. The child continues to meet normal pediatric milestones and receives early intervention services as well as assessment by pediatric neurodevelopment specialists. A genetics evaluation will be pursued if there is any lag in his neurodevelopment.