A 51-year-old male was transferred to our hospital after an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. He had family history of sudden cardiac death in one brother with autopsy study that reported normal cardiac findings, and genetic test was not performed. Moreover, he had a body mass index of 28.5, and medical history of uncomplicated renal colic, otherwise there was no more relevant medical history in their electronic health record system. In this regard, his family denied medical history of hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, allergies, smoking and illicit drugs. In addition, his family states that he used to drink 1–2 alcoholic drinks each week. He had no prescription medication, over-the-counter medications or supplements. Regarding his social history, he was of Caucasian and Hispanic ethnicity, and his occupation was computer engineering. Based on his income, he was on middle social class. He lived independently with his wife and two children. Furthermore, he had received the first dose of the vaccine Ad26.COV2.S (Janssen®) against COVID-19 48 h ago. His family admitted that the patient stated asthenia, myalgias, atypical chest discomfort, and low-grade fever (37,4 °C) in the last 24 h.
The patient had a witnessed collapse by his son, and basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation was started by the local police. An automated external defibrillator advised shock, and he was defibrillated twice. Then, 15 min later, paramedics arrived and found the patient in ventricular fibrillation, advanced cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed by mechanical chest compressions (Lucas®), pulse activity was restored, an ECG showed atrial fibrillation with ST elevation in V1-V2, AVR, and diffuse ST depression in all the leads. During ambulance transportation, the patient had several ventricular fibrillation episodes that were defibrillated and finally came out in asystole. After approximately 1.5 h since the patient experienced a sudden cardiac arrest and 75 min of advanced cardiopulmonary resuscitation, of which 45 min were in asystole, the patient arrived at our center. On admission, the patient was unconscious and in asystole rhythm. Bedside echocardiography ruled out pericardial effusion and pneumothorax.
The coronary angiography was performed by the senior interventional cardiologists. A 6-Fr sheath was introduced into the right femoral artery and another 6-Fr sheath in the right femoral vein. A JL 4 guide catheter 6-Fr was placed over the wire into the ascending aorta, and the left coronary artery was cannulated; it was patent, and there were non-obstructive coronary arteries . Then, the catheter was exchanged for a JR 4 guide catheter 6-Fr, while the right coronary artery was cannulated, an image of probable aortic dissection was observed . The right coronary artery was patent and without angiographic stenosis . Given the persistent asystole despite a prolonged advance cardiopulmonary resuscitation and the possibility of aortic dissection, a prompt in-room heart team discussion was performed with the senior cardiac surgeons. It was decided to stop and withdraw potentially life-sustaining treatment due to futility. Of the note, the SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR test was negative. In addition, genetic testing and necropsy were performed with the consent of his family. The genetic testing reported a negative result for explaining the sudden cardiac death. On the other hand, the aorta in the necropsy study revealed some mild atherosclerotic plaques but without either aneurysm or thrombosis (, , ). The coronary arteries were reported as with patency. In the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD), the intima layer presented a thickness that decreased 50 % of the luminal area, with mild calcification and macrophages but without complicated acute plaques such as rupture, erosion, or thrombus. For the rest, the necropsy study was reported as without relevant pathologies. This case report has been reported in line with SCARE 2020 criteria .