A 79-year-old man presented with a 1-month history of constant lower back pain (LBP) radiating to the right thigh. The pain had been increasing over time. Movements aggravated the symptoms. The patient reported 10 out of 10 points in the visual analog scale. He was afebrile but reported intermittent chills at night. There was no history of recent gastrointestinal procedures, dental diseases/procedures, oncological diseases, immunodeficiency, diabetes, or intravenous drug use.
On examination, the lumbar paravertebral muscles were tender, hip flexion on the right side revealed slightly paresis (M4/5), and minimal movement of the spine or the limbs was accompanied by severe pain.
On admission, the inflammation markers were elevated (C-reactive protein [CRP] 54,4 mg/l, white blood cells [WBC] count = 13,6 G/l, platelet count = 344 G/l). X-ray and a ct-scan of the lumbar spine revealed destruction of the intervertebral space L3/4 and the corresponding endplates. Because of the bony destruction, the L4-body presented an anterior wedging. The standing X-ray revealed a segmental kyphosis as a result of the wedge deformity of L4-body and the collapsed disc space L3/4 . Blood cultures taken on admission were negative. During the next 12 h, the pain got worse, and the patient developed urinary retention, which required a bladder catheterization. MRI-scan of the lumbar spine 12 h after admission revealed an advanced spondylodiscitis L3/4 with a liquefied disc, blurred endplates, and a collection of two abscesses in the right psoas muscle. Furthermore, a diffuse signal enhancement in both psoas muscles and the autochthone muscles from L3 to S1 was shown. A ct-guided fine needle biopsy was performed, and the empiric intravenous antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanate 2.2 g 4 times daily intravenously (iv.) was initiated. As the results of the biopsy did not show any growth of bacteria amoxicillin/clavulanate was stopped. After an antibiotic-free interval of 5 days (9 days after the CT-guided biopsy), an open transpedicular biopsy was performed. On the same day, iv. amoxicillin/clavulanate was resumed. The bacteriological examinations on aerobic/anaerobic cultures showed no results. The eubacterial PCR (16S rDNA-sequencing) revealed V. parvula as the causing pathogen. The antibiotic therapy was switched to ceftriaxone 2 g iv. and metronidazole 500 mg i.v. A CT of the abdomen was performed on day 21, which showed increasing abscess collection in the right psoas major of 4.1 × 4.6 cm but no signs of intraabdominal malignancy. A drain was inserted into the right psoas muscle, and the abscess formation was subsequently drained for 4 days.
Abnormal high calcium levels revealed an incidental parathyroid adenoma, which had to be removed surgically. Because of the additional surgery, the patient was discharged on day 27. On day 39, the patient presented himself in good health and pain-free to our outpatient clinic. Inflammation markers had normalized (CRP 2 mg/l, normal WBC count). A small residual abscess collection in the right psoas muscle was discovered on CT scan. The CT-scans and the standing X-rays of the lumbar spine showed no instability of the spine without any progression of the kyphotic deformity L3/L4. The antibiotics were switched to amoxicillin/clavulanate 1 g po 3 times daily for another 2 weeks, completing 6 weeks of the antibiotic treatment altogether. The patient presented himself to the last follow-up at day 95 in perfect shape, without any symptoms, and further changes in the lumbar spine X-rays .
There was no external immobilization of the spine during the whole duration of the treatment.