A 60-year-old female known case of hypertension and diabetes on treatment had undergone bilateral total knee replacement in 2002. The patient was treated with oral bisphosphonate therapy for osteoporosis, 70mg alendronate once a week orally from 2003 to 2007 (4 years) and then from 2009 to 2013 (4 years). The patient presented to the hospital in January 2013 with pain in the right side of the jaw and pain during mastication since 6 months. From her history, clinical examination and radiological findings she was diagnosed to have osteonecrosis of her right posterior body mandible . This was treated by way of sequestrectomy and saucerization in January 2013 and stoppage of Alendronate. There was no history of the patient having any dental procedure while on alendronate. In March 2013, she was admitted with complaints of pain and swelling over the right thigh following a history of trivial fall, and after clinical examination and history taking, X-rays were done which showed an atypical right displaced subtrochanteric fracture through the focally thickened lateral cortex of proximal femur . The fracture was managed surgically with proximal femoral nailing . The knee replacement was unrelated to the sub-trochanteric fracture. For the subtrochanteric fracture of femur, regular follow-ups were done postoperatively with serial X-rays. Blood investigations were done, and serum calcium was 9.5mg/dl, and serum Vitamin D3 was 20ng/ml which was optimized with 6,00,000 IU of intramuscular Vitamin D3 and maintained by oral Vitamin D3 medications. At 3 months, the fracture was in delayed union , and hence, the patient was started on injection Teriparatide 20mcg subcutaneous for a period of 18 months. The patient was kept non-weight bearing. The 6 months X-ray showed further progression in fracture healing , and the patient was allowed partial weight bearing. In October 2013, 10 months after stopping Alendronate, she again came with the complaint of pain in the right side of the jaw; X-rays showed relapse of ONJ sequestrectomy was done on the right mandible. In February 2014, 13 months after stopping Alendronate, the patient came with the increased pain of the right mandible and was diagnosed as a fracture of the right mandible; the fracture was operated on and fixed with a plate in February 2014 . Meanwhile, the patient continued injection Teriparatide. At 1year postoperatively, the atypical femoral subtrochanteric fracture had healed and the patient was allowed full weight bearing. 24 months postoperatively, X-rays confirmed solid union of the atypical subtrochanteric femoral fracture . On recent review, the patient walks full weight bearing without the need of any support, with a normal gait and is completely asymptomatic as regards the femur as well as the jaw.