80-year-old woman with a history of significant hypertension for 6 years, diagnosed, treated with 50 mg losartan every 12 hours, which, according to the patient, was in adequate control.

She presented a 6-week history characterized by morning stiffness lasting 45 minutes, inflammatory-type pain in the shoulders, elbows, hands, knees, ankles, and feet, associated with fatigue. Within a week, she developed edema in the hands and feet, so she went for evaluation and began treatment with anti-inflammatory drugs, without improvement of the symptoms, which is why she was referred to the service. Physical examination revealed pain in the range of motion arcs in the neck, shoulders, elbows, and wrists. She had limited extension of the elbows, synovitis in the wrists, proximal metacarpofalangeal and interphalangeal joints, pain in the knees, ankles, metatarsophalangeal joints, and edema in the hands and feet with pitting.

The patient was examined and found to have glucose 94, Cr 0.6, uric acid 3.5, ALT 8, AST 14, IgG 1132, IgM 92, IgA 198, Hb 12, platelets 388, leukocytes 4.6.

The general urine examination was unremarkable: no increase in acute phase reactants, ESR 56, CRP 23, with negative rheumatoid factor, negative anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies, negative antinuclear antibodies by indirect immunofluorescence.

Anteroposterior hand radiograph showed soft tissue edema and juxtaarticular osteopenia; there were no erosions.

Mastography and pelvic ultrasound were normal; tumour markers were in the normal range.

RS3PE was diagnosed and was managed with 15 mg prednisone every 24 hours. The patient was reevaluated 6 weeks later and showed improvement in the symptoms. The patient reported that 72 hours after the start of treatment, she had a significant decrease in pain and the edema progressively subsided.

The control laboratory studies showed the following values: glucose 91, Cr 0.8, ALT 12, AST 16, Hb 12.8, platelets 223, leukocytes 5.4, ESR 10, CRP 1.

The steroid was gradually reduced and discontinued at 10 months. The patient is currently under surveillance, with no new inflammatory events and no suggestive data of neoplasia.
