A 27-year-old black (“Habesha”) lactating woman with gravida 2, para 1, and abortion 1 was referred to our hospital from one of the local health centres with the diagnosis of chronic pelvic pain. Over the previous year, she had multiple visits to different health centers, was repeatedly given medications for acute PID, and was also prescribed different anti-pain medications. Her last delivery was one year ago; it was via cesarean section and uncomplicated. A CU-IUD was provided six weeks after her delivery while she was still breast-feeding. The procedure was followed by abdominal cramps and mild bleeding, which lasted several days.

Three months after insertion, she went to the health center because she could not feel the strings. At that time, a presumptive diagnosis of spontaneous expulsion was made. No further attempts were made to confirm its location. She was also not provided with another family planning during that visit. Upon arrival at our hospital, she complained of dull and aching pain in the lower quadrant of eight-month duration. Otherwise, she has no other complaints. Her vital signs were within the normal range; her BMI (20.5) and CBC parameters were within normal limits. A bimanual examination was performed to reveal a tender 3 cm by 3 cm cul-de-sac mass with no clear distinction from the uterus, and a speculum examination was nonrevealing. Pelvic ultrasound showed an undefined posterior cul-de-sac mass. Futher investigation modalities such as laparoscopy and CT were discussed with the patient, but she could not afford them.

Subsequently, suspecting an intraperitoneal IUD from history and the finding of pelvic mass on ultrasound, the radiologist performed an abdominal erect X-ray with a uterine probe inside in the AP and lateral planes, which both showed that the T-shaped CU-IUD is near and posterior (in the lateral plane) to the uterus.

Finally, a laparotomy was decided and the abdominal cavity was accessed by making a 5-cm incision on a previous transverse skin incision. A careful palpation of the pelvic cavity was performed to determine the specific location, and a string was palpated over the posterior wall of the uterus. On close examination, the IUD was found to be enclosed in a mass formed by the left ovary and the left fallopian tube, which adhered to the posterior wall of the uterus at the junction of the body and the cervix.

Considering that part of the string was protruding from the mass, the bowel, vessels, and other pelvic structures were examined for perforation, and there was no perforation. Subsequently, after adhesion was removed, the entire IUD (stem, arms, and string) was retrieved from the mass. The uterus was examined and was in a normal anatomic position. Minor surface bleeding from the posterior wall of the uterus and the adnexa was arrested with pressure. After ascertaining hemostasis, the operation was completed. As part of family planning, she was counseled, provided Implanon-NXT, and discharged without complications two days after surgery. Two weeks following the surgery, she stated that her pain had significantly decreased.