A 39-year-old female who had suffered from trichiasis for more than 30 years complained of a foreign-body sensation and epiphora. The corrected visual acuity of her left eye was 20/30. Slit-lamp examination revealed multiple milky-white soft masses on the corneal surface of her left eye . A slight opacity was suspected in the anterior stroma under the slit-lamp examination. In accordance with our previous classification guidelines, this mass was classified as having a gelatinous drop-like dystrophy-like appearance. These multiple masses were located at the cilia-attached region.
OCT (Cirrus™ HD-OCT; Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany; cube 4×4 mm, 512 A-scan, five-line raster 3 mm, A-scans) revealed that while there was a large mass under the thinned epithelial layer, there was no destruction on Bowman’s layer throughout the region , although a little high density stromal cells were observed in the anterior stromal layer.
On the other hand, the fellow cornea exhibited a linear subepithelial opacity that was not stained by fluorescein when observed under a slit-lamp examination . OCT revealed a high-density spot in Bowman’s layer , and this spot was coincident with the cilia-attached region and linear line observed under slit-lamp examination. There was normal thickness for the epithelial layer, and no change was observed in any other parts of the cornea in the fellow eye.
To resolve the foreign-body sensation in the patient, the corneal tissues were excised by lamellar keratoplasty. After these excised specimens were frozen in 30% sucrose, 3 μm sections were cut and then mounted on slides. After the slides were dried, samples were fixed with 10% formaldehyde and stained with Congo red and antilactoferrin antibody (2B8; Abcam, Cambridge, UK). All of the sections were incubated with 1% bovine serum albumin in phosphate-buffered saline at room temperature for 10 minutes each in order to block the nonspecific binding. Subsequently, the samples were then incubated with antilactoferrin antibody for 90 minutes at room temperature. The sections were washed three times in phosphate-buffered saline for 10 minutes, with the binding of the antibodies followed by reaction with biotinylated goat antirabbit immunoglobulin G and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin (Histofine SAB-PO kit; Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan). The slides were dehydrated using an ethanol series (70%–95%) and xylene, after which they were covered with a coverslip using mounting medium. All slides were examined by both light and polarizing microscopy.
Histological analysis showed that the eosinophilic material was positively stained, with Congo red showing apple-green birefringence under polarized light . The material was also positive when using the antilactoferrin antibody , with this area matching the Congo red-positive region. However, it should be noted that we found that Bowman’s layer was occasionally destroyed within the frozen section.
Ten months after the operation, the corrected visual acuity of the patient’s left eye was 20/20. Epilation of the cilia is performed regularly, and no recurrence of amyloid deposition has been found.