A 5-year-old boy was admitted to the Neurosurgery Department of Tianjin Huanhu Hospital on February 2021 due to right ocular motility disorder and right upper eyelid ptosis.
The patient suffered from right ocular motility disorder, accompanied by right upper eyelid ptosis and diplopia without apparent cause for one month, which had recently worsened. He had no fever, and denied symptoms of headache, vomiting, convulsions, and limb weakness. In addition, he denied fatigue, night sweats, wasting and other tuberculosis symptoms.
The patient had no history of previous disease, including tuberculosis, and he was not taking any medication.
The patient had no related personal and family history, and he denied any tuberculosis contact. Bacillus Calmette-Guerin vaccination was performed after birth.
The patient's vital signs were normal. Physical examination showed no remarkable findings of positive signs, including rales in both lungs, tenderness in the abdomen and palpable lymphadenopathy. Neurological examination showed right third cranial nerve palsy with restrictions of eye movements and ptosis, pupil dilation and negative light reflex. There were no meningeal signs. Muscle tone and tendon reflexes were normal. The patient was not found to have Marcus Gunn syndrome during the eye examination.
Routine laboratory tests, including complete blood count, hepatic and renal function and electrolytes were all in the normal ranges. MTB and HIV serologies were negative.
The patient’s brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mixed density mass in the suprasellar cistern with poorly defined borders, and multiple patchy calcifications were observed within it, with intact adjacent bone structure . A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed that the lesion was approximately 1.6 cm × 2.2 cm × 1.5 cm, downward involving the prepontine cistern, with clear borders, and the lesion appeared isointense on T1-weighted images (T1WI) and hypointense to isointense on T2-weighted images (T2WI), with irregular ring-enhancement after injection of gadolinium . No abnormality was observed on a plain CT scan of the patient’s chest, therefore active pulmonary tuberculosis was not considered.
To determine the presence of MTB in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which suggested tuberculosis, the patient subsequently underwent lumbar puncture. The CSF was clear with normal pressure and negative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for MTB.