A 9-year-old boy (14 kg) was admitted with feeding difficulties after birth caused by spastic CP.
After birth, the patient had persistent feeding difficulties, accompanied by repeated coughing and vomiting after eating. He was diagnosed with spastic CP along with severe malnutrition, thoracic scoliosis, laryngomalacia, pneumonia, and multiple site deformities, including those of the airway, thorax, hip joint, and both hands and feet. In addition to epilepsy and taking clonazepam 1 mg, phenobarbital 25 mg, levetiracetam 150 mg, and sodium valproate oral liquid 5 mL twice daily, he had a history of aspiration pneumonia and copious purulent sputum, for which he was prescribed antibiotics for 9 d. He was scheduled to undergo implantation of an implantable venous access port and gastrostomy to improve feeding and nutrition. This was not a typical elective operation and was difficult to adjust to a conventionally safe state, because the pneumonia was protracted and nursing conditions were limited.
The patient was diagnosed with spastic CP along with severe malnutrition, thoracic scoliosis, laryngomalacia, pneumonia, and multiple site deformities, including those of the airway, thorax, hip joint, and both hands and feet.
The patient had been abandoned as a toddler, and his birth and family histories were uncertain.
The patient’s general physical examination revealed typical facial dysmorphism, thoracic deformities, scoliosis, oxycephaly, and hip dislocation. He showed a Mallampati class IV airway with severely limited neck movement, thyromental distance of fewer than three fingers, and 20-mm-inter-incisor distance. Auscultation indicated an obvious UAO with distinct sputum sounds, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 85%-90% on 3 L/min of supplemental oxygen using a nasal oxygen cannula. Preoperative evaluation exhibited a class III physical status of American Society of Anesthesiologists with a difficult airway.
Routine blood tests showed a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 9.7 g/dL, hematocrit of 33.3%, mean corpuscular volume of 73.9 fL, mean corpuscular Hb of 21.6 pg, and mean corpuscular Hb concentration of 29.2 g/dL. Other blood test results showed no significant abnormalities.
Chest radiography demonstrated pneumonia, scoliosis, and right deviation of the trachea . Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed scoliosis, osteoporosis of the spine, significant atrophy of the muscles of the back in the bilateral thoracolumbar region with fat infiltration, and thoracic and tracheal malformation . Lateral cervical spine CT scans displayed laryngomalacia and malformations of the pharynx and cervical spine .