30-year-old male patient, resident of the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Bolivia, engineer, man who has sex with man (HSH), promiscuous and with personal pathological history of HIV infection, diagnosed seven years ago, with adherence to antiretroviral therapy of great activity (TARGA, dolutegravir, lamivudine and tenofovir), since the beginning of 2018.

On August 8, 2022, he reported unprotected sexual activity (without condom) with a stranger, then four days later he presented a papule with well-defined edges in the left gluteal region, near the intergluteal cleft and three centimeters from the gluteal groove (first day, August 12), with pruritus. In addition, he presented rectal tenesmus and tenesmus, with non-fetid mucopurulent discharge and pain during defecation. For this reason, he decided to go to the National Center for Tropical Diseases (CENETROP) on August 15, 2022.

On physical examination (day 3), 15 lesions, including papules and pustules, were observed in the gluteal region of varying sizes, less than 1 cm. In addition, an erythematous papule was identified in the lower third of the left thigh (sartorius) and a pustule in the neck. There were also bilateral, symmetric, painless, mobile, and slightly indurated superficial and deep cervical lymphadenopathies. The dermatological lesions were sampled, with pharyngeal and anal swabs, the latter to rule out sexually transmitted infections. The diagnosis of VS was confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). He was referred to his corresponding health center, and blood chemistry, serological, and other tests were performed.

Isolation and home monitoring twice a week (Monday and Thursday) was decided. On the seventh day, two solitary lesions appeared: a pustule in the left lateral region of the neck and an erythematous papule in the left costal rib. On the eleventh day, all lesions were erythematous-pustular in the gluteal region and neck, and some pustules were observed umbilicated. In addition, the patient reported that the lesions in the gluteal region were painful. On the fourteenth day, most lesions were in the scab phase and painless. A papule appeared near the gluteal cleft. On the eighteenth day, several scabs were observed. On the twenty-first day, all scabs fell off and discharge was decided.

In view of these findings, the following nosological entities were proposed: VS with HIV, gonorrhea, latent syphilis and infectious proctitis (IP). From the fifth day, general measures were indicated such as home isolation, frequent disinfection, daily washing of towels, clothing and bed at a temperature of 60°C, drying of lesions with a towel specific for the affected areas, and another towel for the rest of the body. Empirical and symptomatic pharmacological treatment was indicated with ceftriaxone 1 g single dose intramuscularly (IM); benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million IU, once a week for three weeks IM; transfer factor (HEBERTRANS®) twice a week IM for eight weeks; doxycycline 100 mg twice daily orally (VO) for seven days; vitamin D3 150 000 IU single dose orally; vitamin C 1 g every eight hours orally; fexofenadine 180 mg once a day orally; tramadol 325 mg/paracetamol 37.5 mg three times a day orally; Roydil (calcium dobesilate, lidocaine anhydride, hydrocortisone acetate and zinc oxide) once a day rectally. After three days of the application of ceftriaxone, the patient had improvement of the tenesmus and straining.
