A 52-year-old female with complaints of the right knee pain and swelling was referred to us in the outpatient clinic with a diagnosis of Baker’s cyst. The pain increased on squatting and climbing stairs and was associated with swelling in the posteromedial aspect of the knee joint for the past 11 months. There was no history of the previous trauma, no intermittent locking of the knee joint, and unremarkable medical history. On examination, there was a solitary, firm, cystic, fluctuant, immobile, and slightly tender swelling on the posteromedial aspect of the right knee joint of size around 4 3 cm with no local signs of inflammation. There was joint line tenderness on the medial aspect with positive McMurray’s test for a medial meniscus tear and no ligamentous instability. Knee range of motion was 0–120 with terminal flexion painful. The plain radiograph showed evidence of early osteoarthritis of the medial compartment along with patellofemoral arthritis. MRI knee demonstrated a large well-defined cystic lesion medial to semimembranosus and semitendinosus at the posteromedial aspect of the right knee joint of size around 3.9 3.0 2.5 cm with few thin internal septations. The lesion was hyperintense on T2-weighted and fat suppression images while it was hypointense on T1 weighted image ( and ) also noted was a horizontal tear in the posterior horn and body of the medial meniscus and oblique tear in the posterior horn of the medial meniscus. The patient was posted for surgery and underwent arthroscopic partial medial meniscectomy and open excision of the cyst in its entirety along with its stalk through a medial incision under spinal anesthesia . The base of the cyst was traced and sutured with the synovial lining, thereby repairing the defect. The excised sample was sent for histopathological evaluation and found to be a cystic structure lined by flattened epithelium with walls made of fibrocollagenous tissue infiltrated sparsely with lymphonuclear infiltrate and foamy histiocytes which were consistent with a meniscal cyst. Post-operative period was uneventful and at 2-year follow-up, there was no recurrence, pain, instability, or locking of knee joint. The patient had 0–120 active, painless range of motion at the knee joint. The patient was able to return to her daily activities without any limitations.