A 28-year-old woman was admitted to Jordan University Hospital in Amman, Jordan, February 22, 2009, complaining of severe muscle spasm. The history of the present illness dated back to three months earlier when she started to complain of painful muscle spasms in her arms, hands and legs. This had been associated with mouth deviation, teeth clenching and involuntary eye twitches with left-sided predominance. The episodes were associated with loss of consciousness and on one occasion associated with tongue bite, but were never preceded with an aura. The attacks were only relieved by taking diazepam and were followed by dizziness and generalized weakness lasting for a few hours. Laboratory studies showed hypokalemia (K = 0.69 mmol/L), hypocalcemia (Ca = 1.47 mmol/L), hypomagnesemia (Mg = 0.58 mmol/L) and pure metabolic alkalosis. Five years ago, she had gone on many kinds of diets in order to lose weight, and decided that the suitable one for her comprised the eating of one small bag of chips and a large quantity of water daily, and she started to vomit several times a day after eating any kind of food. The only food she could tolerate was salt, lemon, citric acid, tomatoes and cucumbers. As a result she developed some sort of addiction to salty food; claiming to consume 3 to 4 tablespoons of table salt (NaCl), 4 tablespoons of citric acid, and 10 lemons a day. Over the past 18 months, she had had difficulty urinating without the use of diuretics (Lasix® Furosemide 40 mg 12 tablets per day) and had become physically dependent on it. On occasions she also experienced legs swelling associated with high blood pressure self managed by increasing her diuretic dose. Afterward, she suffered from severe constipation due to her lack of appetite and reduced food intake caused by depression, the patient relied mainly on salty chips and lemon only as her sole food and was not well-fed as normal healthy people; consequently, the gastrointestinal motility was negatively affected which led to constipation. The patient was unable to pass stool except by the help of a laxative (Dulcolax® bisacodyl 5 mg 12 tablets per day) which she had become dependent on.
The patient lives with her 3-year-old daughter and her sister in-law. She claimed to have poor sleeping habits and usually slept during the day. She sometimes spent 2 to 3 days without sleeping at all. She claimed to use amphetamine and have attempted suicide several times. The most recent was attempting to jump off the balcony, which was prevented by her mother. She has been a heavy smoker (3 packs/day for the past 15 years) and drunk one pint (one pint is equal to 473 mL) of beer every 3 days. The patient didn’t have any seizure.
Upon hospitalization, and correction of serum K, Ca and Mg her symptoms were relieved. Known organic causes of salt craving such as Addison’s disease were excluded by appropriate investigations. A psychiatric consultation revealed a disturbed social history with masked depression. The patient was started and discharged on mirtazapine 30 mg 1×1, risperidone 1 mg 1×3 and citalopram 10 mg 1×2, CaCO3 tablets, K-gluconate syrup, Mg-sulfate sachets and vitamin D supplements for 6 months.