A 69-year-old man presented to the outpatient clinic of the Department of Breast Surgery at the Shiga General Hospital (Moriyama, Shiga, Japan) with a lump in his left breast in the 1990s. Physical examination revealed a mass measuring > 6 cm without skin invasion in the upper-lateral region as well as axillary lymph node swelling. The patient had a history of diabetes, hyper tension, cerebral infarction, and brain schwannoma controlled by oral glimepiride 0.5 mg, nifedipine 40 mg, and aspirin 100 mg. He had no remarkable family history.
Ultrasonography showed a breast mass and right-sided axillary lymph node swelling. A core needle biopsy was performed, and the tumor was diagnosed as a high histological grade invasive ductal carcinoma. It was ER-positive, PgR-negative, HER2-negative and AR-positive (detected by anti-AR rabbit monoclonal antibody SP107; Roche tissue diagnostics, Ltd.); the Ki-67 labeling index was 10% . The tumor was radiologically classified as cT3N3M0, stage IIIC disease (Union for International Cancer Control-TNM classification, 8th edition) .
Preoperative chemotherapy was not performed at the time; thus, a mastectomy and axillary dissection were performed. The final histological diagnosis was pt3n3a (36/39) M0, stage IIIC disease. Postoperative chemotherapy with epirubicin 40 mg/body with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 500 mg/body every 2 weeks plus oral cyclophosphamide 100 mg daily (CEF) was administered. After 2 cycles of the chemotherapy, computed tomography (CT) revealed pleural metastasis in his right lung. Anti-estrogen therapy with high-dose toremifene (TOR) 120 mg b.i.d and oral 5-FU, doxifluridine (5’DFUR) 1200 mg was administered as first-line therapy for metastatic breast cancer.
Two years after the recurrence, the patient complained of frequent urination. Radiological and histological examinations revealed that he had cT3N0M0, stage III primary prostate cancer with a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level of 40.5 ng/mL. He underwent radiation therapy at a dose of 66.0 Gy/33 fractions as local control to treat the prostate cancer. After radiotherapy, the prostate cancer therapy was temporarily suspended, and the watchful waiting approach was taken. Breast cancer therapy with high-dose TOR was continued since breast cancer control was good. Six months later, the PSA level increased from 3.7 ng/mL to 18.0 ng/mL. Oral estramustine phosphate sodium hydrate (Estracyt®) 626.8 mg was administered daily because this drug remains specifically in prostate cancer tissue and is not contraindicated in patients with breast cancer. The PSA level immediately decreased to within the normal range (3.7 ng/mL), and Estracyt® as well as TOR were continued for 3 years until the patient experienced a deep vein thrombosis in his right leg related to the endocrine therapy, while the antiplatelet therapy was ongoing.
TOR was stopped but Estracyt® was continued for symptomatic disease control. A CT scan revealed liver metastasis from the breast cancer after the patient stopped the breast cancer therapy. Estracyt® was changed to the non-steroidal anti-androgen agent, Casodex® as the second-line endocrine therapy for the prostate cancer and a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist as third-line treatment; however, the patient died due to breast cancer progression 5 years after the diagnosis of prostate cancer .
We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 1431 patients with breast cancer who underwent breast cancer therapy at the Shiga General Hospital between 1998 and 2017. The retrospective review of the medical records was approved by the appropriate ethics review board, and the study complied with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Of all patients, 8 (0.6%) were men; they were diagnosed with primary breast cancer histologically. Table shows the clinicopathological characteristics of the patients with MBC.