A 10-year-old Kurdish boy presented with bone pain and fever associated with night sweats, shortness of breath, weight loss (5kg/month), purple purpuric spots over the skin and bleeding from the nose. The patient’s history dated back to 1 month before admission. On examination, we observed pallor, cachexia, dyspnea, fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, multiple petechiae and ecchymoses all over the skin, dilated tortuous veins over the chest, pulse rate 120bpm, respiratory rate 23cycles/minute, temperature 39°C and blood pressure 90/45mmHg. Moreover, we found multiple small cervical lymphadenopathies and mild splenomegaly 3cm below the left costal margin. The boy’s liver was tender 7cm below the right costal margin, and he had gross abdominal distention. The initial blood counts were hemoglobin 64g/L, white blood cell count 34 × 109/L, platelets 25 × 109/L and blasts 38% (Figure
A). The blasts were homogeneous with a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, inconspicuous nucleoli and open chromatin, and some of the blasts were vacuolated. Platelets were markedly reduced (Figure
B). There was mediastinal widening visualized on a chest X-ray (Figure
). MRI showed lumbosacral vertebrae with diffuse infiltration of the axial bone marrow of the lower dorsal and lumbar vertebrae, suggestive of bony metastases predominantly osteolytic in nature (Figure
A–
C). Bone marrow aspiration (BMA) showed no fragments but few areas of necrosis. Bone marrow biopsy showed marked BMN (Figure
A and
B). The first immunophenotyping was not conclusive, but the second was positive for CD3 and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase and negative for CD20, CD79a and CD10.
After admission, the patient’s condition deteriorated and features of frank superior vena cava syndrome developed. The patient was treated with chemotherapy according to the ALL protocol, and complete remission was achieved on day 28. At the 24th week of chemotherapy, his condition relapsed on treatment. He returned to our hospital with fever, chest infection and 60% blasts observed on peripheral blood film, and the complete blood count revealed severe pancytopenia. The BMA was a dry tap, but the biopsy showed hypercellular marrow with extensive infiltration by mononuclear cells and disappearance of necrosis (Figure
C and
D). Treatment was reinitiated according to the ALL protocol (bone marrow relapsed protocol), after which he developed severe mucositis, uncontrolled septicemia and electrolyte imbalance. Eventually, that led to death.
The BMA at the time of diagnosis was diluted, and the slides appeared to show artefact with a few necrotic cells. The biopsy was a 1.6cm piece of tissue that consisted of a fragment of trabecular bone showing marked BMN, as shown in the image in Figure
A (before treatment). The result of immunohistochemistry was not interpretable for the first specimen, but for the second the diagnosis was definitive as precursor T-cell ALL.
During admission, we gave the patient intravenous fluid 3000ml/m2/day, allopurinol tablets 100mg/m2/dose and antibiotics. The patient’s condition subsequently deteriorated, and he developed progressive dyspnea, chest tightness, abdominal distention and fever. The patient was near to developing frank features of superior vena cava syndrome, but later he developed bilateral lower-limb weakness. The straight leg raising test was observed to be positive bilaterally. MRI of the dorsolumbosacral spine showed diffuse focal infiltration of the axial bone marrow of the lower dorsal and lumbar vertebrae causing altered hypointense T1-weighted signal intensity (Figure
A and
B). The image was suggestive of bony metastasis that was predominantly osteolytic in nature (Figure
A and
B). Incidental hepatosplenomegaly and bilateral renal enlargement were also observed (Figure
C), but there was no pressure on the spinal cord.
We started dexamethasone intravenous infusion at 6mg/m2. Seven days after the patient’s admission, we started induction therapy with vincristine 1.5mg/m2 intravenous bolus on days 7, 14, 21 and 28. Dexamethasone 6mg/m2 was administered daily, and daunorubicin 25mg/m2 was given on the days 1 and 7.
Upon starting induction, the patient developed attacks of tonic-clonic contractions. We found computed tomography of the brain without contrast to be negative. Electrolyte measurements showed severe hypocalcemia, and we induced correction, which stabilized the convulsions. On day 28, BMA indicated a few fragments and megakaryocytes were seen. Erythroid and myeloid series were present with all stages of maturation. The data also indicated predominant neutrophils and histiocytes, but the cellular elements could not confirm an excess of blast cells. The bone marrow biopsy report showed 95% cellularity, which was composed predominantly of early-stage granulocytes and normal maturation stages of hematopoietic cells. The blasts constituted about 2% of total marrow nucleated cells. The myeloid to erythroid cell ratio was 8:1.
After a 4-week induction period, complete remission was observed and we continued giving the early consolidation chemotherapy. Unfortunately, at the 24th week of treatment, the patient returned with fever, chest infection, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, and we found the presence of a few blasts in the peripheral blood film. The patient was not responding to supportive treatment that included antibiotics and antipyretics. The follow-up analysis of BMA showed excessive bone marrow infiltration by mononuclear cells with multiple inconspicuous nucleoli. Both erythroid and megakaryocytic precursors were suppressed in BMA, whereas in relapsed biopsy no necrosis was observed (Figure
C and
D).
On the reinduction therapy date, we followed a bone marrow relapsed protocol. On the 14th day of treatment reinduction, the patient developed severe anemia, thrombocytopenia and neutropenia. In addition, he developed grade IV mucositis with hypokalemia. The patient could not tolerate the complications, and he developed septicemia followed by sepsis. The patient’s death was an inevitable outcome. The overall survival period was 26 weeks after first diagnosis.