Subjective and objective examinations
This surgical case report is presented according to SCARE criteria [14]. A 56-year-old male patient came to the Emergency Department of the Regional Hospital with complaints of swelling of the lower jaw accompanied by fever from two days ago. The patient also experienced nausea, difficulty in swallowing, and pain that intensified during eating. He also experienced toothache and tooth mobility one week before admission. There was no history of trauma. The patient was seen to be weak upon admission, with vital signs: blood pressure 129/67 mmHg; heart rate 76 bpm; respiratory rate 20 bpm, temperature 36.7 °C. The patient’s oxygen saturation was consistently above 96% upon admission.

Physical examination demonstrated diffuse swelling in the submandibular region, soft and tender on palpation. The margin of the swelling was well-defined and had a color similar to that of the surrounding skin. Intraoral examination revealed no abnormalities. Oral hygiene was moderate, with some calculus accumulation on the lingual face of the tooth. The patient was treated with parenteral medication, including Ondansetron, Ketorolac, Ranitidine, and Asering®.

Ketorolac was used to relieve the patient’s pain. The patient also experienced nausea upon admission; therefore, Ondansetron was administered. The patient was found to be weak upon admission. Asering® was administered to provide stable electrolyte condition and prevent the patient’s dehydration. The medication was aimed to manage the signs and symptoms experienced by the patient and to prepare the patient for the operative treatment.

Panoramic, anteroposterior, and lateral radiography revealed a well-defined, lobulated, irregular-shaped radiopaque mass within the submandibular region. No additional stones are noted in the immediate vicinity. Head Multi-Slice Computed Tomography (MSCT) revealed a hyperdense mass surrounded with a hypodense shadow, reflecting the presence of stones in the duct of the left submandibular gland. The patient was diagnosed with submandibular abscess et causa submandibular gland sialolithiasis, and stone and partial gland removal were planned.

Surgical technique
Under general anesthesia, the stone and partial submandibular gland were surgically removed, along with the drainage of the submandibular abscess. Submandibular surgical access was established. Tissue dissection was done layer by layer including skin, connective tissue, until the platysma muscle. The submandibular gland was dissected out and partial removal of the submandibular gland was done. After the submandibular gland specimen evacuation, it was dissected to reveal the salivary gland stone, measuring approximately 1.2 cm. Postoperative medication, including intravenous antibiotics and symptomatic medication, was given. These regimens includes Ceftriaxone injection 1 g/12 h, Metronidazole injection 500 mg/8 h, Dexamethasone injection 5 mg/12 h, Ketorolac injection 30 mg/8 h, Paracetamol injection 500 mg/8 h, and Ranitidine injection 50 mg/12 h.

Results
The patient was followed up seven days after the operation. Pain and swelling decreased significantly, and there was slight edema in the submandibular region. There were no wound-healing complications or postoperative complications with extraoral sutures intact and no dehiscence. The sutures were removed during this follow-up period. After the follow-up period, the patient was discharged with a stable and complication-free condition.