A 52 year-old male presented to our institution having undergone local excision of a left breast tumor one month previously. The tumor had measured 7 × 5 cm. The mass had been present for 10 years. At physical examination there was evidence of recent surgery and the patient had a 1 cm ipsilateral axillary lymph node. Serum tumor markers and other routine blood test were normal. The liver ultrasonography, chest X-ray and bone scan were negative for metastases.
He underwent a modified radical mastectomy. Residual tumor measuring 2.8 cm × 2.6 cm was present. On macroscopic examination the tumor was firm and circumscribed . Microscopy showed the classical features of secretory carcinoma with a microcystic pattern with abundant intra and extracellular secretory material. No tumor was present at the surgical margins. Colloidal iron staining highlighted the secretory material . On immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein but negative for estrogen and progesterone receptor and HER2 (Dako, Carpinteria, CA). 2 of 24 resected lymph nodes were positive for metastatic carcinoma.
The case was investigated for the t(12;15) ETV6-NTRK3 translocation using two complementary probe sets . A t(12;15) translocation fusion probe assay and a chromosome 15 NTRK3 gene split-apart assay were used to detect the t(12;15) translocation. All BAC clones used in this study were obtained from the BACPAC Resources Centre at the Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute. All probes were labeled by nick translation with the use of the manufacturer's recommended protocol (Vysis, Downer's Grove, Illinois). BAC clones RP11-434C1 and RP11-407P10 telomeric to ETV6 on 12p were labeled with spectrum orange. On chromosome 15, RP11-114I9 and RP11-730G13, centromeric to NTRK3 on 15q were labeled with spectrum green and clone RP11-247E14, telomeric to NTRK3 was labeled with spectrum orange. Six-micrometer tissue sections were baked overnight at 60C and then subjected to FISH with a modified protocol (Vysis, Downers Grove, IL) . FISH signals were analyzed with a Zeiss Axioplan fluorescent microscope equipped with a COHU-CCD camera. Images were captures with Metasystems ISIS software (MetaSystems Group Inc., Belmont MA) with seven focal planes stacked for the analysis.
In view of the nodal metastasis it was decided to treat the patient with six courses of adjuvant 5-fluorouracil, adriamycin and cyclophosphamide (FAC). The patient abandoned treatment after the second course. The patient returned to clinic eighteen months later with two hard nodules in the surgical resection area measuring 8 × 8 cm and 4 cm × 4 cm, (one ulcerated), and three left axillary subcutaneous nodules, two measuring 2 × 2 cm and one 3 × 3 cm .
A chest CT scan identified pulmonary metastases with a right pleural effusion . The effusion was drained via percutaneous thoracentesis. He then began treatment with concurrent radiation (total dose of 60 Gy) and UFT (Tegafur-Uracil) to the chest followed by systemic UFT as a single agent for 3 months. Post-treatment, there was no change in the pulmonary disease and there was minor response of chest-wall and axillary disease .