A 58-year-old woman was referred to our center for further investigation of a cystic lesion in the pancreas. She has a history of repeated resection for brain tumor diagnosed as meningioma in another hospital. The first brain surgery was performed at 31 years of age, and she underwent surgical excision of the recurrent tumor 16 and 26 years after the initial resection. During admission in a community hospital for the treatment of a femoral bone fracture, computed tomography (CT) incidentally detected a 5.5-cm cystic tumor in the pancreas tail.
The laboratory data on admission in our hospital indicated a slightly elevated level of serum lipase (56 IU/L; normal range, 13–55 IU/L) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (47 IU/L; normal range, 9–32 IU/L). In contrast, the tumor marker levels of carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and DUPAN-2 were within the normal range.
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed a circumscribed well-encapsulated cystic mass in the pancreas tail with protruding vascularity-rich components inside. A hypervascular area that appeared like collateral vessels was also observed on the surface of the tumor . Dynamic contrast-enhanced CT showed a heterogeneously enhancing mass beside the splenic hilum with a large non-enhancing portion inside. From the arterial to portal phase, strong enhancement was observed both in the rim and the edge of the protruding solid components with the hypoattenuating area inside the solid lesions. During the portal to delay phase, all of these were gradually isoattenuated compared to the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma except for the non-enhancing portion . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed low signal intensity in the solid components on T1-weighted imaging and slightly higher signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging compared with the pancreas parenchyma. Additionally, the large non-enhancing portion on CT appeared as a bright signal on T2-weighted imaging, indicating cystic or necrotic change .
Based on these findings, we considered pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasm, solid pseudopapillary neoplasm, and hemangioma in the differential diagnosis. Although its morphological structure is untypical, mucinous cystic neoplasm was also considered given the patient’s sex and tumor location. Invasive carcinoma of the pancreas was excluded from the differential diagnosis. EUS-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy (EUS-FNA) was not performed considering the risk of cystic puncture and bleeding. We performed distal pancreatectomy with regional lymph node dissection for this disease. The pancreatic parenchyma was resected above the left edge of the superior mesenteric artery. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 15th postoperative day.
The resected specimen revealed a well-demarcated hemispheric cystic mass projecting from the pancreas tail and measuring 5.6 × 5.4 cm in diameter. The solid components occupied most of the lesion . The pancreatic stump was free of tumor with a margin of approximately 3 cm including the width of the stapler closure. Histopathological examination confirmed that oval and spindle-shaped cells proliferated bluntly with a richly vascular stroma, and they were configured to be a hemangiopericytoma-like structure . Immunohistochemically, the specimen stained positively for CD34, a mesenchymal marker , but negatively for cytokeratin AE1/3, an epithelium marker (data not shown). Furthermore, CD99, Bcl-2, and STAT6 were diffusely positive , whereas beta-catenin, chromogranin, and synaptophysin were all negative (data not shown). Therefore, we diagnosed this tumor as SFT of the pancreas. Further, the tumor showed an increased mitotic rate (ten mitoses per ten high-power fields), indicating its malignant potential.
Considering the similarity of meningioma, which was the patient’s past disease, to intracranial SFT, we conducted a histopathological review of her brain tumor. We found that it had the same characteristics as the pancreatic tumor and thus determined that the SFT of the pancreas was derived from the central nervous system tumor.
She underwent no adjuvant therapy, and no recurrence has been observed in the abdominal cavity. However, she developed meningeal dissemination 4 years after the pancreatectomy and is currently undergoing treatment.