A 25-years-old severe morbidly obese male (Body Mass Index [BMI] 54 kg/m2, Body Surface Area [BSA] 3.27m2) with no other known past medical history, presented to the emergency department with worsening respiratory distress. Patient’s family denied vaping, electronic cigarette or illicit drug use. On initial evaluation, he was found to have an arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 28 mmHg and an arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 79 mmHg, non-responding to supplemental oxygen and non-invasive positive pressure ventilation. He was endotracheally intubated, placed on lung protective mechanical ventilation with a fraction of inspired oxygen [FiO2] of 100%, and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Initial respiratory viral panel, blood and respiratory cultures were negative. Chest radiograph demonstrated bilateral pulmonary infiltrates.
Initial attempts to evaluate heart function with transthoracic echocardiography were unsuccessful given the patient’s body habitus. Over the following five days, efforts to decrease the fraction inspired on oxygen (FiO2) were unsuccessful (nadir of 80%), and his PaO2/FiO2 ratio ranged around 110-164 mmHg. Pulmonary compliance was still preserved at this point. Next day, the patient developed frank anuria and acute kidney failure, requiring initiation of continuous veno-venous hemodialysis (CVVHD). Transesophageal Echocardiogram (TEE) revealed a mildly dilated left ventricle with moderately reduced function (ejection fraction 30–35%), no signs of wall motion abnormalities, and a moderate-to-severe dilated right ventricle with elevated systolic pressures (50–60 mmHg) .
The patient hypoxemia worsened (PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 75 mmHg) with associated ventilator desynchrony and worsening pulmonary compliance (plateau pressures 39cmH2O) for which neuromuscular blockade was started. A pulmonary artery catheterization demonstrated elevated pulmonary artery pressures (systolic 58 mmHg, diastolic 32 mmHg, mean 41 mmHg) and a central venous pressure of 14 mmHg. Inotropic support (milrinone) and inhaled epoprostenol were started, all aimed to decrease the pulmonary artery pressures and enhance right ventricular function. In spite of these changes, the patient still remained severely hypoxemic (PaO2 64 mmHg) as well as hypercarbic and acidotic (79 mmHg, pH 7.22, respectively) with normal lactate levels (1.7 mmol/L, normal value < 2 mmol/L), as well as normotensive with no vasopressor requirement.
Given that conservative therapy for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) failed, the decision was to institute extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Since no obvious signs of low cardiac output were present, the decision was made to institute veno-venous (VV) ECMO, via a 25-French multi-orifice left femoral vein drainage cannula with its tip at the left iliac vein, and a 21-French right internal jugular vein return cannula with its tip at the right atrium, reaching flows of 5–6 l/minute . The patient was initially placed on sweep flow rate of 10 l/minute and FiO2 100% (PaO2 344 mmHg). The prior hemodialysis catheter was left for administration of medications and blood products, and the CVVHD was run through the VV-ECMO circuit. The patient was continued on lung protective ventilation with tidal volumes at 6 ml/kg (ideal body weight), PEEP 10cmH20 and FiO2 100% and the inhaled epoprostenol therapy was discontinued.
Three days later, the patient severe hypoxemia persists notwithstanding VV-ECMO at maximum settings (nadir PaO2 52 mmHg, arterial O2 saturation 81%). Oxygenator issues were ruled out by excluding any obvious thrombus in circuit and by confirming post-oxygenator high oxygenation levels (post-ECMO PaO2 332 mmHg). Nitric oxygen (NO) therapy was initiated to assist with right ventricular and pulmonary artery pressure off-loading. A supplementary 21-French drainage cannula was placed in the right femoral vein and its tip at the junction of the inferior vena cava and the right atrium , achieving flows of 7–8 L/min (veno-veno-venous [VV-V] ECMO). The patient oxygenation status intermittently improved (PaO2 310 mmHg), although a significantly elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was noticed (> 12,500 unit/L; normal range 313–618 units/L). Liver function panel was normal.
On next day, hypoxemia persists (PaO2 66 mmHg), with associated systemic hypotension (mean arterial pressure [MAP] of 52 mmHg) and signs of worsening tissue oxygenation (serum lactic acid 5.5 mmol/L). The team decided to switch to VV and VA ECMO with parallel circuits, in order to provide further cardiovascular support, relieve the patient’s refractory hypoxemia and provide adequate flows for his BSA.
The original VV-ECMO circuit consisting of a left femoral vein drainage cannula and right internal jugular vein return cannula was continued, and VA-ECMO was instituted through the existing venous cannula in the right femoral vein (which became the drainage cannula) and an additional 17-French right femoral artery return cannula with its tip at the distal aorta before its bifurcation . Distal right lower limb infusion cannula was placed to the right superficial femoral artery. No significant drop in the venous pressures in the original VV-ECMO or in the CVVHD lines was noticed when the four cannulations were instituted. The total flow of both circuits was 10–11 L/min: 5-6 L/min for the VV-ECMO and 5 L/min for the VA-ECMO.
The patient’s hemodynamics and oxygenation subsequently improved over the course of the next days (average MAP 68 mmHg, average PaO2 170 mmHg). A significant decrease in the LDH levels was noticed. No clinical or laboratory signs of upper body hypoxia (Harlequin Syndrome) was noticed. Adequate weaning of flow sweeps and FiO2 in both circuits was achieved. VV-ECMO was removed by hospital day #29. TEE demonstrated an improved left ventricular function (ejection fraction 45%) with persistent right ventricular dilation, for which the VA-ECMO was continued to provide further relief of the right ventricle and successfully removed 5 days later. The patient continued further ventilator weaning and planned for long-term acute care recovery.