A 53-year-old Japanese man visited our hospital for a scheduled follow-up examination for uveitis due to BD. His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/16 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 15 and 11 mmHg in his right eye and left eye, respectively. Slit lamp biomicroscopy with Goldmann three-mirror examination did not reveal active uveitis in either eye. Vitreous haze was graded as trace . Anterior chamber flare was evaluated based on the aqueous flare value measured with the Kowa FM-600® laser flare meter (Kowa Medicals, Nagoya, Japan) in photon counts per millisecond. Aqueous flare values measured with laser flare meter (LFs) were 12.6 and 7.6 photon counts per millisecond in his right eye and left eye, respectively; both were expected to be within normal range. An ultra-widefield (UWF™) high-resolution digital image (optomap®) was obtained with a Daytona imager (Optos, Scotland); no active uveitis lesions or vitreous opacity were detected . Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SDOCT; RS-3000, Nidek Co., Ltd, Aichi, Japan) was used to analyze the macular lesion; no macular edema was observed.
He had been diagnosed as having incomplete-type BD 11 years before. He was adequately treated with systemic corticosteroid and colchicine accompanied by occasional topical corticosteroids and mydriatics. Because his right visual function was disturbed by a preretinal membrane combined with vitreous opacity and secondary cataract in his right eye as a consequence of repeated bouts of severe uveitis, he underwent vitrectomy with inner limiting membrane peeling and phacoemulsification with intraocular implantation 2 years and 4 years after the diagnosis, respectively. Three years after the diagnosis he was given a systemic infusion of 5 mg/kg infliximab (Remicade®; Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, Osaka, Japan) every 8 weeks with no recurrence of uveitis attacks. He received no other treatments for BD besides the infliximab. He stated that his left eye had once shown mild intermediate to posterior uveitis, but that he had been completely stable since the commencement of systemic infliximab treatment.
Four days after the scheduled follow-up examination, he returned to our hospital to receive his regularly scheduled systemic infusion of infliximab. At the visit, he complained of blurred vision in his right eye. BCVA was 20/25 and 20/16 in his right eye and left eye, respectively. Intraocular pressure was 17 and 11 mmHg in his right eye and left eye, respectively. LF was 72.0 and 6.2 in his right eye and left eye, respectively. Slit lamp biomicroscopy with Goldmann three-mirror examination revealed severe AAU and deteriorated aqueous flare in the anterior chamber, with anterior vitreous opacity that was shown by the silhouette against the retina in his right eye . Vitreous haze was graded as 2+. We did not observe any abnormal changes in his left eye (data not shown). SDOCT resulted in a cloudy image due to marked vitreous opacity, but we did not detect macular edema .
He stated that 2 days prior he had received botulinum toxin (BOTOX®, botulinum toxin type A; GlaxoSmithKline K.K., Tokyo, Japan) 50 unit intracutaneous injections on both sides to treat axillary hyperhidrosis. Three hours after the injections, he noted severely increasing floaters and pain in his right eye. After he received the scheduled infliximab injection, however, he stated that the floaters and ocular pain in his right eye improved within a day. The severe vitreous opacity had attenuated considerably 1 month after the infliximab injection . BCVA was 20/16 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 10 and 9 mmHg in his right eye and left eye, respectively. LF was 31.1 and 26.3 in his right eye and left eye, respectively. Vitreous haze was graded as trace. Finally, LF was 15.2 and 14.6 in his right eye and left eye 3 months after the infliximab injection, respectively.
After this event, he explained he had once received botulinum toxin injections in the same way last year. He received the scheduled infliximab injection 2 weeks prior. He felt no abnormality in both eyes, and a scheduled follow-up examination did not reveal active uveitis on that occasion.