A 22-year-old female arrived at the Emergency Department presenting claudication when walking less than 300 m as well as increased paresthesia and dysesthesia in both pelvic limbs. The claudication, paresthesia, and dysesthesia began five years earlier. At the time of onset, the claudication was bilateral after walking approximately 1500 m with improvement after rest, while the paresthesia and dysesthesia were bilateral and involved all four extremities. At that time, the patient was diagnosed with Takayasu’s arteritis (TA) by the Rheumatology department from this institution based on immunological profile (i.e. rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, anticardiolipin antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), the American College of Rheumatology and Ishikawa criteria. [,] Six months prior to the patient’s visit to this hospital, claudication progressed (i.e. reduction in the distance able to walk to 500 m, increasing paresthesia and dysesthesia frequency). The patient had no relevant family and personal non-pathological history to her current condition. The patient denied the use of controlled substances, allergies, past blood transfusions, traveling to regions with endemic diseases within the last three months, tattoos and body piercings.
Upon initial physical examination, we found a patient recumbent with freely chosen body position, Glasgow coma score of 15, without focal neurologic deficits nor meningeal sings, aware of his environment, with reference to place, time, and people. The patient’s integumentary system was hydrated and without alterations, while the head and neck exploration had no alterations. Upon inspection, palpation, and percussion the cardio-respiratory system and abdomen had no abnormal findings. Precordial auscultation revealed tachycardia, but no aggregate phenomena. Abdominal auscultation revealed a systolic murmur grade III/IV at the mesogastrium. Right upper limb exploration revealed normal axillar, humeral, and radial pulses (i.e. presence of rhythmic, with normal intensity +++/+++, normal amplitude, and having a synchronous frequency with heart rate). The right ulnar artery pulse was absent. Upon left upper limb exploration, palpation showed the presence of normal axillar and humeral pulses; while radial and ulnar pulses were absent. Lower limb exploration showed absence of bilateral femoral, popliteal and posterior tibial pulses. The skin presented cyanotic appearance, especially of the toes of both feet. Upon palpation, reduced skin temperature was noticed and absence of edema. Upon admission, the patient had the following vital signs: blood pressure 100/70 mmHg in the right arm, 80/60 mmHg in the left arm, blood pressure in the right leg and the left leg were not detectable; heart rate 85bpm; respiratory rate 17 rpm; temperature 36 °C; weight 65 kg; height 167 cm; body mass index23.3 kg/m . Laboratory results at admission are presented in and the follow-up laboratory results in .