A 53-year-old white man presented to our knee clinic with knee pain. The pain was located in the posteromedial aspect of his left knee and first presented whilst training for a marathon. The pain was a continuous dull ache, which would often wake him from sleep. He had no improvement from conservative management trialled by his general practitioner, which included rest, ice, elevation, orally administered non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and physiotherapy. There was no history of trauma, locking, or giving way of the knee. He was otherwise fit and well with no medical co-morbidities; he was very active and had not had any previous injuries or surgeries to his left knee.
A physical examination revealed normal alignment of his knee and hindfoot, no effusion, and an area of point tenderness posteromedially, not over the hamstrings or the pes anserinus. There was full range of movement with a positive medial step off and good tracking of the patella with no gross patellofemoral crepitus. He also did not have any significant ligamentous instability and an examination of his ipsilateral hip joint was normal.
Plain radiographs taken at the time of presentation did not reveal any significant abnormalities and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was organized, which demonstrated the presence of a cord-like structure that originated from the fabella and passed medially, dividing into two parts around the semimembranosus tendon . The superficial part appeared to blend in with the semimembranosus tendon sheath itself, whereas the deeper part was thought to blend in with the superficial fascia of the gracilis and semitendinosus. This was associated with the presence of diffuse thickening of the distal semimembranosus tendon suggesting impingement of the tendon .
As he continued to be symptomatic, and conservative measures had failed, he underwent a knee arthroscopy which demonstrated a grossly thickened semimembranosus with fluid collection around it. A band arising from the fabella, running transversely across the popliteal fossa and around the semimembranosus tendon was noted, confirming the diagnosis of semimembranosus impingement. This band, thought to be congenital in nature, was divided, and the semimembranosus fully released .
Postoperatively, he recovered well and was allowed to fully weight bear with crutches. He was followed up at 6 weeks post-surgery, at which time his symptoms had resolved and he was back to training for a marathon.