An 82-y-old woman, gravida 2 para 2, suffering from right vulvar swelling and pus drainage for 1 week was transferred to our hospital. She presented with a remarkable swelling of her vulva as well as her right leg. Computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance imaging showed a 75 mm irregular mass in her right vulva; additionally, her pelvic and inguinal lymph nodes were markedly swollen. However, we did not detect any instance of distant metastases, and neither did the patient have a family history. Incidentally, the patient had been diagnosed with endometrial cancer stage IA, and she had undergone a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy 3 y ago. Histological diagnosis of the hysterectomy specimen had confirmed endometrioid carcinoma (grade1, pT1a cN0 cM0) (shown in Fig. a). However, lymphovascular space invasion was observed over the uterine wall (shown in Fig. b). No adjuvant therapy had been administered post-surgery. The current vulvar biopsy revealed small atypical cells with necrosis, a high nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio, and a proliferating solid mass (shown in Fig. c, d). The patient’s tumor marker levels were as follows: cancer antigen 125 – 20.2 U/mL (normal value: ≤ 35.0 U/mL), cancer antigen 19–9 < 2.0 U/mL (normal value: ≤ 37.0 U/mL), squamous cell carcinoma antigen – 1.0 ng/mL (normal value: ≤ 1.5 ng/mL), neuron-specific enolase > 370 mg/mL (normal value: ≤ 16.3 mg/mL), and pro-gastrin releasing peptide – 53.4 pg/mL (normal value: ≤ 80.00 pg/mL). The vulvar SCNEC was thought to be a primary or secondary SCNEC. The tumors grew daily. However, owing to the patient’s age and poor prognosis, only palliative care was provided for the pain management. Unfortunately, the patient died of the disease within 1 month.
Immunohistochemical staining of the vulvar mass revealed that most of the vulvar tumor cells were positive for AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, neuron-specific enolase, CD56, and chromogranin A (shown in Fig. a). On the contrary, the tumor cells tested negative for MCPyV (shown in Fig. b), CK20, synaptophysin, c-kit, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, p16, and adrenocorticotropic hormone. Retrospectively, immunohistochemical and virological analyses had been performed for the initial endometrial endometrioid carcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining had revealed that the tumor cells were positive for CD56 and chromogranin A (shown in Fig. c). Notably, endometrial cancer cells infiltrated into lymphatic vessels are also positive for chromogranin A. Additionally, the tumor cells were negative for MCPyV and CK20. Furthermore, the HPV DNA typing analysis (types 6, 11, 16, 18, 30, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, and 66) of the formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens of the vulvar tumor was negative (PapiPlex™, GeneticLab Co., Hokkaido, Japan) (shown in Fig. ). Therefore, the vulvar tumor was suggested to be a recurrence of the endometrial cancer rather than a primary vulvar HGNEC (shown in Table ).