A 40-year-old male presented in casualty with a history of seizures that let to fall from 10 feet height resulting in injury to both hips and left shoulder. He was diagnosed with cerebral venous thrombosis and started on heparin. On X-rays & CT scan (, ), he was diagnosed to have bilateral acetabular fracture and three part left proximal humerus fracture. He was operated for bilateral acetabular fracture using modified Stoppa’s approach and fixed with buttress plate in true pelvis on both sides . On post op day 3, he had fever & discharge from suture site, dressing was done and pus culture and sensitivity done. Wound wash was done to eradicate infection. Culture showed growth of Klebsiella and anaerobes sensitive to cefoperazone sulbactum, clindamycin and amikacin. The pus discharge resumed again after 3 days of wound wash and antibiotics. This time culture sensitivity tests showed resistance to cefoperazone sulbactum so chloremphenical was started which decreased the pus discharge but could not stop it. Based on the sensitivity tests, meropenem was started which stopped the discharge for 5 days then again the discharge started. At this time about 2 weeks after the first surgery, it was decided to start irrigation with Qurion solution for an hour and then continue Vacumn assisted suction (VAS). At both ends of the suture line single stitches were removed, at one end infant feeding tube was put for irrigation with qurion solution and at the other end infant feeding tube inserted for vacuum assisted suction . Daily Qurion irrigation was done in morning and evening for one hour during which vacuum assisted suction was stopped. After one hour again vacuum assisted suction was started. After 2 days of starting Qurion irrigation & vacuum assisted suction therpy (QiVAS), the suture site became dry. We continued QiVAS therapy for 2 weeks with antibiotic meropenem. Blood counts and CRP were within normal range after 2 weeks of QiVAS therapy and patient was discharged. Patient was followed up at 3 months and 6 months with no evidence ofinfection .