An 81-year-old woman attended a local hospital because of fatigue, lethargy, fever, chills, phlegm and wheezing.
The patient developed fatigue, lethargy, fever, chills, phlegm and wheezing three days before admission, but without treatment. On November 16, 2021, the patient developed a coma and was sent to the emergency room of our hospital. As her oxygen saturation dropped to 70%-80%, the patient was admitted to the intensive care units (ICUs) for further treatment after consultation. After admission to the ICU, the patient developed a progressive drop in blood pressure, requiring norepinephrine to maintain a mean arterial pressure > 65 mmHg.
The patient had a medical history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and bronchial asthma for more than 50 years and received long-term home oxygen therapy. She had suffered from and chronic heart insufficiency for five years and was treated with oral bisoprolol. There was no history of abdominal pain and chronic renal failure.
The patient had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. There was no relevant family history.
The patient's body temperature was 36 °C, the pulse was 85 beats/min, the respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and the blood pressure was 105/45 mmHg. Breath sounds were decreased in both lungs, and wet rales could be heard at the bottom of both lungs. Cardiac and abdominal examinations were unremarkable.
The initial troponin level was 0.05 ng/mL, and increased later . B-type natriuretic peptide was 4164 pg/mL. Results of arterial blood gas analysis were: Carbon dioxide partial pressure 58.7 mmHg, oxygen partial pressure 86.5 mmHg, and oxygenation index 172.97 mmHg; inflammatory indicators: White blood cell 8.12 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage 93.2%, C-reactive protein 298.38 mg/L, procalcitonin 6.26 ng/mL, and interleukin-6 > 5000 pg/mL. The polymerase chain reaction-severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 test and multiple blood cultures were negative. Other blood tests, fecal examinations, and coagulation function were all normal.
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) findings: Sinus rhythm, T wave was high and sharp; R wave: V1-V4 progression was poor, V1 was Qr type, and subsequent re-examinations revealed ST-segment elevation (> 0.05 mv) . Echocardiography suggested left atrial enlargement, segmental abnormal motion of the left ventricular wall, left ventricular apical bulge (considered to be ventricular aneurysm formation), decreased left ventricular diastolic function, and lower limit of normal systolic function (LVEF) was 51%. Chest CT showed chronic bronchitis, emphysema, multiple infections in both lungs (mostly in the middle and lower lobe of the right lung), right pleural cavity small effusion, and obvious calcification of aortic arch and coronary artery. An abdominal CT scan showed no abnormal changes, but obvious abdominal aorta calcification.