The patient, a 38-year-old Chinese female, presented to the general surgical outpatients clinic with a 18-month history of intermittent right upper abdominal pain, back pain, nausea and vomiting. The examination of the patient's medical history revealed good general health, absence of systemic diseases, and smoking habit. The physical examination was normal. These symptoms were not decreased in patient treated with oral acid-inhibitory drug and cholagogue at the local hospital.
Ultrasound of the abdomen showed a retroperitoneal tumor measuring 4.8 × 2.3 cm . To further confirm the diagnosis, Abdominal contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a retroperitoneal mass 34 mm × 27 mm in size, near right renal veins extending to inferior vena cava, and it was pushing the pancreas forward . Abdominal contrast enhanced CT did not reveal any evidence of retroperitoneal enlarged lymph nodes. The border between the tumor and IVC was indistinct at the arterial phase, the venous phase and the delayed phase . To determine the primary site of the tumor and whether metastasis had occurred, The patients' complete examination included head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), chest CT and cardiac ultrasound. The patient refused to undergo PET-CT due to financial constraints. The cardiac ultrasound and brain MRI were normal. The CT scan of the chest showed a tumor in the lingual segment of the upper lobe of the left lung, consisting of ground-glass nodules with unclear boundaries; The tumor was approximately 1.3 cm × 1.1 cm in size and multiple short burls can be seen around the edges of the tumor. There were no enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum . Bronchoscopy was performed to clarify the nature of the tumor, showing acute inflammation of the bronchial mucosa. Pulmonary tumor may be metastases of inferior vena cava tumors, primary lung cancer or benign pulmonary nodules. Therefore, the patient was discussed in the multidisciplinary tumor board meeting to determine the best treatment strategy. Discussion the results suggest surgery as the only effective treatment for inferior vena cava tumors and pulmonary tumor. The patient first underwent resection of IVC sarcoma. And 1 month later, the patient underwent wedge resection of pulmonary by thoracoscope without preoperative pulmonary biopsy.
The patient underwent resection of IVC sarcoma, which was located at the confluence of the renal vein into the inferior vena cava. After the proximal and distal clamp, the tumor and the involved IVC were completely removed from the infrahepatic IVC to just above the right renal vein. In order to save operation time, the inferior vena cava was reconstructed with artificial blood vessels. Blood loss was around 400 ml during the operation. Post operatively, patient made a good recovery without serious complications.
The postoperative pathological specimens showed that the size of the tumor was 6 × 4 × 3 cm, which was lobulated, the capsule was intact, and there was no metastasis in the surrounding lymph nodes. The histopathological examination showed a well-circumscribed mass composed of spindle cells arranged in interlaced and bundles . The tumor cells are fusiform, slender and rich in cytoplasm. The nucleus is deeply stained, the end is blunt, located in the center, with a certain degree of heteromorphism and pleomorphism . A few fused nuclei were also seen. Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed the tumor to be positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), myoglobin, desmin, Epithelial Membrane Antigen (EMA), Transducin-Like Enhancer of split 1 (TLE-1), h-caldesmon, vimentin, CD99 and Ki-67:40%, and negative for CD 117, CKp, CK7, Bcl-2, S100, CD31, CD34, Dog-1 and STAT-6. These findings support the diagnosis of IVC sarcoma.
After 1 month, the patient underwent thoracoscopic wedge resection of the upper lobe of left lung. The lung tissues 20 mm from the edge of the nodule, including the nodule, was removed with a linear cutting closure device. There were no obvious blood loss and complications during or after the operation. Blood loss was around 50 ml during the operation. Post operatively, patient made a good recovery without serious complications.
Grossly, the resected lung tissue was approximately 6 × 4 × 3 cm in size with an solid mass measuring 0.8 × 0.8 cm in the central area. Patient underwent pathologically confirmed complete anatomical resection of the primary tumor, therefore the surgical margin was >2 cm. There were no enlarged or suspected lymph nodes in the mediastinum during the operation, so mediastinal lymph node dissection was not performed. The histopathological examination of the excised mass showed lung adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor cells revealed positive expression for CK7, napsin A, TTF-1 and Ki-67:20%, and negative expression for CK5/6, p63, p40, Syn, CgA, CD56 and LCA. Cells from a squamous cell carcinoma are generally CK5/6, p40 and P63 positive and TTF-1 and Napsin A negative whereas adenocarcinoma cells are generally CK7, Napsin A and TTF-1 positive while being negative for p40 and CK5/6 . In addition, the patient's lung tissue specimens were consulted by pathologists in Fudan University Cancer Hospital and Gansu Cancer Hospital, and the pathologists of the two hospitals agreed on the diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma. The patient received gefitinib tablets (250 mg per day) as a maintenance therapy during the perioperative period. Follow-up based on patient's recent medical history, chest and abdominal physical examination, complete blood count, liver function tests, tumor markers monitoring, ultrasound scan of the abdomen every 3 months, CT scans of the lung, abdomen and head every 6 months. 20 months after resection of inferior vena cava leiomyosarcoma, the contrast-enhanced CT images show two lump about 1.2 and 0.7 cm in diameter in upper lobe and lower lobe of the right lung . According to the examination results, it may be metastasis of inferior vena cava sarcoma or recurrence of lung adenocarcinoma. Thoracoscopic wedge resection was performed in patient after the discussion by thoracic surgery department. The immunohistochemical results of postoperative specimens were consistent with the metastasis of inferior vena cava leiomyosarcoma . Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor cells revealed positive expression for SMA, desmin, vimentin and h-caldesmon and Ki-67:70%, and negative expression for CD117, S100, CD34, and Dog-1. Histopathological examination of the right lung mass confirmed the diagnosis of the inferior vena cava leiomyosarcoma metastasis. The patient received oral anlotinib treatment (12 mg once daily) after the last operation. The follow-up items are the same as before. During on-going regular follow-up visits no evidence of recurrence or metastasis was observed from December 2020 to October 2021 .