A 65-year-old man on hemodialysis complained of malaise, lightheadedness, and confusion during one of his sessions. He did not report dyspnea, tachycardia, chest pain, or other symptoms. The patient had been previously diagnosed with hypertension, diabetes, morbid obesity, and cirrhosis secondary to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. He was also on continuous use of allopurinol 100 mg/day, sertraline 50 mg/day, esomeprazole 40 mg/day, and sevelamer 2.4 g three times daily.

The patient had been on hemodialysis for two years for diabetic nephropathy, but frequently missed sessions. He had no residual diuresis in addition to a long history of high interdialytic weight gain and low adherence to the prescribed diet. The individual had a radiocephalic arteriovenous fistula in his right upper limb. To deal with his frequent absences, he was prescribed hemodialysis six times a week, with 2.5 hour sessions. The dialyser was a high-flux polysulfone membrane with a surface area of 2.2 m2, and his hemodialysis prescription consisted of Qb: 370mL/min. Qb: 370 mL/min and Qd: 800 mL/min. Dialysate prescription: Ca: 2.5 mEq/L; K: 1 mEq/L; Na: 138 mEq/L; bicarbonate: 36 mmol/L; unfractionated heparin: 5000 IU/session. If the patient had attended his sessions as prescribed, his calculated standard Kt/V would have been 2.45. However, since he came to the clinic for only three or four sessions per week, his actual Kt/V was 1.5-2.

The physical examination at admission showed the patient to be in poor general condition, pale and cyanotic. Pulmonary auscultation was normal. His respiratory rate was 16 bpm and his oxygen saturation was 88% in room air. Cardiac auscultation revealed hypophonic murmurs, no heart murmurs, a heart rate of 88 bpm, blood pressure of 50/30 mmHg with a prolonged capillary refill time and jugular venous stasis. His abdomen was normal and his legs showed no signs of oedema. He showed signs of confusion and slowness during the neurological examination. His electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm, low diffuse voltage of the QRS complex, and altered ventricular repolarization.

The patient was anuric and in shock. Resuscitation was performed with 1,000 ml of crystalloid fluid, but his blood pressure did not recover to normal levels. Cultures were collected and vancomycin and ceftazidime were prescribed until the etiology of the shock was clarified. He was referred to the intensive care unit (ICU), where noradrenaline 0.2 mcg/kg/min was initiated. His clinical and neurological condition improved despite the presence of paradoxical pulse.

The results of his examination were as follows: hemoglobin: 9.8 g/dL; hematocrit: 29.5%; leukocytes: 5,230/mm3; platelets: 98,000/mm3; C-reactive protein: 0.61 mg/dL; NUS: 66.82 mg/dL; creatinine: 7.94 mg/dL; Na: 134 mEq/L; K: 6.2 mEq/L; ionized calcium: 1.17 mmol/L; P: 7.8 mg/dL; ALT: 14 U/L; AST: 22 U/L; alkaline phosphatase: 81 U/L; total bilirubin: 0.51 mg/dL; albumin: 3.9 g/dL; INR: 1.3; and TAP: 1.29. The markers of myocardial ischemia and the subsequent blood cultures were negative.

A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a mild enlargement of the left atrium. The ventricles had a systolic function with an ejection fraction of 67% despite abnormal septal motion. The patient had a thickened pericardium with no signs of effusion, along with areas of hyperechogenicity. His inferior vena cava (IVC) was dilated and showed no signs of inspiratory collapse. The association between the findings of tissue Doppler of the mitral annulus and the plethora of the IVC suggested constrictive pericarditis. A chest computed tomography showed a thickened pericardium with areas of coarse calcification. Cardiac catheterization showed equalization of diastolic pressures in all cardiac chambers and exhibited a square root signal, indicative of constrictive pericarditis. An echocardiogram performed ten months before admission showed no evidence of pericardial abnormalities.

The individual underwent a pericardiectomy based on a diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis and cardiogenic shock. The cultures of pericardial fluid were negative for fungal and bacterial infection, and the adenosine deaminase (ADA) level was 23 U/L (normal range: <40U/L). The culture of pericardial fluid and the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests were negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The histological analysis of the surgical specimen showed marked fibrosis, areas of dystrophic calcification and mild foci of mononuclear inflammation, with no signs of granuloma or infection. The investigation for neoplasms and autoimmune diseases, as well as tuberculin testing were negative.

After ruling out additional secondary causes, the combination of findings of constrictive pericarditis led to the diagnosis of dialysis-induced constrictive pericarditis (DICP). The patient was prescribed a more intensive haemodialysis protocol and was discharged nine days later. Since then, he has been attending haemodialysis sessions rigorously and has been complying with his prescribed diet and fluid intake recommendations.
