A 32-year-old woman, gravida 2 and para1, withregular menstruation, detected a small lump of 2 × 1.5 cm in her left breast upon self-examination in July 2010. The breast ultrasound confirmed the presence of a 1.8 × 1.2 cm lump of low echo-levels in August 2010. In January 2011, the position emission tomography-computer tomography (PET-CT) of the whole body revealed that there were metabolism-elevating occupying lesions in the left breast, left kidney, and two lungs. Computed tomography (CT) confirmed the occupying lesions in the lung and left kidney . The core needle biopsy in the left breast was performed, but no cancer cells were detected. The levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) was 22,931 U/L (normal values: 0–5 U/L). In February 2011, the breast excisional biopsy was performed and a diagnosis of breast infiltrating ductal carcinoma was made. In the chemotherapy regimen, one cycle was 21 days. Two cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, once per cycle) combined with epirubicin (75 mg/m2, once per cycle) reduced the lesions in the lungs and kidney and the HCG level (5,773 U/L at the end of the first cycle but 9,026 U/L at the end of the second cycle), while new lesions appeared in the lungs. The chemotherapy regimen was then changed to two cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, once per cycle) and cisplatin (75 mg/m2, once per cycle), and the lesions in the lungs remained stable; the HCG level continued to decrease to 1,490 U/L at the end of the regimen. During this regimen, resection of the left kidney was performed due to rupture and bleeding. The left kidney excisional biopsy was also performed and a diagnosis of high-level infiltrating renal carcinoma (breast cancer metastatic to the kidney) was made. The chemotherapy regimen was changed to one cycle of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, once per cycle) and lobaplatin (35 mg/m2, once per cycle), and the HCG level continued to decrease to 57.86 U/L at the end of the regimen. Due to the severe marrow depression of docetaxel and lobaplatin, the chemotherapy regimen was changed to three cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, once per cycle) and capecitabine (2 g/m2) (one cycle means once-daily administration for 2 weeks followed by 1 week of rest). At the end of the regimen, the HCG level continued to decrease to 17.64 U/L and the lesions in the lungs remained stable. A single capecitabine was then used instead of docetaxel and capecitabine. After two cycles of capecitabine (2 g/m2, one cycle means once-daily administration for 2 weeks followed by 1 week of rest), the HCG level continued to decrease to 0.12 U/L as didthe lesions in the lungs. The excised breast cancer and breast cancer metastatic to the kidney were retrospectively analyzed using HCG immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining. The IHC results demonstrated that all the cancer cells strongly expressed HCG, and the final pathological diagnosis was corrected to BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney . After a further 9 cycles of capecitabine (2 g/m2, one cycle means once-daily administration for 2 weeks followed by 1 week of rest), the HCG level returned to normal values and the lesions in the lungs disappeared . At this time, the patient was still alive (the survival was 37 months), and was undergoing her 26th cycle of capecitabine (2 g/m2, one cycle means once-daily administration for 2 weeks followed by 1 week of rest) with no additional treatment.
Grossly, the left breast of the patient was normal and BCCF did not protrude through the skin surface. The BCCF was 3.2 × 3.2 × 1.8 cm in size, and was a solid, well-circumscribed, and dark red mass, with extensive necrosis and hemorrhage in the lesion. The BCCF metastatic to the kidney was 5 × 3.5 × 2 cm in size, and was a solid, well-circumscribed, and chromatic mass, with extensive necrosis and hemorrhage in the lesion.Histologically, the BCCF showed well-demarcated borders with extensive hemorrhage, and no infiltrating ductal carcinoma and ductal carcinoma in situ could be found . At high magnification, a sheet-like arrangement of oval-shaped epithelial cells with prominent nucleoli was seen. Multinucleated giant cells with oval nuclei, prominent multiple nucleoli, and irregular chromatin clumping resembling syncytiotrophoblastic cells could also be seen . The BCCF metastatic to the kidney showed a very similar pattern in histology . The cancer (presented as a thin border of intact choriocarcinoma) was well-circumscribed and cystic, surrounded by normal renal tissue, with extensive hemorrhage around it . In the background of hemorrhage, giant cells with prominent pleomorphic nuclei, and abundant acidophilic and vacuolated cytoplasm resembling cytotrophoblastic cells could be seen . In all, the BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney were made up of proliferation of large sized cells with high nucleus/cytoplasm ratio and increased nuclear chromatin. Multinucleated or mononucleated giant cells resembling syncytiotrophoblastic and cytotrophoblastic cells could be seen. This finding was similar to choriocarcinoma originating from genital tract. No subtypes of breast infiltrating ductal carcinoma or ductal carcinoma were identified in the cancer. No lymphovascular invasion was identified.
IHC staining was performed on paraffin-embedded tissue sections, using a standard avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method. The IHC staining demonstrated that all the cancer cells strongly expressed HCG in the BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney . In BCCF, other IHC markers were described as follows: HER-1 (++); HER-2 (-); p53(-); Cyclin D1 (-); ER (-); Ki-67 (+ >75%); PR (-); Top-IIα (+50% to 75%); p120 (++); CK5 (-); CK7 (+); CK20 (-); CK (+); EMA (+); and GCDFP-15 (+). In BCCF metastatic to the kidney, other IHC markers were described as follows: HER-2 (-); ER (-); Ki-67 (+ >75%); PR (-); CK (+); CK7 (+); CK20 (-); EMA (+); p63 (-); Vimentin (-), and PLAP (-).
According to the IHC study findings, the diagnosis of BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney was confirmed.