This present case involved a 22-year-old female who became aware of leukocoria in both eyes. Upon examination at another eye clinic, a vitreous strand was detected in her left eye, with a suspected diagnosis of PFV, and she was referred to the Department of Ophthalmology at Osaka Medical College Hospital, Takatsuki-City, Japan for a more detailed diagnosis and subsequent treatment.
The patient had previously been diagnosed with strabismus when she was 2 years of age. She was delivered at full term, with a birth weight of 3320 g, and she had no history of oxygen administration. We did not perform genetic investigation (i.e., sequencing) on the patient in order to diagnose PFV. In addition, her relatives had no previous history of visual impairment.
At initial visit, the clinical findings of a slit-lamp examination revealed a shallow anterior chamber in both eyes. In her right eye and left eye, the diameter of the cornea was 8 mm and 9 mm and the axial length was 15 mm and 19 mm, respectively, and microphthalmus was observed in both eyes. In her right eye, the fundus was not visible due to a cataract, and ultrasonic B-mode examination revealed total retinal detachment . A magnetic resonance imaging scan of the patient’s head revealed no calcification in the right eye and no abnormalities in her brain. In the left eye, retrolental fibrovascular proliferation was found around the temporal side. The fundus exhibited FRD from the optic disc to the inferior-temporal side . Most of the peripapillary retinal vessels were involved in the retinal folds, and a part of the nasal retina covered-over the optic disc. In the periphery of the fundus, retinal avascular area was observed over the entire circumference, and pigmentation was also observed in a wide range on the temporal side. An oscillating nystagmus was observed in both eyes, and was found to be prominent in the left gaze and less conspicuous in the right gaze when her face was turned to the left.
During the clinical course, cataract and corneal opacification progressed, ultimately becoming phthisis bulbi in her right eye. On the other hand, from the age of 6 to 22 years, her left eye retained a corrected visual acuity of 0.08, and no significant change of the fundus was observed during that 16-year period . OCT images obtained when she was 22 years of age revealed bundle shading at the optic disc, combined with the finding that the nasal retina was overlaid on the optic disc . However, the layer structure of the surrounding retina was well preserved . On the temporal side of the optic disc, the elevated stalk of the fold protruding into the vitreous was observed at the site of the FRD, yet the upper and lower retinal layered structures were relatively well retained . However, on the temporal peripheral side, the retina was remarkable thinned, the layered structure was unclear, and the ellipsoid zone could not be clearly identified .
Goldman kinetic visual field examination findings, with an isopter of V− 4, obtained when the patient was 22 years of age exhibited 50-degrees upwards, 40-degrees to the nasal side, 60-degrees downward, 75-degrees to the temporal side, and 80-degrees to the inferior-temporal side . The patient is currently undergoing yearly follow-up observations (i.e., once per year).