An 82-year-old female patient with a history of coronary artery disease and coronary stenting, known to have gallstones, presented with a nausea vomiting and post prandial abdominal pain evolving for two weeks. Additionally, the patient presented with a pulse rate of 102 beats per minute, a weak pulse, blood pressure measuring 10/6, and indicators of extracellular dehydration, such as a persistent mucosal fold, clammy skin with decreased elasticity and sunken eyes. Laboratory tests revealed the presence of hypokalemia and hypochloremia. After putting the urinary catheter we noticed a reduced urinary output. We initiated resuscitation by inserting a nasogastric tube, which promptly drained 400 cc of gastric fluid. The fluid resuscitation was performed based on the input-output assessment, aiming to correct any hydro electrolytic imbalances. After stabilizing the patient an esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed normal findings up to the second part of the duodenum , there was no duodenal dilatation and the EGD showed some retained bile. Regarding the symptomatology and signs of gastric outlet obstruction searching for ethiology we decided to perform a complementary abdominal computed tomography that showed a cholecystoduodenal fistula with a measured 4 cm stone lodged at the duodenojejunal jonction . Due to the absence of endoscopic treatment at that time, the decision was made to proceed with surgery.
During laparotomy, a lodged stone was found at the duodenojejunal angle. The stone was successfully advanced to the second jejunal loop , where an enterotomy was performed, allowing for the extraction of the stone. After that we decided using this enterotomy, on the second jejunal loop, to proceed with a latero-lateral gastroenteroanastomosis Trans- and sub-mesocolic, without gastric resection. The cholecystoduodenal fistula was left untouched.
Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 8th day post-surgery. 3 month follow up was uneventful.