A 48-year-old Thai woman with congenital mutism presented with a 3-month history of intermittent swelling of both lower limbs. She was otherwise well and did not report joint pain, headache, photophobia, rash, dyspnea, orthopnea, palpitations, hair loss, or bowel symptoms. Her appetite was normal. She had no history of clinically significant underlying diseases; she was not receiving any drug treatments; and she did not drink alcohol or smoke. Her physical examination revealed that she was well; her weight was 41 kg, and her body temperature was 37.2 °C, pulse rate was 103 beats/minute, blood pressure was 116/70 mmHg, and respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute. She had no abnormal findings of her head, ears, eyes, nose, throat, heart, lungs, and abdomen. The only abnormal sign was bilateral pitting edema 3+ below the knee without erythema and increased warmth.
Routine laboratory tests showed that she had a mild microcytic anemia (hemoglobin 9.4 mg/dl, mean corpuscular volume 73 fl). Her serum total protein and albumin concentrations were low, but she had hyperglobulinemia and raised liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase). Her serum creatinine was 0.82 mg/dl, for an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 85.49 ml/min/1.73 m2, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 21.20 mg/dl, sodium 137 mEq/L, potassium 4.0 mEq/L, and chloride 103 mEq/L. Her hepatitis (anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies, hepatitis B surface antigen) and human immunodeficiency virus serology results were negative.
Her urine was yellow and turbid, and dipstick urinalysis (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) demonstrated a specific gravity of 1.021, pH 6.0, protein 3+, blood 3+, red blood cells 20–30 cells/high-power field (HPF), white blood cells 5–10 cells/HPF. Urine microcopy of the urine sediment showed few fine granular casts 0–1/low-power field (LPF) and coarse granular casts 5–10/LPF. By spot urine, her total protein and creatinine were 1.339.4 mg/dl and 143.79 mg/dl, respectively.
Suspecting chronic kidney disease secondary to an autoimmune disease, we performed additional investigations, which revealed a positive antinuclear antibody. For the titer of 1280, it revealed the homogeneous and fine speckled patterns meanwhile the nucleolar, peripheral, and cytoplasm patterns were observed in the titer of less than 80. The patient’s C3 complement concentration was 50.0 mg/dl (normal 81–157 mg/dl), and her C4 complement concentration was < 8.0 mg/dl (normal 13–39 mg/dl). Her urinary protein excretion over 24 hours was 9.3 g, meeting the case definition of nephrotic proteinuria. The result of a second urine analysis was similar to that of the first analysis . The patient was diagnosed with clinically suspected SLE with lupus nephritis. A referral for a renal biopsy was made, and she was prescribed prednisolone 1 mg/kg. Two days later, a third urinalysis was performed . In addition to similar results as before, several rapidly moving, large, ovoid-shaped ciliated parasites were seen by video clip/light microscopy; these findings were confirmed by two additional microscopic analyses of her urine sediment. No antiparasitic treatment was given, and she was asked to come for follow-up 2 weeks later.
At follow-up, a fourth urine analysis was done , and a spot urine protein (1679.0 mg/dl) and creatinine (100.34 mg/dl) were measured. Serum BUN and creatinine were 37.5 and 1.48 mg/dl, respectively. Numerous motile, ciliated trophozoites were seen in three consecutive urine samples by wet preparation and Wright-Giemsa staining that were identified as B. coli . Three daily stool examinations by formalin-ethyl acetate concentration were negative for ova, cysts, and parasites. She was prescribed tetracycline 500 mg four times daily for 10 days, after which the result of a post-treatment urine examination was negative for B. coli.