A 72-year-old female presented in Shafa laboratory with a history of lethargy and weakness. Blood was taken for CBC evaluation and analyzed by automated heamatology analyzer (Sysmex kx-21 N). After taking the hematology results, total bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase enzyme measured by autoanalyzer Hitachi 917 and protein electrophoresis were performed on a sample of blood serum. In addition, titration of cold agglutinin was estimated to make a definite diagnosis. Moreover, mono test was performed to rule out causative infection.
Aggregation of RBCs, which occurs mainly at temperatures lower than 30°C, causes invalid findings when working with automated hematology analyzer (Sysmex KX 21 N). On the other hand, few values change erroneously such as RBC count, HCT, MCV and MCHC, which two latter indices show an increase. In fact, proportion between 3 fold of Hb and HCT did not correlate and this makes mismatching of CBC results. In this condition, tubes were checked and precipitation residue found sticking to the sides of the tube. To rule out a problem, the technologist was instructed to redraw a new sample. Another CBC test was run, but the results remained unchanged. Suspecting cold agglutinins, the tube warmed at 37°C for 20 minutes and after the second run, the results become valid. However, there were large clumps of red cells on the slide before warming the tubes, which should be differentiated from rouleaux formation. RBC count decreased due to doublet erythrocytes being counted as a single cell, thus resulting in a falsely high MCV. Hematocrit lowered as the volume of doublets is slightly less than two cells. The platelet count was normal. Furthermore, mild leukocytosis and anemia (Hb = 8.2 g/dL) were present. Although in biochemistry profile, total bilirubin and LDH enzyme activity were increased, protein electrophoresis seemed normal. Approximately, cold agglutinin titer measured 1:2048. Infection or overt malignancy was ruled out as the result of mono test was negative.
Moreover, bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy performed and the result revealed mild erythroid hyperplasia and slight increase in lymphocyte population, while progenitor morphology and number of platelets were normal. These findings are sufficient to exclude the case for secondary chronic CAD. The case was referred for treatment with Zytux© for a while and the results were satisfactory.