A 32-year-old man was admitted to our hospital to undergo surgery for colon cancer associated with pancolitis-type UC that had been diagnosed 20 years previously. He was simultaneously diagnosed with PSC ; therefore, his UC was considered PSC-related. PSC and UC had been well-controlled until the development of severe colitis, diagnosed as toxic megacolon 5 years previously and treated using aminosalicylates, azathioprine, and adalimumab; cholangitis was also present, which was treated with endoscopic biliary stenting. After colitis and cholangitis were treated, the patient had been well, and his liver function remained acceptable. However, his total bilirubin level gradually increased to approximately 5–8 mg/dl and colon cancer developed. Surveillance colonoscopy revealed two superficial neoplastic lesions. Slightly elevated lesions were detected in the ascending and transverse colon . Pathological biopsy findings indicated well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma in the ascending colon and an adenoma in the transverse colon. Because mucosal reddening was observed in the colon (Mayo endoscopic subscore 1–2), we diagnosed UC-related colon cancer. Isolated proctocolectomy was initially considered, but the patient’s liver function progressively deteriorated with severe concurrent portal hypertension. The Child–Pugh classification was C (score 11), and the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score was 15. Because his UC-related colon cancer was diagnosed as T1bN0M0 stage I, we expected a postoperative outcome similar to that of sporadic colon cancer [–], which has an estimated 5-year survival rate of > 90% according to the Japanese Society for Cancer of the Colon and Rectum sporadic cancer data . Therefore, we eventually decided to perform LDLT before restorative proctocolectomy.
LDLT for PSC was performed using a relatively small-for-size (463 g; ratio of the graft volume to the recipient standard liver volume, 38.9%) right liver graft from his 27-year-old wife. Because their blood types were incompatible, rituximab was administered for 2 weeks before surgery. During surgery, severe adhesion was observed between the right lobe and diaphragm with multiple collateral veins that contributed to a large amount of bleeding; however, LDLT was successfully performed without any other significant complications. Biliary reconstruction using Roux-Y hepaticojejunostomy (instead of duct-to-duct reconstruction) was performed, as generally adopted for LT for PSC. The operative time was 619 min and the estimated blood loss was 16,761 g. The postoperative course was uneventful except for the development of small-for-size syndrome with massive ascites (1120 ml/day). The peak total bilirubin level was 20 mg/dl at 10 days after surgery. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 20 after his liver function had normalized. Basic immunosuppression medication consisted of tacrolimus, steroids, and mycophenolate mofetil. There were no signs of rejection. Follow-up colonoscopy was performed at 1 month after LDLT, and no exacerbation of colon cancer was detected. Three months after LDLT, we performed restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch–anal anastomosis. Severe adhesion was observed in the upper abdomen. After resection of the colon, a J-pouch was constructed and returned to the abdomen. A hand-sewn ileal pouch–anal anastomosis was created and a temporary diverting ileostomy was constructed. The operative time was 572 min and the estimated blood loss was 1445 g. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 16. Severe inflammation was observed in the whole resected colonic mucosa, and the right colon was brown because of mucosal hemorrhages . Two superficial neoplastic lesions were detected in the ascending and transverse colon. Pathological examination revealed well-differentiated to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the mucosa of the ascending colon without lymph node metastasis . A low-grade tubular adenoma was observed in the transverse colon . Infiltration of inflammatory cells to the submucosa was observed in the colon. After surgical dilatation of the anastomosis stricture, ileostomy reversal was performed 10 months after proctocolectomy. The patient was well thereafter, with good liver and bowel functions and without tumor recurrence, at > 1 year after proctocolectomy. The entire clinical course of this case is shown in Fig.