A 43-year-old Malay female was referred by an ophthalmologist to the low vision clinic for low vision rehabilitation assessment. She was diagnosed with tractional retinal detachment secondary to diabetic retinopathy. She reported that she was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus 5 years ago. Currently, the patient is on follow-up and receiving treatment for diabetes mellitus from a government hospital. Her treatment includes metformin 500 mg twice daily, glicazide 60 mg daily and insulin 18 unit/day (nocte). Her glycosylated hemoglobin (HbAIc) assay at her last visit was 7 mmol/L. Apart from the diabetes mellitus, she is also on treatment for hypertension with hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg daily and for cholesterol with atorvastatin 20 mg daily. However, there was no evidence of any end organ damage i.e. diabetic nephropathy or diabetic neuropathy. There was no family history of diabetes mellitus or retinal detachment. Her main complaints at presentation at the low vision clinic was 1) blurred vision at both distance and near but she had never used nor was ever prescribed with any contact lens or glasses, 2) difficulty in recognizing faces and 3) difficulty with orientation and mobility. She had exhausted all her efforts to get treatment/rehabilitation for her visual problem and was frequently told that “nothing more can be done” to alleviate her condition. She agreed to be referred to the low vision clinic by the private ophthalmologist as a last attempt to improve her vision and quality of life through low vision rehabilitation.
Upon examination, her distance vision for right eye (RE) and left eye (LE) was 6/48. Her near vision was N28 at 20 cm bilaterally. Subjective refraction, improved her distance vision to RE 6/48 using -1.75Ds, and LE 6/38 with a +3.50 Ds. For near, addition of +2.50 Ds enabled her to read N24 for RE and N16 for LE both at a reading distance of 20 cm. Visual field assessment testing at near using an Amsler’s chart revealed no abnormality. Contrast sensitivity function was not measured. Examination of her fundi using binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy and fundus photography showed diabetic retinopathy changes and tractional retinal detachment . She was informed of her eye condition with respect to the pathological process and its effect on her functional vision. The DASS score showed that she was in a state of severe stress (score = 34); she was severely anxious (score = 16), and she was depressed (score = 38). The LVQoL questionnaire assessment score was 43, which indicated that her quality of life was at the moderate stage.
Low vision assessment was conducted for near and distance vision. Using a +6.00 Ds spectacle magnifier she was able to improve her near vision to N10 at a reading distance of 20 cm. For her LE distance vision, a 3× monocular telescope was able to improve her vision to 6/12. She was also introduced to eccentric viewing techniques to identify/recognize faces. To assist her with orientation and mobility, a pair of distance spectacles with prescription of RE-1.75 Ds, LE +3.50 Ds and a 3x monocular telescope was prescribed. She was also referred to an orientation & mobility clinic at a training center organized by a blind person’s association. She agreed to a referral to the Social Welfare Department for registration purposes and eligibility assessment for benefits. To help her cope with her mental health status, she was referred to a clinical psychology clinic. She was also referred to an occupational therapy clinic to cope with her daily living activities. She was advised to return for a review at the low vision clinic in 3 months to monitor her functional vision for distance and near work and to repeat her DASS and LVQoL evaluations. Her mental health state will be monitored using DASS and her quality of life scores will be measured using the LVQoL questionnaire at the follow up.
After 3 months, the patient returned for a follow-up low vision. A routine low vision assessment was conducted and the DASS and LVQoL questionnaire was readministered. It was found that the patient’s visual acuity for both eyes remains the same i.e. 6/48. Subjective refraction and visual field status were similarly unchanged. The DASS and LVQoL questionnaire on the other hand showed significant improvement. The DASS score indicated that the stress level had come down from extremely severe (score = 34) to normal (score = 14) and the depression level also registered a decrease from extremely severe to moderate (score = 18) level. The anxiety score remained at 16 while the LVQoL score markedly improved from 43 to 98. A further three months review was given to the patient at the low vision clinic. At the same time, the patient was advised to continue with her sessions at the psychology clinic, occupational therapy clinic and the orientation & mobility clinic at the association for the blind.