A 46-year-old man with no remarkable past medical history was brought to the emergency department of the University Clinical Hospital in Wrocław. As reported by the emergency medical service physician, the man was found lying under a park bench. He was obtunded, reported nausea and vomiting, but denied any chest pain. The physician noted anisocoria (left > right).
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) recorded at 04:04 PM showed sinus bradycardia with a rate of 55 beats per minute (bpm), first degree atrioventricular block, widened QRS complexes, and ST elevation in leads II, III, aVF, and V3–V6 . Suspicion of an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) was raised. Within 5 min, ventricular tachycardia developed , followed by torsade de pointes with a rate of 150 bpm . At 04:28 PM, cardiac arrest due to bradycardia/asystole occurred. Sinus rhythm returned after a short application of external cardiac massage. While the patient was in the emergency department, basic and advanced life support was initiated several times (with 1 mg adrenalin injection three times) due to cardiac arrest caused by bradycardia and asystole. Intravenous dopamine infusion was started and access to the right jugular vein was obtained. Emergency coronary angiography showed no significant coronary lesions. A consulting neurologist ordered computed tomography of the brain which also showed no significant abnormalities.
Abnormal laboratory test results included elevated levels of dimer D (1.19 μg/mL), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (119 U/L), aspartate transaminase (238 U/L), alanine transaminase (172 U/L), urea (68 mg/dL), creatinine (1.40 mg/dL), plasma glucose (323 mg/dL), and hypokalemia (3.3 mmol/L). Troponin I level was normal. Arterial blood gases showed metabolic acidosis.
On admission to the Intensive Cardiac Care Unit, the patient was severely ill, sedated with midazolam and fentanyl, intubated, ventilated, and treated with intravenous dopamine infusion. Bedside echocardiography showed dilated vena cava inferior (28 mm) without respiratory variability, paradoxical interventricular septal motion (D-sign), and impaired left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction of 40 %. Pulmonary embolism was suspected and pulmonary computed angiotomography was performed which showed no evidence of embolism.
At 11:05 PM, cardiac arrest due to pulseless electrical activity occurred and resuscitation was started immediately. ECG showed recurrent torsade de pointes, requiring several defibrillations and administration of magnesium and antiarrhythmic drugs, and periods of bradycardia. The overall duration of resuscitation attempts was 1.5 h. The patient was treated with intravenous dopamine (200 μg/50 mL 0.9 % NaCl, rate 15 mL/h), norepinephrine (8 mg/50 mL 0.9 % NaCl, rate 30 mL/h), and dobutamine (250 μg/50 mL 0.9 % NaCl, rate 5 mL/h) infusions and adrenaline in boluses (6 × 1 mg during resuscitation) followed by infusion (2 mg/50 mL 0.9 % NaCl, rate 10 mL/h) beginning at 02:30 AM. The patient also received amiodarone, lidocaine, bicarbonates, and intravenous fluids (1000 mL 0.9 % NaCl, yielding 2700 mL of urine). Due to ineffective antiarrhythmic drug therapy and bradycardia, a transvenous pacing lead was inserted, allowing effective pacing and resolution of shock.
Despite treatment with amiodarone, magnesium, and lidocaine, correction of electrolyte disturbance, and several dozens of defibrillation attempts, the arrhythmia underlying cardiac arrest persisted. Only after overdrive pacing was established using a transvenous pacing lead could arrhythmia be controlled and the patient’s condition stabilized.
As the underlying cause of the patient’s clinical condition remained unknown, the patient’s family was contacted. The family reported that 2–3 weeks before admission to the Department of Cardiology, the patient was consulted by a psychiatrist due to a suspected suicide attempt. He had numerous financial debts resulting from his addiction to internet gambling. The toxicology screen and serum digoxin assay on admission were negative. The family was asked to search for any toxic substances among the patient’s personal belongings at home and work. A decoction of unknown origin was found in the patient’s work locker and his mobile phone’s internet history included websites discussing toxic plants, including yew (Taxus baccata). Due to a suspicion of Taxus baccata intoxication (bradycardia leading to asystole, vomiting, orange-pink color of urine), the decoction and patient’s blood sample were sent to the Department of Pharmaceutical Biology and Botany for biochemical analysis.
Fresh leaves (needles) (20 g) of T. baccata were harvested from two different locations. The first sample was from the vicinity of where the suicide attempt took place (yew1) and the second one was from the certified collection of the Wroclaw Medical University Botanical Garden where T. baccata is cultivated (yew2). The voucher specimens of the two plant samples are stored in the herbarium of the Botanical Garden.
All material was ultra-sonicated (IS-36 ultrasonic bath, Intersonic, Poland) in 200 mL of ethanol (analytical grade, 95 %) for 30 min and soaked for 16 h overnight. The crude extract was filtered, the solvent evaporated, and the residue was reconstituted with 80 mL 1 N HCl and extracted with 80 mL dichloromethane. The aqueous phase was alkalized with ammonia solution (25 %) and extracted with 240 mL dichloromethane (3 × 80 mL). The organic phases were pooled and the solvent evaporated, yielding 80 mg of a white residue (0.4 % of the fresh mass of yew leaves). A methanolic solution of this residue was diluted with mobile phases A and B (50:50, v/v) for further analysis.
Two mL of the patient’s blood serum sample obtained from the coronary care unit were precipitated by adding 2 mL of acetonitrile, followed by centrifugation at 6000 g for 7 min. The supernatant was then purified by the solid phase extraction method using octadecyl silica bed cartridges (Supelco, USA). All analyzed samples were filtered with a 0.45 μm membrane filter (PTFE, Carl Roth, Germany) before injection into the ultra fast liquid chromatography (UFLC) system.
The UFLC system consisted of an LC-30ADXR pump, a DGU-20A3 degasser, a SIL-20AXR autosampler, a CTO-10ASVP column heater, and a CBM-20A system controller (Shimadzu Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic separations were performed on a Kinetex C18 100A column (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 2.6 μ) with a security guard column (Phenomenex, U.S.A.).
The mobile phase was composed of acetonitrile-water with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. A gradient program was employed with the mobile phase, combining solvent A (water) and solvent B (acetonitrile) with 0.1 % formic acid as follows: 80 % A (0–0.5 min), 80–40 % A (0.5–7 min), 40–20 % A (7–12 min), 20–5 % A (12–15 min), 5–0 % A (15–16 min), 0 % A (16–17 min), 0–80 % A (17–18 min), 80 % A (18–22 min).
The flow rate was 0.3 mL/min and the injection volume was 1 μL. The column and sample temperatures were maintained at 35 and 4 °C, respectively. All data acquisition and peak integration were performed using LabSolution (5.53 SP2) from Shimadzu Ltd.
Mass spectrometric detection was performed on a Shimadzu LCMS-8030 with an electrospray ionization (ESI). The analytes were determined in the positive ionization mode and quantified by multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) mode. The parameters and conditions were optimized as follows: capillary voltage of 4.5 kV, desolvation line (DL) temperature of 250 °C, heat block temperature of 400 °C, and nebulizing gas flow and drying gas flow of 3 L/min and 15 L/min, respectively.
Qualitative confirmation was achieved using UFLC MS/MS analysis with MRM . The obtained spectra were compared to the literature data [, ].
The main substance of taxine origin identified in the blood sample (serum) was 3,5-DMP, the aglycone of taxicatine (3,5-dimethoxyphenol glucoside), which is an ingredient of yew leaves. This compound was suggested by Musshof et al. as a convenient marker of poisoning with Taxus baccata leaves. We observed this compound in both yew1 and yew2 samples. Other toxins including taxine A, 2-deacetyltaxine, monoacetyltaxin, taxine B (isotaxine B), monohydroxydiacetyltaxine, triacetyltaxin, and monohydroxytriacetyltaxine were also detected. We did not detect paclitaxel (Taxol A), deacetyltaxol, 10-(DAT), deacetylbaccatin III 10-(DAB) in any of the analyzed samples. These compounds are frequently listed as yew constituents. However, they may not have been extracted from our plant material with the method used.
Nonetheless, the liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method was useful for fast and reliable detection of yew toxin residues in the blood sample.
The main taxine ingredients are presented in Table .