A 58-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency department with worsening exertional dyspnoea for 1 year and generalized body swelling for 4 months. The swelling started from lower extremities and slowly became anasarca. The review of systems was pertinent for fatigue, weakness, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea and negative for chest pain, cough, sputum, or syncope.
The previous history was negative for any co-morbidities or home medications. The social history was negative for nicotine or substance use disorders and positive for alcohol use disorder with eight beers a day for 30 years. The patient was living alone and working at a construction company, however, denied exposure to particles like asbestos etc.
Upon presentation, the vital signs revealed blood pressure of 123/76 mmHg, heart rate of 94 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 24 per minute, and oxygen saturation of 90% while the patient was breathing ambient air. The physical examination showed raised jugular venous pressure (JVP), normal S1 and S2, and generalized anasarca. The pulmonary examination revealed decreased breath sounds and bilateral crackles. The focused exam for CTD including lymphadenopathy, rash, ulcers, hair loss, joint swelling, etc. was negative.
In a patient with new-onset congestive heart failure (HF), the differential diagnosis of the acute coronary syndrome, cardiomyopathies including but not limited to alcoholic, constrictive vs. restrictive, thyrotoxicosis, hypertension, and valvular heart disease should be considered.
The laboratory data were within normal limits except for elevated brain natriuretic peptide levels of 274 pg/mL (reference range <100 pg/mL). The electrocardiogram was unremarkable while the chest radiography (CXR) revealed increased cardiac silhouette, pulmonary vascular congestion, and bilateral pleural effusions. The CXR also showed a bright layer surrounding the heart, suggestive of calcified pericardium . The computerized tomography confirmed the presence of calcified pericardium with thickness up to 23 mm .
The patient was started on oxygen supplementation and diuretic therapy with partial improvement of the symptoms. Further investigation with a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed classical features of CP. The ejection fraction was normal along with bi-atrial enlargement (see , ). The parasternal long-axis M-mode revealed rapid expansion and sudden diastolic flattening of the inferolateral wall due to thickened pericardium outside and septal bounce secondary to interventricular dependence (IVD) . There was increased respiratory atrioventricular valve inflow variation due to intracardiac and intrathoracic pressure dissociations and IVD . The inferior vena cava was dilated along with diastolic expiratory hepatic Doppler flow reversal due to the right sided septal bounce (see , ).
Upon tissue Doppler, the septal e’ was more than 8 cm/s and more than the lateral e’ consistent with annulus reversus . On invasive evaluation with right heart catheterization, the right atrial pressure tracing showed Friedrich’s sign with a prominent ‘y’ descent due to rapid diastolic emptying along with rapid ‘x’ descent . Simultaneous left and right ventricular pressure tracings revealed the ‘Dip and plateau’ or ‘square root’ sign characteristic for rapid early diastolic dip and equalization of diastolic pressures, along with IVD . A thick shell of calcified pericardium with restricted heart motion was evident on fluoroscopy (see , ).
The case was discussed with cardiothoracic surgery and the plan was made to proceed with pericardiectomy. The patient underwent successful procedure with removal of the calcified pericardium which allowed a significant distensibility of the heart (see , ). The patient had an uneventful recovery and significant improvement in the symptoms. The patient was discharged home on furosemide with close follow-up. The patient’s symptoms were significantly improved at one month follow-up visit.