An Italian 7-year-old girl with a TMAU-like phenotype has come to our attention after her mother reported the production of strong body odor. The child’s history revealed that she is the third child of healthy, unrelated parents. Her two brothers aged 16 and 10 years were both apparently healthy.
All her hematological parameters and her biochemical indices for renal, thyroid and liver function were within the normal range.
TMAU was suspected and it was suggested that the child’s DNA be examined for mutations in the FMO3 gene. The study was approved by our local ethics committee. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents.
Molecular analysis of FMO3 gene in the index patient and family members was performed. Genomic DNA was extracted from heparinized peripheral blood of all family members using the salting out method . Upstream sequence, the non-coding exon 1 and each of the coding exons (exons 2 to 9) of the FMO3 gene were amplified from genomic DNA by polymerase chain reaction using the primer pairs shown in Table .
PCR products were sequenced with the BigDye® Terminator sequencing kit version 1.1 on the 377 ABI PRISM® Sequencer Analyzer (Applied Biosystems).
We also analyzed urine samples from the proband and all family members for the presence of TMA and TMAO. A first urine sample was collected for 24 hours under normal dietary conditions (a diet not containing TMA-rich foods) and a second was collected for 6 to 8 hours after a 300g marine fish meal.
Urine samples were acidified to pH 3.0 with formic acid and stored at -20°C. Creatinine was measured by the Jaffe reaction on an autoanalyzer.
Derivatization of TMA was carried out according to the method by Johnson using ethyl bromoacetate as a derivative reagent [,]. Each sample was analyzed in duplicate.
Mutations analysis of nine exons of the FMO3 gene was performed on all family members.
The proband was found heterozygous for the previously reported polymorphism c.472 G>A p. E158K (rs 2266782) in exon 4, and a G-to-A transition at codon 158 (GAG to AAG) resulting in a glutamic acid to lysine substitution (Glu158 to Lys158).
E158K polymorphism reduces FMO3 catalytic activity that appears to vary depending on the substrate [-]. Previous in vitro expression studies showed that the K158 form of the protein is a poorer TMA N-oxygenator than the E158 form.
In some populations, this variant was found in a high degree of linkage disequilibrium with the E308G variant. When present on the same allele, the E158K and E308G exhibit an even more pronounced effect on FMO3 function , even leading to mild or transient forms of TMAU .
The proband was heterozygous also for two polymorphisms in intronic regions: c.627+10 C>G (IVS5+10G>C) (rs 2066534) and c.485-21 G>A (IVS4-22G>A) (rs 1920149).
The first, a variant of uncertain functional relevance, was found in cis with E158K polymorphism while the second was an intronic A-to-G substitution at the -21 position from the acceptor splice site of exon [,]. The parents and the eldest of two brothers were heterozygous for the same variants while the younger brother did not show any variation.
Since the latter was wild-type it is possible to deduce that he has inherited the wild-type allele from each parent and that c.472 G>A, c.485-21 G>A and c.627+10C>G polymorphisms occurred in cis configuration on one of the two FMO3 alleles of the father and mother.On the basis of this it is possible to infer that the proband and the elder of the two brothers, as well as the parents, were compound heterozygotes for the three polymorphisms . However, among them, only the proband showed a TMAU-like phenotype.
Therefore, we wanted to analyze the upstream region of FMO3 gene in order to identify polymorphic variants that could affect the enzymatic activity. No variants were identified in any family members. Analysis of the urine samples collected for 24 hours from both parents and two brothers under normal dietary conditions (a diet not containing TMA-rich foods such as fish or eggs) showed the presence of relatively small amounts of TMA excreted. The N-oxidation metabolic ratio (TMA/TMAO ratio) for the four subjects ranged from 0.02 to 0.04.
For the proband the TMA excretion accounted for only 29.0% of total TMA excretion. The N-oxidation metabolic ratio for the proband was 2.4, two orders of magnitude greater than those observed for the parents and two brothers (affected ratio TMA/TMAO >0.2).
After oral TMA challenge, the amount of urinary TMA excreted as TMAO, in the parents and two brothers remained high and it was very similar to the values under normal dietary conditions. N-oxidation metabolic ratio ranged from 0.02 to 0.04.
After oral TMA challenge, in the proband, TMAO excretion accounted for 19.4% of total TMA excreted .