We report here the case of an 82-year-old Japanese woman who had received yearly intravenous denosumab for 4 years and presented with a fracture fulfilling the criteria for an atypical fracture, except for being located at the tibial diaphysis. There was no history of bisphosphonate or oral glucocorticoid use. She was found to have stage 4 breast cancer with multiple bone metastases 4 years prior. Since then, she has been treated with an aromatase inhibitor and denosumab.
The patient had no obvious history of trauma. One day, while walking, pain appeared in her left shin. A few days after the pain occurred, she visited an outpatient orthopedic clinic. X-ray images from the initial visit are shown below .
Because her fracture was without any accompanying dislocation, she was followed up at home with full weight bearing on her left leg. Her pain persisted for a month after the initial visit, and she had difficulty walking because of the shin pain. She returned to the orthopedic outpatient clinic, and X-ray images demonstrated a non-displaced transverse fracture of the proximal third of the left tibial diaphysis .
She had multiple bone metastases to several spinal and pelvic bones 4 years prior, due to breast cancer. .
The tibial fracture was also considered a differential for a pathological fracture due to a metastatic bone tumor. Therefore, the patient underwent additional imaging examination, including CT and MRI scans. The CT and MRI images did not show any positive findings to suggest a metastatic bone tumor, but they could not rule out the possibility either. At the time of the fracture, the serum biochemical parameters of bone metabolism and cancer markers were 25-hydroxyvitamin D 32 ng/mL, total calcium 10.3 mg/dL, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRACP-5b) 192 mU/dL, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 66.3 ng/mL, and cancer antigen 15-3 (CA15-3) 109.7 U/mL.
Her tibial fracture pattern fulfilled all the major criteria (except for the location) and several minor criteria of an atypical fracture. We suspected from these findings that her tibial fracture was atypical.
She had difficulty walking due to pain and underwent surgical treatment. Treatment consisted of an intramedullary nail that immediately resolved the pain . The cancellous bone within the medullary cavity of the fracture was harvested during intramedullary reaming. The skin near the medial fracture site was also incised, and external periosteum and bone tissue around the fracture site were collected. Pathological examinations were performed on both bone tissue samples. Both samples had no neoplastic changes that could be considered breast cancer-associated bone metastases. Therefore, a pathological fracture due to bone metastases from breast cancer was ruled out, and we diagnosed her tibial fracture as an ATF. Four months after surgery, the fracture site exhibited bone fusion .
Upon literature review, we discovered that only three previously reported cases of atypical tibia fracture with denosumab had been published. We searched the PubMed database for papers related to atypical tibia fractures and discovered 97 references. After checking all of the titles and abstracts, we found three reports of atypical tibia fractures related to denosumab use [–]. The results are shown in Table .
In one case, the patient had a giant cell tumor of the femur and was administered 120 mg denosumab once a month, the same dose as in this case. All three reports described bilateral tibial lesions. The patient in this study had no pain in the right tibia and no cortical thickness (beaking sign), as was observed in the X-ray images of her left tibia, in the right tibia. Informed consent for the acquisition of data to present in this case report was obtained during the hospitalization, and signed by the patient herself.