A 54-year-old woman presented at our hospital with left flank discomfort and palpebral edema of 1-week duration. She underwent abdominal postcontrast computed tomography (CT) in a local hospital, which showed a low-density renal pelvic mass and hydronephrosis of the left kidney and indicated renal pelvic cancer (Figure ). Her past medical history included sicca complex for 5 years previously. In her laboratory examination, a routine urine test revealed a red blood cell count of 118.4/μl (normal reference range, 0 to 25/μl), a white blood cell count of 127.3/μl (normal reference range, 0 to 25/μl) and an epithelial cell count of 13.4/μl (normal reference range, 2 to 10/μl). No remarkable findings in the complete blood count or urine cytology were observed. A retrograde pyelogram showed a dilated left renal pelvis and stricture of the upper ureter, which had a regular surface and a filling defect (Figure ). On postcontrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, the wall of the ureteropelvic junction was irregularly thickened and showed isointensity on T1-weighted images and hypointensity on T2-weighted images. On both T1- and T2-weighted images, the thickened wall of ureteropelvic junction showed homogeneous enhancement. Furthermore, multiple enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes were visualized by MRI (Figure ). Positron emission tomography/CT findings indicated that the renal pelvic mass was a malignant tumor, because the glucose metabolism was very high (Figure ). PET/CT also revealed multiple enlarged hypermetabolic lymph nodes in the supraclavicular, retroperitoneal, peritoneal and pelvic regions. All of these findings together led us to consider a possible diagnosis of a renal pelvic malignant tumor with multiple lymph nodes metastasis.
A few days later the patient underwent a left-sided nephroureteral cystectomy and retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, in which part of the bladder was removed. The surgery was performed to establish a definitive diagnosis and for treatment if the mass was malignant.
Gross examination of the kidney showed a 5 × 2.5–cm, pale, whitish-tan, ill-defined mass located in the renal pelvis near the renal hilum. Histologic examination of the mass showed lymphatic tissue hyperplasia and diffuse infiltration of plasma cells. The plasma cells were IgG- and IgG4-positive. The IgG4/IgG ratio was approximately 40% (Figure ). Two retroperitoneal lymph nodes were dissected, which represented as reactive hyperplasia. The pathological findings did not reveal malignancy.
After the diagnosis of IgG4-RD was made, a further laboratory examination was performed. The patient’s serum IgG4 level was 18.6 g/L (normal reference range, 0.03 to 2 g/L), and her high-sensitivity C-reactive protein test result was 26.3 mg/L (normal reference range, 0 to 3 mg/L). The patient underwent steroid therapy in a local hospital for 1 year. At the fourth month of her steroid therapy, her high-sensitivity C-reactive protein level had descended to 8.76 mg/L (normal reference range, 0 to 8 mg/L). Her enlarged lymph nodes in the supraclavicular, retroperitoneal, peritoneal and pelvic regions diminished with the steroid therapy.