Our patient was a 27-year-old Javanese man with borderline intellectual functioning and striking dysmorphisms. Both his parents were Javanese, normal, non-consanguineous, and in their sixth decade of life. He was the third child born after a normal third pregnancy and he had two sisters who were normal. His mother had a cesarean delivery with no history of trauma, infection, or drug use during the term. No family history of similar complaints or any other congenital abnormality was reported. Our patient was born at term after an uneventful pregnancy.
He is a slow learner and attends a school for children with special needs in Cirebon, West Java, Indonesia. There he began to socialize, play with other classmates, and he likes to draw and enjoys music. The dysmorphisms found are very characteristic. On physical examination, his weight was 36 kg, height 158 cm, and occipital frontal circumference 54 cm. It was observed that he displayed hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral fissure, strabismus, ocular proptosis, depressed nasal bridge, short philtrum, and low-set ears. In addition, acrocephaly, asymmetrical flat facies, nasal deformity, and prominent jaw were present . His oral deformities showed maxilla hypoplasia with high arch palate. His V-shaped maxillary arch was filled with double rows of teeth. In addition, there was a dental fusion between maxillary premolar and first molar. Panoramic radiographs were performed for confirmation . Other abnormalities found were mild scoliosis and mild pectus excavatum. Symmetrical cutaneous bilateral syndactyly involving his four fingers, his palms were spoon-shaped with an inwardly placed thumb, was present (type 2). Both feet showed type 2 symmetrical cutaneous syndactyly of the first to fifth toes. Radiographs of both hands and feet confirmed soft tissue syndactyly . He had corrective surgery twice on both hands to correct for joint contractures. There was no postoperative complication. Six months after the second surgery, he could start using his fingers. A clinical diagnosis of AS was previously made based on these clinical features, as earlier mentioned in our study describing clinical manifestations of this patient . Furthermore, Pictures of Standard Syndromes and Undiagnosed Malformations (POSSUM) software was used before molecular analysis and the result showed suspected AS with a cut-off point of 14. Ethical clearance for genetic testing was obtained according to the research ethic committee of Faculty of Medicine, Swadaya Gunung Jati University, Indonesia.
Mutation analysis was conducted for our patient. DNA was isolated from peripheral blood using the salt saturation method, as previously described by Miller et al. . Molecular genetics analysis of FGFR2, targeting exon 7, was performed by direct sequencing at the Laboratory of Neurovascular Unit and Cognitive Impairments, University of Poitiers, France. The reference genomic DNA sequence used was NM_000141.4. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of exon 7 from the FGFR2 gene was performed using the primers FGFR2-F 5-CCGGCAGTCTCCTTTGAAGT-3′ and FGFR2-R 5′-GATCTGTTAATTCCTTAGAACACTCTCT-3′, resulting in a 525 bp fragment. Approximately 50 ng of DNA solution (2.5 μl) was added to 22.5 μl of PCR mixture. This PCR mixture contained 0.25 μl of 25 mM deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs), 3 μl of 25 mM MgCl2, 0.25 μl of each 20 μM primer, 2.5 μl of 10× PCR buffer, 0.125 μl of 5 U/μl Diamond® high fidelity Taq DNA polymerase (Eurogentec), and 16.13 μl of H2O. PCR was initiated with denaturation at 95 °C for 3 minutes, followed by 35 PCR cycles (at 95 °C for 30 seconds, 60 °C for 30 seconds, and 72 °C for 30 seconds) and 7 minutes final elongation at 72 °C. The amplified products were detected by electrophoresis on a 1.5% agarose gel with 0.5 mg/ml ethidium bromide and visualized under ultraviolet (UV) light. Furthermore, 5 μl of the PCR product was cleaned up with 2 μl ExoSAP reagent (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, to remove excess primers and unincorporated nucleotides enzymatically. Finally, 2 μl of the PCR product was used for the sequence reaction (BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit Version 3.3; Applied Biosystems), which was run on an ABI PRISM® 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems), following the manufacturer’s directions. Sequencing was performed bidirectionally using the forward and reverse PCR primers. The sequence result was compared with the published reference sequence using Chromas software version 2.6.4. In this patient, we detected a missense mutation, changing a TCG codon (coding for a serine) into a TGG (coding for a tryptophan): p.Ser252Trp (c.755C>G) .