The patient was a 40-year-old man who was admitted to hospital because of increased pain in the metatarsal joints and renal impairment.
Around 15 years previously, the patient was diagnosed with gout.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The proband had a family history of hyperuricemia as his grandmother, father, two of his aunts, and two of his female cousins were diagnosed with hyperuricemia and gout. The grandmother, father, one aunt, and one female cousin had been undergoing hemodialysis and died between the ages of 30 and 50 years. In addition, the patient’s 9-year-old daughter had also been diagnosed with hyperuricemia based on her 5.6 mg/dL serum uric acid level (normal range for children aged 1–10 years: < 5.3 mg/dL) .
The patient’s temperature was 36.7 ℃, heart rate 88 bpm, respiratory rate 14 breaths/min, blood pressure 132/78 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air 100%. Physical examination indicated the presence of a mildly painful nodule behind the auricle, slight pain and swelling of the knee joints, serious pain and deformity of the interphalangeal joints, and gout stones on the 1 s metatarsal joints in the feet of the patient .
The patient had respective blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels of 50.5 mg/dL and 6.2 mg/dL (normal ranges: 7.30–21.06 mg/dL and 0.46–0.82 mg/dL, respectively). The patient had a serum uric acid level of 13.2 mg/dL (normal range: 2.6–6.0 mg/dL), whereas fractional uric acid excretion was reduced by 3.43%. Other laboratory test results were within normal ranges.
Renal ultrasonography showed that the patient’s kidneys were relatively atrophic (longitudinal image; 8.1 and 8.7 cm in the major axis of right and left kidneys), indicating the presence of cysts and suggestive of ESRD . Analysis of the knee joints by computed tomography showed high bone density, the presence of high-density shadows, narrowing of the joint space, and soft tissue swelling, which were consistent with the patient’s gout/arthritic symptoms .
Considering the family history of kidney disease, juvenile-onset of hyperuricemia, symptoms of gout/arthritis, and progressive renal impairment beginning at an early age, ADTKD-UMOD was considered highly probable. After receiving written informed consent from the four affected living members of the patient’s family, DNA analyses, clinical data collection, and image publication were performed for these individuals. The peripheral blood was sent to CIPHER gene to perform the whole exome sequencing by Illumina HiSeq (the specific method can be consulted in the Supplementary Material). Genetic analyses revealed the presence of a novel heterozygous missense mutation in UMOD exon 3 of the patient, his daughter, aunt, and younger female cousin . The conclusion of the genetic test was variants of unknown clinical significance. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics genetic variation classification standards and guidelines, the variation site was heterozygous, and the zygote type could explain the patient’s disease. Furthermore, this missense mutation was the result of nucleotide exchange at position c.554 (c.554G>T), in which leucine was replaced by arginine at position 185 in the final protein (p.Arg185Leu). This resulted in abnormal folding of uromodulin protein, leading to its accumulation within the endoplasmic reticulum and impaired trafficking through the cell.