A 21-year-old Caucasian woman presented to an outside facility with altered mental status after being found lethargic by family. On arrival to the emergency department, plasma glucose was 20 mg/dl. The patient was hospitalized and started on dextrose infusion, including 10% dextrose in water but remained hypoglycemic with capillary glucose ranging between 50 and 60 mg/dl. She was transferred to our facility on suspicion of an insulinoma as the patient was unable to recall her prior diagnosis.
Medical records from our hospital revealed treatment for hypoglycemia as a neonate. The patient reported repeated episodes of seizures, syncope, dizziness, headaches, palpitations, and sweating around age 12; however, symptoms were never formally investigated as she did not seek expert care. These symptoms were also reported to have been present since birth but had been intermittent and of varying severity. She remained seizure-free and without syncopal episodes until 17 when she experienced another syncopal episode. At that time, she underwent extensive inpatient hypoglycemia evaluation with the following results: blood glucose of 47 mg/dl after 2 h of fasting, proinsulin levels varying from 10.4 to 84.1 pmol/l (normal range 0–10 pmol/l), C-peptide level 3.1 ng/ml (normal range 1.1–4.4 ng/ml), negative insulin antibodies and sulfonylurea screen. Magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen showed no insulinoma, but genetic studies revealed Val452 Leu activating mutation of the GCK gene. She was successfully treated with diazoxide and discharged home on oral diazoxide 250 mg daily, which she discontinued due to side effects of hirsutism and fluid retention.
On current admission, the patient was treated with dextrose boluses initially. Her blood glucose level remained low in spite of a continuous infusion of 5% dextrose necessitating transfer to an intensive care unit. Both fasting and postprandial blood glucose levels were low. As review of her medication list did not show any implicating drugs, no additional work-up was pursued. She was then placed on octreotide 200 µg subcutaneously twice daily and diazoxide suspension 100 mg three times a day on consultation with the pediatric endocrinologist. Neuroglycopenic symptoms of hypoglycemia improved. The patient's hypoglycemia improved with capillary glucose of 55–110 mg/dl by the time of discharge. Importance of compliance with the treatment and follow-up with an endocrinologist was emphasized.