A 58-year-old male with a known co-morbid of hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus (compliant with medications) presented to the emergency room on September 25, 2021, with complaints of worsening shortness of breath, dry cough, and intermittent fever for the past 10 days. On general physical examination, his respiratory rate was 50 breaths per minute, along with the use of accessory muscles. He had 90% oxygen saturation on high-low oxygen. With worsening respiratory symptoms, he was shifted to the Critical Care Unit (CCU).
On admission, baseline laboratory investigations were carried out . He had low hemoglobin levels, low leucocyte count, and significantly high C-reactive protein (CRP) and Creatinine (Cr) levels. He was further tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), despite being fully vaccinated for COVID-19.
On detailed investigation, a High-resolution Computer Tomography (HRCT) scan of the chest was done and revealed patchy bilateral areas of ground-glass opacity along with lobular septal thickening. In addition, there were bilateral extensive fibrotic patches in sub-pleural and central locations, together with pleural thickening. The above findings represent pulmonary fibrosis with interstitial lung disease due to sequelae of COVID-19 pneumonia.
The patient was intubated during the CCU hospitalization due to worsening hypoxemic respiratory failure that was refractory to noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. He was given an entire course of remdesivir and dexamethasone during the intubation period. On the 15th day of hospitalization, he was extubated and was shifted out of the CCU.
On the 20th day of hospitalization (30 days after onset of COVID-19 symptoms), the patient developed bilateral lower limb weakness. Given the concern for the neurological nature of the complaint was evaluated by an on-call neurologist. His physical exam revealed intact cranial nerves and sensations but a power of 3/5 in lower limbs bilaterally along with absent lower limb reflexes and mute plantar reflex. To rule out etiologies of polyneuropathy, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the cervical was done which showed to be insignificant.
On further investigation, neuroelectrophysiology was done whose report showed decreased compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude and sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) amplitude in the left median and ulnar nerves. Moreover, electromyography (EMG) showed few motor unit action potential (MUAP) along with fibrillation in the left first dorsal interosseous and left tibialis anterior muscles. In conclusion, the reports suggested acute motor-sensory axonal polyneuropathy (AMSAN).
Moreover, a detailed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was carried out which revealed to have isolated elevated protein levels (71 mg/dL), while the rest of the components were in the normal range such as pH, specific gravity, glucose. No white blood cells or red blood cells were noted. Culture and sensitivity, and gram staining were both negative. Increased protein levels is a hallmark of GBS.
Based on clinical findings, neurophysiological studies, CSF analysis, and MRI of the cervical, the patient was diagnosed with GBS associated with COVID-19.
Initially, the patient was given oral glucocorticoid (prednisolone) for 5 days and was tapered off when symptoms began to improve. He further received intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) for 6 days continuously. His vitals were stable throughout the rest of the hospital stay, and he had no signs of distress. After receiving this treatment, the patient's symptoms significantly improved, and he was discharged on October 21, 2021, to home with regular physiotherapy advised by the on-call doctor.
The present paper has been reported in accordance with the CARE guidelines .