A previously healthy, 4 week old, Caucasian boy was brought to the emergency department by his mother because he had accidentally been given the mothers’ dose of citalopram. Instead of the vitamin D drops she intended to give him, she accidentally switched bottles of the citalopram and vitamin D. These bottles are similar, as shown in Fig. . The mother noticed the incorrect medication bottle around 30 min later and immediately presented the infant to the emergency department. She administered 10 drops of citalopram, corresponding to 20 mg. With a weight of 3355 g corresponding to a dose of around 6.0 mg/kg.
Upon first physical examination we saw an extremely jittery, agitated infant with an evident opisthotonos, as shown in Fig. . Vital signs were stable, the patient had a respiratory rate of 50/min and an oxygen saturation of 100% in room air. At presentation the patient showed an isolated systolic hypertension. Blood pressure was 110/38 mmHg (reference value p95 for systolic pressure 105 mmHg), with a regular heart rate of 190 beats per minute . An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with normal intervals. A nasogastric tube was inserted to empty the stomach; activated charcoal and sodium sulfate were administered over a 2 h period to prevent any possible further absorption of the citalopram. Furthermore, an intravenous cannula was placed with maintenance fluid and secure intravenous access.
The patient was transferred to a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for intensive monitoring, concerning the possible risk of cardiac rhythm disturbances and convulsions. Laboratory testing was performed including a complete blood count, infection parameters and electrolyte concentration, all results were within normal limits. Because of the risk of convulsions and intracerebral hemorrhage, amplitude-integrated electroencephalography (aEEG) and cerebral ultrasound were performed, which showed no abnormalities.
After 16 h the patient was transferred back to the medium care neonatal ward. In the following days he continued showing signs of extreme jitteriness and increased muscle tone. After 4 days these symptoms were found to be acceptable enough to discharge the patient. Before, during and after admission the patient was only fed formula feeding, breast milk was not used.
During several weeks, at ambulant follow-up, the patient showed persistent signs of increased muscle tone for at least 1 month after discharge. Furthermore, he showed signs of agitation and gastro-oesophageal reflux. Treatment was started with esomeprazole to counteract the effect of the gastro-oesophageal reflux. After 7 months patients symptoms disappeared completely and the patient was discharged from further ambulant follow-up.
To assess pharmacokinetic parameters as well as to predict time to improvement of symptoms, citalopram and the active metabolite desmethylcitalopram concentrations were measured in the serum of the patient. Citalopram and desmethylcitalopram concentrations were analyzed using a validated UPLC-MS-MS method at the Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis hospital in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Two hours after ingestion, the citalopram plasma concentration was 77 μg/l with no detectable desmethylcitalopram concentration. Fifty-four hours after ingestion, citalopram serum level decreased to 33 μg/l and desmethylcitalopram increased to a concentration of 43 μg/l.
To objectify the severity and clinical course, Finnegan scores were randomly measured during the course of admission (Additional file ) . Fig. shows the course of the known Finnegan scores, citalopram and desmethylcitalopram serum levels. Finnegan scores were as follows: 2 h after ingestion 11, 24 h after ingestion 8, 46 h after ingestion 6, 66 h after ingestion 3, more elaborate data is shown in Additional file . Unfortunately during the time of admittance at the NICU, Finnegan scores were not measured.