A 68-year-old man was examined in the outpatient department of our hospital by transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) because the attending cardiologist suspected mitral valve endocarditis. The patient’s medical history revealed permanent AF, drug-, and hepatitis E-induced liver cirrhosis (CHILD Score B) being on vitamin-K-antagonist (VKA), a biological aortic valve replacement in 2011 and long-standing hypertension. Due to a history of cirrhosis-associated major gastric bleeding complications in February 2014, while being on VKA and rheumatoid arthritis with long-term glucocorticoid therapy, an LAA closure procedure was planned 3 months later in our hospital. At that time, the patient had a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 2 points (age 65–74 years +1 and hypertension +1) and a HAS-BLED score of 5 points (age, hypertension, abnormal liver function, labile International Normalized Ratio (INR), and prior major bleeding; each +1). Despite antihypertensive combination therapy, including a diuretic, the patient’s blood pressure remained increased. Therefore, in combination with the glucocorticoid therapy, the bleeding risk (estimated risk 9–12%) was substantially higher than the risk for ischaemic stroke (estimated at 2.2%). At the time, guidelines did not recommend direct oral anticoagulants as an alternative to VKA use as there was insufficient data. As a result, a percutaneous LAA closure was performed in May 2014 and a 33-mm WATCHMAN device was implanted in the LAA of a chicken wing type and a left atrial (LA) size of 22 cm2. The WATCHMAN device size was chosen based on a maximum LAA ostium size of 30 mm, for which a 33-mm WATCHMAN device is recommended. The manufacturer’s standard guidelines and recommendations were followed and the procedure was performed without any adverse events. Post-interventional TOE assessment showed an appropriate closure of the LAA. The patient was discharged with dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) comprising aspirin 100 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day for 3 months, to which he was compliant.
In July 2015, the patient was diagnosed with an ischaemic stroke due to the occlusion of the right internal carotid artery and carotid endarterectomy performed. A TOE performed at the time showed no intracardiac thrombus. Systemic lysis was performed, which resulted in intracranial bleeding. As a result, the CHA2DS2-VASc score increased to 4 points (age 65–74 years +1, hypertension +1, and stroke +2; estimated risk 4%) and the HAS-BLED score increased to 6 points [age, hypertension, abnormal liver function, labile INR, prior major bleeding, and (NEW) stroke; each +1 point; estimated risk higher than 9.1%], respectively. After conservative treatment, the patient was discharged to outpatient care with only slight neurological deficits (insecure gait) and his daily life was not impaired. The patient again received DAPT for 3 months, but no oral anticoagulation.
In April 2016, the patient was invited by the outpatient cardiologist for a routine transthoracic echocardiographic assessment, which included the evaluation of the prosthetic aortic valve function. Examination revealed a mobile mass towards the mitral valve, which was suspected to be potentially endocarditis-related. The size of the left atrium was only slightly larger than in 2014 (25 cm2). A TOE, which was performed shortly after hospital admission, confirmed this mobile mass (∼40 mm × 15 mm in size) arising from a cleft of the LAA and located between the pulmonary vein ridge and the LAA device itself . The structure periodically prolapsed through the mitral valve leaflets and was of dense texture with only minor mobility. Anticoagulation with partial thrombopplastin time (PTT)-controlled heparin (PTT 50–80 s) was initiated. The patient remained completely asymptomatic, without showing any clinical evidence of peripheral embolism or neurological event. Fever and elevation of serological inflammation markers were also absent. Because of the high bleeding risk with a HAS-BLED score of 5 points, surgery was chosen as the therapy of choice instead of long-term anticoagulation.
The patient was transferred to the cardiac surgery unit of a tertiary hospital and the device together with the thrombus was removed. Surgery was performed by a standard procedure with moderate hypothermia, utilizing a cardiopulmonary bypass manoeuvre, and by surgical closure of the LAA thereafter. In situ analysis showed that the closure did not cover the LAA completely and the device was only partially coated by the endothelium. A gap was identified between the device and the LAA from where the thrombus developed.
On Day 21 post-extirpation of the thrombus, the patient was discharged in good clinical condition on DAPT for the following 3 months. A TOE 6 weeks later showed no further thrombus formation and a completely closed LAA. In follow-ups at 6 and 12 months after surgery, transthoracic echocardiography was performed in an outpatient setting and did not reveal any clinically relevant findings. At this point, the patient was in a stable clinical condition. Further follow-up is planned on a yearly basis.