A 67-year-old Chinese male, chronic smoker, with past medical history of hypertension, asthma, and untreated hepatitis B presented to our emergency department (ED) with complaint of sudden onset of frank hemoptysis of 1 day duration. He reported that he had a productive cough with significant amount of blood and clots measuring about a cupful. He mentioned that his cough had been present for over a month but only now was present with frank blood. The patient also complained of generalized fatigue and endorsed losing over 15 pounds over the course of the last several months unintentionally. He denied any shortness of breath, chest pain, fever, chills, night sweats, epistaxis, dry eyes, dry mouth, vision changes, photosensitivity, oral ulcer, dysphagia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, or diarrhea. He denied any urinary disturbance, muscle pain, joint pain or swelling, blood in urine or stool, and any Raynaud’s type symptoms. The patient had immigrated to United States about 20 years prior, with a questionable history of treated tuberculosis about 20 years ago, and no recent travel history. He endorsed a family history only significant for lung cancer in his father. He reported drinking 1–2 alcoholic beverages every day and smoking one pack of cigarettes for the past 20 years.
Few days prior to this admission, patient had presented to our ED with complaints of bilateral lower extremity and upper extremities numbness, and rash that has started 1 month prior. The rash at the time was described as a palpable purpura over the lower extremities. The patient denied any associated joint pain or joint swelling at that time. He was discharged from the ED with a short course of prednisone, and the rash improved.
In the ED, the patient’s vitals were blood pressure 127/72 mmHg, pulse 60/min, temperature 98.3 F, respiratory rate 14 breaths/minute, and pulse oximetry 98% on room air, and he was not in need of any supplemental oxygen. On physical exam, patient was not in acute distress. He was able to answer questions appropriately, alert and oriented to time, place and person. Head and neck examinations were unremarkable for lymphadenopathy or Jugular venous distension (JVD). Oral examination showed blood spots that were noted on the roof of the mouth and the base of the tongue and poor oral dentition, but no ulcerations or any other lesions found. On chest auscultation, scattered coarse crackles were noted and decreased breath sound in the right and left middle and lower fields. Cardiology, gastrointestinal, and neurological examinations were unremarkable. No joint tenderness or swelling appreciated at the musculoskeletal examination. Skin examination revealed dark red non-blanching rash on the bilateral shins and calves.
Initial complete blood count and complete metabolic panel were all within normal limits . Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) initially was 13 mm/hr., and on subsequent follow up increased to 44 mm/hr. C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated at 21.9 mg/L. Urinalysis was negative, with no protein or cells. Hepatitis C antibody negative. Hepatitis B surface antigen was positive, and viral load detected by quantitative nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) at 530 IU/mL. Coagulation profile was within normal (INR: 0.9, activated PTT: 31). Infectious work-up over the next subsequent days was found negative including for tuberculosis.
Further work-up was performed during the admission and yielded highly elevated rheumatoid factor (2460.00 U/mL), reduced complement levels (C3 54.8, C4 < 2).
A computed tomography angiography of the chest showed no evidence suggestive of pulmonary embolus but was suggestive of ground-glass and mixed density nodular opacities with increased bilateral peri-bronchial thickening with tracheal and bronchial mucous stranding and increased right middle lobe mucous plugging indicating chronic low-grade inflammatory process .
At that time, most of serology work-up were pending including cryoglobulins level and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), therefore patient was started on oral Azithromycin 500 mg daily, and intravenous Ceftriaxone 1 g daily for 7 days for pneumonia concern. His hemoptysis resolved during his hospital stay and hemoglobin remained stable. He was also initiated on antiviral therapy for hepatitis B. The patient was discharged home on empiric azithromycin for outpatient treatment for presumable pneumonia and follow-up bronchoscopy while waiting for serology.
One day after discharge, patient experienced another episode of hemoptysis, was readmitted for closer monitoring and further evaluation. At that time, the remaining serology was resulted revealing elevated cryoglobulins IgG and IgM level, and immunofixation electrophoresis of the cryoprecipitate disclosed a Type II Cryoglobulinemia. Patient was found negative for serine PR3 (protease3)-ANCA and MPO (myeloperoxidase)-ANCA.
The patient underwent bronchoscopy at the 2nd hospital admission, which revealed a friable and necrotic bronchial mucosa with blood clots in the right lung, but no active bleeding was noticed. Analysis of the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) revealed no malignant cells, and no fungal elements identified, but few bronchial epithelial cells and hemosiderin-laden macrophages on a hemorrhagic background confirming the suspected diagnosis of alveolar hemorrhage. Bronchoalveolar lavage cultures were negative.
Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with cryoglobulinemic vasculitis and started on high dose oral corticosteroid, 60 mg Prednisone daily. His hemoptysis resolved, and kidney function remained stable. He was stable for discharge to follow up outpatient with rheumatologist for closer monitoring and to start Rituximab as an outpatient. The patient was continued on Entecavir for hepatitis B treatment under the follow up of hepatologist. He received Rituximab intravenous infusion of 1000 mg on week 0 and 2 (for total of two doses). Prednisone was tapered off on weekly basis over the following 3 months. With the treatment, hemoptysis resolved, purpuric skin rashes cleared, kidney function remained stable with no active urinary sediment, and C3, CRP, and ESR normalized. Hepatitis B viral load became undetectable on treatment with Entecavir.