A 58-year-old Caucasian female with a prior diagnosis of SjS and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus presented to our primary care office, where she is an established patient. The patient was prior prescribed cevimeline 30 mg three times a day since diagnosis. She was additionally prescribed 150 mg daily dose of hydroxychloroquine for management of lupus. The patient’s personal medical history also included a tear duct blockage 5 years prior and family history of rheumatoid arthritis.
On presentation to the clinic, the patient reported a 1-day complaint of “heart racing, sweating, unease, headache, dizziness, nausea” and the “physical feeling of wanting to have a bowel movement” that continued for several hours. She reported that, the previous night, she had taken her usual medication of 30 mg of cevimeline, but included two gummy formulation tablets of the B. monnieri and phosphatidylserine-containing herbal supplement. She did not consult with primary care regarding the herbal supplement. Within 30 minutes of ingestion, the patient reported experiencing acute onset of tachycardia, hyperhidrosis, malaise, nausea, and tenesmus. She decided to “sleep off” her symptoms and called our office the next morning when the malaise and nausea had not fully resolved.
A physical examination showed a blood pressure of 127/77 and a pulse oximetry reading at room air of 94%, whereas all other parameters were within normal range. She was fully alert and oriented without any neurological deficits. Pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light and accommodation. On auscultation, patient had regular heart rate and rhythm, normal S1 and S2 heart sounds without murmur, gallop, or rub. Lung and abdominal examination were unremarkable.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed and showed no acute ST–T changes and normal heart rate of 83. The patient was advised to hydrate and to discontinue the herbal supplement. On telephone follow-up the next day, the patient reported that her symptoms had subsided and have since fully resolved. Resolution of symptoms was consistent with the clearance of the drug following a single dose.