A 76-year-old woman had an 8-year history of atrial fibrillation (AF) and severe TR. Her history included mild hypothyroidism and right upper lobectomy for lung carcinoma 11 years previously. For 2 years, she had complained of shortness of breath when lying in the left lateral decubitus position. She had felt dyspnea after mild exercise for 9 months. Recently, she had a sense of abdominal fullness. Although administration of diuretics was started, her symptoms did not completely improve, and she was referred to our department for surgical treatment. The follow-up chest X-ray showed a gradually protruding right-side shadow of the cardiac silhouette, and the cardiothoracic ratio on the chest X-ray reached 88% . The electrocardiogram showed AF with low fibrillatory wave amplitude. Echocardiography showed an enlarged right ventricular (RV) cavity and mild paradoxical motion of the ventricular septum. The tricuspid valve had no findings of an organic and constructive abnormality, with no severe tethering. The annular size of the tricuspid valve was 50 mm, and the tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion was 21 mm . Repeated preoperative cardiac catheterization showed slightly elevated wedge pressure with mild pulmonary hypertension, although LV function was preserved with a cardiac index of 4.0 . There was no L-R shunt disease. Computed tomography (CT) findings showed that the maximum size of the RA reached 121 mm . The change in dimension of the RA by CT showed that the size of the RA increased with time . Blood tests showed no liver dysfunction.
Surgery was performed via median sternotomy. The pericardium was extremely thin on the RA side without any defect. There was no adherence in the pericardial cavity. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established by ascending aorta cannulation with bicaval drainage. The RA was extremely thin and the tricuspid valve annulus was enlarged, with a diameter of 55 mm, but there was no tricuspid structural abnormality. Tricuspid annuloplasty was performed on the beating heart using a 28-mm Carpentier-Edwards Physio tricuspid annuloplasty ring (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). Plication of the enlarged RA was performed, mainly at the interatrial septum, the free RA wall, including the appendage, and the space between the inferior vena cava and the tricuspid ring, in addition to the free RA wall, including the appendage . Additionally, closure of the left atrial appendage from the outside was performed to prevent left atrial thrombus formation. All procedures were performed on the beating heart. The postoperative course was uneventful. The pathological findings of the RA wall demonstrated thinning of the myocardium, inflammatory cell infiltrate, and few cardiomyocytes . Postoperative X-ray and CT showed reduced cardiac silhouette and RA volume . Postoperative echocardiography showed an ejection fraction of 58% and mild TR with a pressure gradient of 29 mmHg . The postoperative value of tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) decreased after the operation. However, the patient’s symptoms were completely resolved, and she was discharged 3 weeks after surgery. The patient is doing well 2 years after surgery.