A 44-year-old woman was admitted to hospital during the 2nd wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in Madagascar (April 2021), for severe epigastric pain. She was neither an alcoholic nor a smoker. The patient did not report a history of trauma or recent surgery. The patient presented a week earlier with asthenia, myalgia, dry cough, a few episodes of difficulty breathing and fever. The Chest computed tomography scan showed bilateral ground glass opacities. COVID-19 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of nasopharyngeal swabs was positive. A moderate COVID-19 was retained. The patient had a favorable evolution with home isolation and drug management (paracetamol, aspirin, atorvastatin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, enoxaparin preventive dose). One week later, severe epigastric pain (visual analog scale 9/10), associated with nausea and vomiting (3–4 times) suddenly appeared, leading to hospitalization. General examination reported a Body mass index of 28.5 kg/m2, a blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg, a heart rate of 64 bpm, a respiratory rate of 26/min and an oxygen saturation of 94%. Physical examination on admission showed epigastric tenderness and abdominal bloating. Laboratory tests reported a serum lipase level at 301 U/L (> 3 X Upper limit of normal), C-reactive protein at 25 mg/L, serum calcium level at 2.2 mmol/L, serum triglyceride level at 2.1 g/L, D-dimer at 805 ng/mL. The other laboratory tests are reported in Table 1. Abdominal ultrasound showed no extrahepatic or intrahepatic lithiasis. The Abdominal computed tomography scan showed a benign edematous pancreatitis with no evidence of gallstones. The outcome was favorable under symptomatic medical treatment associating fluid resuscitation, bowel rest, management of pain and vomiting, preventive dose of enoxaparin and early oral feeding upon pain resolution. The patient was discharged after one week of hospitalization. We ultimately retained the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection induced AP in a woman patient without risk factors.