A 55-year-old man (height, 176 cm; weight, 95 kg) with rhegmatogenous retinal detachment presented to the hospital after experiencing sudden blackout of vision in the right eye for over 20 days prior to his visit. He had a medical history of claustrophobia for over 40 years and severe obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS); however, he had not undergone any treatment. He had no medical history of chronic systemic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, allergies, or surgery. The preoperative physical examination was unremarkable.
Surgery under local anesthesia was initially planned to take place in an ophthalmic operating room. The first operation failed, as the patient experienced a panic attack upon entering the operation room. The ophthalmologist subsequently applied for anesthesia sedation surgery the next day and consulted the anesthesiology department. After consultation with the anesthesiology department, it was found that the patient had severe OSAS, and thus, the risk of adverse events surrounding surgery under sedation in the ophthalmic operating room was high. As a result, the patient’s safety could not be guaranteed, and general anesthesia surgery was recommended in the anesthesiology operating room. On the day of the surgery, the patient was so resistant to the unfamiliar environment of the anesthesiology operating room that the operation had to be canceled again. After building trust with the patient, the anesthesiologist accompanied the patient to the anesthesiology operating room. However, the patient still experienced a panic attack when he entered the room. He complained of a severe headache, throat obstruction, near suffocation, and an uncontrollable and desperate need to escape the operating room. Neither the nurse nor the doctor could comfort him effectively. Finally, the operation was canceled again. After multidisciplinary consultation, the anesthesiologist recommended that the patient be accompanied by family members for anesthesia sedation outside the operating room of the anesthesiology department, followed by completion of the operation under general anesthesia in the operating room.
The patient underwent routine fasting. On the day of the surgery, the patient, accompanied by his family members, went to the hall outside the operating room of the anesthesiology department. He half-laid on the surgical transfer bed, facing a large window in the hall. The patient felt comfortable looking out of the window, and the anesthesiologist relaxed the patient through conversation. After cannulating an upper extremity peripheral vein, intravenous midazolam (3 mg) and propofol (30 mg) were administered for induction, and the patient was quickly transferred to the operating room after he lost consciousness. He was administered high-flow oxygen via mask for FiO2 100%, oxygen flow 6 L/minutes, with routine monitoring of vital signs. Heart rate was 65 beats per minute, blood pressure 112/55 mm Hg, oxygen saturation 100%, temperature 36.5°C, and bispectral index 75. Intravenous injection of etomidate (20 mg), sufentanil (10 μg), and dexmedetomidine hydrochloride infusion (1 μg/kg during the first 10 minutes) were administered. After stabilization of the heart rate and blood pressure, intravenous injection of cis-atracurium (15 mg) was given to complete anesthesia induction. Oxygen was administered via a mask to assist with breathing, and mechanical ventilation was started after oral placement of a No. 4 laryngeal mask following muscle relaxation. Subsequently, intravenous targeted infusion of propofol (3.0–6.0 μg/mL) and remifentanil (2.0–8.0 ng/mL) and an intravenous dexmedetomidine pump were started for intraoperative maintenance of bispectral index 40 to 60. The surgery took 55 minutes. The operation went smoothly, and the intraoperative vital signs were stable. After the operation, the patient was taken to the hall outside the operating room and kept in a supine position facing the window of the hall. The oxygen bag provided oxygen compound air for spontaneous breathing with a heart rate of 55 beats per minute, blood pressure 96/62 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation 100%. After spontaneous breathing with oxygen saturation ≥ 98% under room air, the laryngeal mask was removed once extubation conditions were reached. The patient had no difficulty in breathing after removing the laryngeal mask, and the semi-recumbent position kept the patient’s airway open and comfortable. After 30 minutes of observation, the patient was fully conscious, breathing was completely restored, and he could communicate normally. He was then sent back to the ward, and all his vital signs remained stable after the operation.
After a few days, the patient was interviewed over the telephone. He had returned to his daily routine, and there were no long-term postoperative adverse events. He described having a fear of enclosed spaces that could be traced back to childhood experiences. He said that he could consciously control his emotions before the surgery, but still experienced uncontrollable fear unconsciously during the operation; however, the extra-operative anesthesia and awakening experience were comfortable.
Written informed consent for publication of this report was obtained from the patient and his family.