A 28-year-old man with a history of chronic alcoholism visited the emergency department owing to weakness in the left extremities. He was under treatment with an antiepileptic drug for the past 6 months since a traumatic subdural hemorrhage occurred during a fall down the stairs. At that time, he underwent facial nerve decompression for left-sided facial palsy due to ear bleeding and a temporal bone fracture. He complained of a 5-day history of myalgia and upper respiratory infection symptoms, such as coughing and sore throat. Initially, his vital signs were stable except for a body temperature of 38.6 °C. He was responsive to the medical staff’s questions, but his answers lacked fluency. Findings of a physical examination performed on arrival to the emergency room were unremarkable, and mild neck stiffness was observed during a neurological examination.
Baseline laboratory data of complete blood count showed leukocytosis (white blood cell [WBC] count, 15,090/µL; neutrophils, 87.5%; lymphocytes, 4.9%) with mild C-reactive protein elevation (2.08 mg/dL). Since the patient’s neck stiffness worsened and stupor was noted, a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was performed. The CSF analysis showed pleocytosis (WBC count of 390/µL; polymorphonuclear leukocyte count, 60%), high protein level (161.3 mg/dL; reference range, 15–40 mg/dL), and low glucose level (30 mg/dL; reference range, 40–70 mg/dL) with a negative Gram stain. No focal lesions were observed on brain magnetic resonance imaging (Additional file : Fig. S1). Intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g every 12 h) and vancomycin (1 g every 12 h) as empirical antibiotic therapy were administered with intravenous dexamethasone, as the findings were suggestive of bacterial meningitis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae or Neisseria meningitidis.
On day 6 of hospitalization, blood culture revealed Gram-negative bacilli growth in the aerobic and anaerobic bottles. On day 11 of hospitalization, the organism was identified as C. fetus. However, these organisms were not identified in the CSF culture. The CSF specimen was collected 6 h after prompt empirical antibiotic treatment. Doripenem (500 mg every 8 h) was administered for 10 days until the meningitis symptoms completely resolved without neurological sequelae. The automated susceptibility test (VITEK2 system, bioMérieux, France) showed that the isolate was susceptible to erythromycin and ciprofloxacin. The patient regularly visited the outpatient clinic for 2 years, without recurrence of the meningitis. He stated that he had been raising a companion dog and denied contact with livestock animals such as cattle and sheep or ingestion of raw or undercooked meat.
To confirm the species and identify the subspecies of the isolated C. fetus sample, a sequence analysis of the 16 s rRNA gene was conducted using the polymerase chain reaction primers 27F 5′-AGA GTT TGA TCM TGG CTC-3′ and 1492R 5′-TAC GGY TAC CTT GTT ACG ACT-3′. The sequencing primers 785F 5′ (GGA TTA GAT ACC CTG GTA) 3' and 907R 5′ (CCG TCA ATT CMT TTR AGT TT) 3′ were used. The C. fetus 16S rRNA sequence was compared to the published sequences from GenBank. Phylogenetic analysis (Jukes-Cantor/Neighbor Joining) revealed that the 16S rRNA sequence in this case showed high similarity (99.93%) with other Cfv 16S rRNA sequences . These sequences were also distinct from those of Cff and other Campylobacter spp. compared with previously reported 16S rRNA nucleotides of other Campylobacter species (C, coli, C. jejuni, Cff) .