The present case involves a 65-year-old female with a medical history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus. In 2020, her ECG showed complete left bundle branch block (LBBB), and in January 2021 the patient experienced dizziness with no apparent cardiac cause. In October 2021, the patient was seen in the outpatient clinic because of dizziness and shortness of breath. ECG and Holter monitoring revealed a 2:1 AV-block, high-degree AV-block, and complete AV-block. A trans-thoracic echo showed normal cardiac function, except for the abnormal septal movement typically seen in LBBB. Subsequently, the patient was referred to our center for brady-pacing and due to the prospect of chronic RV pacing, she was accepted for CSP.
Upon admission for CSP implantation in October 2021, the patient had complete AV-block with a ventricular escape rhythm of 33 beats per minute. The CSP implantation was successfully performed under local anesthesia with the device placement location being subcutaneous and left-sided. The right atrial lead was successfully positioned within the right atrial appendage. Consistent with the 2021 ESC pacing and CRT guidelines (Class IIa recommendation), the operator proceeded to insert an RV backup lead at the RV apex in the context of His-pacing.
Thereafter, a ventriculogram was performed to visualize the His-region for CSP lead placement (Medtronic SelectSecure Model 3830 lumen less lead, Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN). His capture could be achieved at several sites, but pacing at high output only resulted in partial correction of the LBBB. After three unsuccessful attempts to correct the LBBB completely at the His, the decision was made to proceed with conversion to the LBBA. The CSP lead was then placed in the ventricular septum until sufficient (non-selective) LBBA pacing was achieved, with satisfying sense and threshold values. During pacing, specific observations were made; a modest R’ in V1 and a stimulus to LV activation time of less than 80ms. The inter-peak time measured was 24ms (interval between peak R-wave in V6 and R’ in V1) . Achievement of more selective LV capture was hindered by the challenge of reaching deeper into the septum. Following lead implantation, a fluoroscopic image revealed the fulcrum sign, demonstrating the placement of the CSP lead tip within the RV septal wall . Finally, a cardiac resynchronization therapy pulse generator (Medtronic Solara CRT-P, Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN) with the CSP lead connected to the LV port was implanted subcutaneously. The LBBA pacing threshold at implant was 0.5 V and the pacing settings were eventually programmed to 2.5 V/0.4ms for the LBBA lead.
The day after the procedure, a chest X-ray confirmed the lead position and a threshold test was performed to ensure stable pacing values . Two months after implant, during the routine device checkup, it was discovered that the LBBA pacing threshold had increased slightly to 1.25 V.
During the routine device follow-up at one year, it was observed that the LBBA pacing threshold had risen to 3 V, which was above the pacing output of 2.5 V. Consequently, the patient was receiving RV only pacing from the backup lead . Attempts to increase the output led to pocket stimulation, prompting a change in the pacing configuration to LVtip – RVring at 4 V/0.7ms. Subsequent follow-up two months later revealed an even higher LBBA pacing threshold. At increased pacing output, anodal capture at the lead ring was observed, and battery life expectancy decreased drastically. As a result, RV pacing was established as the default mode, and LBBA pacing was deactivated.
Subsequently, a CMR scan (1.5T scanner, Sola, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) was performed to investigate the possible cause of the increasing LBBA pacing threshold. To ensure safety during the procedure, the device was programmed in the MR safe mode. The following imaging techniques were applied: cine imaging, T1 and T2 mapping, and wideband late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging (to reduce cardiac implantable electronic device–induced artefacts) as presented in Fig. . The cine imaging showed a normal LVEF of 58% and normal cardiac dimensions. Proximal LV septum thickening (14 mm) was present with hypokinesia in the same area. T1 mapping demonstrated focal high T1 values in the proximal LV septum of 1263 ± 51ms (site-specific normal myocardial T1 values: 950–1050ms) indicative of myocardial fibrosis, edema or infiltration. On T2 maps, a slightly increased T2 value was present in the same area (54.6 ± 2.7ms) as compared to the site-specific normal myocardial T2 values (42–50ms), compatible with focal edema/inflammation. LGE images revealed non-ischemic patchy mid-myocardial high signal intensity in the same proximal LV septum, suggestive of focal fibrosis. Fibrosis was not limited to the insertion point of the CSP lead tip; instead, it extended in both the basal-apical and inferoseptal-inferolateral directions. The combination of findings, including basal septal thickening with mid-myocardial focal LGE and evidence of inflammation with concomitant diffuse myocardial edema is suggestive of cardiac sarcoidosis. Therefore, further lab tests and a PET-CT scan were performed. Lab results showed an increased serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), and normal soluble Interleukin2-receptor antagonist levels. PET-CT findings did not support the diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis (no lymphadenopathy or avid lymph nodes within the imaged region) or the presence of active myocarditis. Alternative causes for basal septal thickening with mid-wall focal LGE could be an infiltrative cardiomyopathy, systemic disease, or a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.