A 62-year-old man with no history of eye surgery underwent 25G+ pars plana vitrectomy for proliferative diabetic retinopathy. After retrobulbar anesthesia, a vision system was used to view the surgical field, and an inferotemporal sclerotomy was created using a 25G+ trocar. The trocar obliquely punctured the bulbar conjunctiva and sclera at an angle of 45° (sclerotomy), approximately 4 mm from the limbus and parallel to it. The trocar was twisted into the eyeball, and its orientation was gradually changed perpendicular to the limbus. After confirming that the cannula was inside the eye, we pulled out the trocar and inserted an infusion cannula into the port. Two more sclerotomies were created in the superotemporal and superonasal quadrants. However, when we pulled out the superonasal trocar, the collar of the cannula fell off and the cannula tube was missing . Therefore, a bulbar conjunctival incision was placed to search for the missing cannula. No cannula was found in the subconjunctival space. We used a scleral depressor to look for the missing cannula tube along the peripheral retina and found the broken cannula tip in the ciliary body corresponding to the superonasal sclerotomy site. We created a new sclerotomy 2 mm above the original incision and 4 mm from the limbus and subsequently performed vitrectomy around the broken cannula to mobilize it for extraction. The new scleral incision was extended to 3 mm parallel to the limbus and allowed entry of a foreign body forceps . The broken tip of the cannula was brought into view by indenting the sclera adjacent to the original sclerotomy. We used the foreign body forceps to clamp and pull the fractured cannula toward the central vitreous body . With the help of the light probe, the longitudinal length of the cannula was aligned with the foreign body forceps and retrieved through the enlarged incision . No leakage occurred from the original sutureless scleral incision. The extended scleral incision was sutured with 7-0 polyglactin 910 suture.