We evaluated a Comorian girl aged 3 years 6 months with neuroregression and seizures. The child was third born to second-degree consanguineous parents by lower-segment cesarean section due to cephalopelvic disproportion. Birth weight was 3.1 kg with uneventful perinatal history. There was maternal history of normal healthy live birth in the first pregnancy and spontaneous miscarriages in second and fourth pregnancies in early trimesters. The fourth pregnancy was associated with Down syndrome. The mother was given antenatal progesterone for excess bleeding in the first trimester.
From 2 weeks of age, she presented with lethargy, sweating, and breathlessness on feeding. Later on, she presented with recurrent episodes of aspirations with severe lower respiratory infections. Cardiac examination revealed a holosystolic murmur suggestive of ventricular septal defect (VSD). Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly with features suggestive of pneumonia . Echocardiography (ECHO) showed moderate VSD (6–7 cm subaortic perimembranous VSD), dilated left atrium and left ventricle, trivial aortic regurgitation with aortic cusp collapse, dilated pulmonary artery system with flow acceleration across pulmonary valve, and half-systemic pulmonary artery pressure with normal left ventricular systolic function . There was no pericardial effusion or right ventricular outflow tract obstruction. She was managed medically with decongestive medications and antibiotics for lower respiratory infections. She was noted to have laryngomalacia. At 3 months of age, decreased motor movements were noted. She was gaining weight till 5 months of age, after which there was flattening of the growth curve and failure to thrive. At 6 months, she had developmental arrest followed by progressive neuroregression. She also had severe startle response since 8 months of age. Then, she started having generalized recurrent seizures from 9 months onward. The epileptic episodes were mostly focal with secondary generalization, with the most severe event reported as having frequency of ten seizure episodes within 2 hours time period despite anticonvulsant therapy. She had also macrocephaly with coarse facial features, persistent laryngomalacia, and hyperacusis. There was no muscle atrophy. Central hypotonia, peripheral hypertonia, and a positive Babinski reflex were elicited. Organomegaly was absent. Ophthalmological examination showed bilateral macular cherry-red spots and an inability to fixate the eyes. At 12 months, she developed gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) as well as reactive airway disease. Gastrostomy tube feeding was also commenced. She had frequent episodes of hospitalizations due to repeated aspiration pneumonia, reactive airway diseases, and other central nervous system complications.
History and physical examinations pointed toward the diagnosis of GM2 gangliosidosis (Tay–Sachs disease, SD, AB variant). In view of cherry-red spots and coarse facies, GM1 gangliosidosis was also considered. No significant abnormality was noted in complete blood count, electrolytes, or renal and liver function tests. Ultrasonography of abdomen did not reveal any hydronephrosis or other anatomic abnormalities. Computerized tomography scan of brain without contrast was suggestive of mild bilateral symmetric hyperdensity of thalami . Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed slowing of delta frequencies associated with drowsiness. Video-fluoroscopic assessment for swallowing function was suggestive of aspiration on both fluoroscopic runs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain revealed extensive high signal within the supratentorial white matter involving subcortical and deep white matter structures. There was evidence of T1-increased signal in the thalamus and a relatively large head shape. Bilaterally, the thalami demonstrated symmetric reduction of T2 signal and increase in the T1-weighted signal. There was marked delay in myelination as demonstrated on T1-weighted imaging. The corpus callosum was markedly thinned in its anterior body and genu. There was mild hypoplasia of the posterior arch of the C1 vertebra causing minimal narrowing at the upper cervical spinal canal .
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) trace did not reveal high creatinine or N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) peaks. No significant lactate level was demonstrated .
Metabolic workup revealed a serum finding of trace-to-absent total serum HEX A and HEX B (0.0 nmol/min/ml; reference value > 20 nmol/min/ml) explaining the deficiency of the β subunit of HEX and consequent deficiency of HEX B. The serum HEX A percentage was 100% (reference value 20–90%). This biochemical findings of low total HEX and deficient HEX B activities, with high percentage of HEX A/total HEX activity suggested the diagnosis of SD. Oligosaccharide urine screen was positive in the urine sample, and genetic testing confirmed the diagnosis of SD with homozygous deletion c.(445+1_512-1)_(669+1_1170) in the HEXB gene. The parents were advised to consent to genetic analysis, but they refused.
The patient was maintained on decongestive therapy (captopril, frusemide, spironolactone, and digoxin) and antiepileptics (levetiracetam and phenobarbitone). Fundoplication was done owing to her symptomatic GERD during infancy, and she was started on regular esomeprazole and domperidone, after which she was fed through gastrostomy tube. Fluticasone, ipratropium bromide and salbutamol nebulizations were continued in view of reactive airway disease. Iron supplementation was started in view of anemia. The clinical course is complicated with recurrent aspiration pneumonia warranting frequent hospital admissions. She also underwent multiple bronchoscopies. At 3 years of age, she had adenoviral infection on respiratory BioFire assay and then developed Pseudomonas pneumonia. Despite treatment with piperacillin–tazobactam, ciprofloxacin, tobramycin, and clindamycin antibiotics, her cardiorespiratory status worsened and she became ventilator dependent. Tracheostomy was performed at 3 years of age. However, despite the multimodality care with cardiology, neurology, pulmonology, physiotherapy, and nutritional and ventilatory support, she died at 3 and half years of age .