A 31-year-old previously healthy Sri Lankan woman from southern parts of Sri Lanka presented with fever for 3 days and altered level of consciousness for 1 day. The fever was associated with headache and myalgia and she did not have nausea, vomiting, or skin rashes. On admission to our hospital she was afebrile and nuchal rigidity was present. She was conscious but aphasic. Her Glasgow Coma Scale was 11/15 (E 4, V 1, M 6). There were involuntary conjugate fast eye movements in all the directions of gaze without a saccadic interval, suggestive of opsoclonus. There were no ophthalmoplegia or other cranial nerve palsies. Her pupils were equally reacting to light. Fundoscopy revealed papilledema. There were involuntary twitching movements on the right side of her face, mandible, and tongue, which increased with movement and disappeared during sleep. Both upper and lower limb tone were normal and she was able to move her limbs against gravity, but not against resistance (power 3/5). The deep tendon reflexes were present. Bilateral plantar responses were flexor. Her other vital signs were stable with a heart rate of 68 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, and blood oxygen saturation (spO2) on air was 96%. All other system examinations were unremarkable.
Her full blood count revealed a neutrophil leukocytosis: white blood cells, 14 × 103/μL; neutrophills (N), 78%; lymphocytes (L), 11%; eosinophills (E), 02%; basophills (B), 5%; platelets, 280 × 103/μL; and hemoglobin, 13 g/dl. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 66 mm in the first hour but her C-reactive protein was less than 6 mg/dl. Her serum electrolytes and renal and liver profiles were normal: sodium (Na), 133 mmol/l; potassium (K), 4.5 mmol/l; serum calcium, 2.3 mmol/l; magnesium, 0.99 mmol/l; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 40 U/l; and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 47 U/l. Her thyroid stimulating hormone was 0.34 IU/L. Blood and urine culture, blood film for malaria parasite, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, and human immunodeficiency virus serology were negative. Thyroid microsomal antibody was less than 10 IU/ml and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibody was also negative. A non-contrast computed tomography of her brain showed cerebral edema. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure was 180 mmH2O and full report showed high level of proteins of 130 mg/dl with 60 lymphocytes/mm3. Polymorphs and red blood cells were absent in CSF. CSF glucose was 3.4 mmol/l (corresponding random blood sugar was 5.5 mmol/l). Herpes simplex virus polymerase chain reaction in CSF was negative. IgM for JE became positive in both serum and CSF. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain showed symmetrical bilateral high signal intensities in basal ganglia, head of the caudate, and midbrain in T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) without diffusion restriction . Serial electroencephalograms (EEGs) were done which showed various epileptiform discharges. Initial EEG showed bilateral periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges and the second EEG after 2 days showed left-sided lateralization with background slowing.
She was given supportive care and once JE was confirmed we administered methylprednisolone pulses intravenously (1000 mg per day) for 5 days. With this, she improved gradually with reduction in opsoclonus and myoclonic movements. Her limb muscle power and speech also improved slowly. After approximately 2 weeks of the disease duration, epileptic discharges and background slowing in an EEG showed improvement. During the course of her illness she became rigid and a quarter of a tablet of levodopa-carbidopa (250/25 mg) was started at a frequency of three times a day to alleviate the extrapyramidal symptoms.