50-year-old female patient with a history of dermatomyositis and antisynthetase syndrome associated with secondary diffuse pulmonary disease (EPD), on treatment with mycophenolate and corticosteroids. She progressed with weight loss of 18 kg, night sweats and progressive increase in volume of the upper left eyelid. Orbital CT scan was performed which showed an increase in volume of the lacrimal gland.

He was admitted to our center electively for biopsy, with a presumptive diagnosis of MALT lymphoma of the lacrimal gland. Twenty-four hours after the procedure he presented clinical signs of acute abdomen. A TAC showed multiple nodular lesions in the liver, spleen, adrenal glands and subcutaneous tissue, as well as thickening of the colonic walls. An emergency exploratory laparotomy was performed, where peritonitis of 4 quadrants was evident, as well as perforated transverse colon tumour and 3 implants in the omentum. A hemicolectomy and terminal ileostomy were performed and the surgical piece was sent to pathological anatomy.

Other infectious or rheumatologic etiologies that could explain the picture in the context of immunosuppression were discarded. In addition, a myelogram was performed, in which a sample was obtained for myeloculture and universal PCR of bacteria and fungi, which were negative. The immunophenotype of the bone marrow sample showed 9% of polyclonal lymphocytes. A CT scan of the brain, neck, thorax, abdomen and pelvis was performed to extend the study of the nodules found in surgery, which did not show new lesions to those already described. The presumptive diagnosis was unknown primary neoplasm.

Finally, the biopsy result of the lacrimal gland tumor showed extensive necrosis and lymphoid infiltration, mixed with CD68-positive histiocytoid cells and some plasma cells. Occasionally, a multinucleated cell was recognized. The lymphocytes were predominantly small, although larger around the vessels. Medium to large lymphocytes were present with angiocentricity, causing infiltration and necrosis of blood vessels. These cells were CD20 positive and EBER positive, with the majority of lymphocytes being small T-cell lymphocytes. The biopsy of the colon tumor showed the same histology.

Given the clinical picture and results described in the biopsies, the diagnosis of atypical presentation of lymphomatoid granulomatosis (GL) was concluded in the first instance. The case was presented to the haemato-oncological committee, and given the patient's nutritional and functional status, and high risk of intestinal perforation with chemotherapy, it was decided to initiate the R-COP protocol as a prephase to be able to progress to the R-CHOEP scheme after stabilisation. The patient completed 6 cycles of R-CHOEP, without complications, and has been in complete remission for 1 year.

In 2022 in light of new classifications and definitions of lymphoid neoplasms, it was concluded that both clinically and histologically, the case is more like a GL-type, polymorphic B-LPD.
