We admitted a child of 3 years and 11 months to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) of Montpellier University Hospital following a sudden collapse at home.

The event occurred at about 1 pm, approximately 5 min after the child woke from a nap showing sudden eye rolling and loss of consciousness, but no abnormal movements. The father made the decision to transport her in his vehicle to the nearest medical center. Upon arrival 15 min later, the child was lifeless with cardiac asystole on electrocardiogram (ECG) and the medical team began cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).

At admission, the child was pale and cold and showed no hematoma, purpura, rash or wound. Abundant digestive hemorrhage of black blood was aspirated by a gastric tube. Expired CO2 was very low, 20 mmHg, indicating prolonged low blood flow. ECG monitoring showed persistent asystole. After discussion with the referral service, there was no indication for circulatory extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Resuscitation was stopped and death declared after 80 min of CPR performed by health professionals.

The parents were immediately interviewed and they asked for all exams, including an autopsy, to identify the cause of their child’s death. The forensic pathologist was contacted and, after being fully informed of all events prior to the child’s death, decided that an autopsy should be carried out, for both legal and medical purposes.

This girl was the first child of non-consanguineous Caucasian parents, born full-term with low weight for gestational age (2330 g at 39 weeks of gestation). She was without significant health problems and her vaccinations were up to date on her health record. The child had had gastroenteritis 3 weeks earlier. Two days before the event, she had a fever associated with fatigue and abdominal pain in the right iliac fossa. For this reason, she was kept at home and was examined by the general practitioner, who found no worrisome signs. Treatment with trimebutine maleate and domperidone was prescribed. The previous night, the father noted a small amount of vomiting and more frequent liquid intake. In the morning, she woke at 7 am with an occipital headache relieved with paracetamol. When she woke from her nap, she spoke correctly and had perioral cyanosis without any other sign of respiratory distress.

As for her family, her father had convulsions in childhood, from 6 months to 12 years, and was treated intermittently with diazepam. Her maternal great-grandmother died suddenly at the age of 25–35 years from a ruptured intracranial aneurysm.

Immediately after death, transthoracic puncture in the cardiac area was performed to collect blood. The puncture, however, brought back 10 ml of yellow serous fluid, which prompted an echocardiography that revealed a large pericardial effusion. The analysis of the pericardial fluid was indicative of an exudate (albumin 46 g/L, protein 66.4 g/L, LDH 344 IU/L), with 440 cells/mm3 (73% granulocytes, 24% lymphocytes). Direct examination by Gram staining and bacterial culture was negative. The search for a panel of respiratory viruses by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was positive for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).

Bacterial cultures of urine, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood were negative, and stool culture found neither fungal nor specific pathogenic bacteria, including clostridium botulinum. Bordetella pertussis and parapertussis were not found in nasal swabs. No other bacterial or viral analysis was performed on nasal specimens. The search for viruses in CSF, stool, and blood was also negative. Laboratory tests found normal concentrations for hemoglobin, C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin, while leukocyte (19.4 109/L) and platelet (448 109/L) counts were slightly elevated. The serum levels of immunoglobulins were normal for the age. Chromatography found no abnormal peak suggestive of aminoacidopathy, and the acylcarnitine profile was normal. No psychotropic or narcotic drugs were detected in the blood. Serum paracetamol concentration was within the therapeutic range (11.6 mg/L) but domperidone was undetectable. The carboxyhemoglobin level measured in the blood sample at admission was 0%. Radiography of the entire skeleton found no significant abnormality, including no recent or old fracture.

The autopsy was performed 48 h after death. External examination found normal development: weight 14.4 kg; height 100 cm. There was no morphological abnormality and no lesion suggestive of maltreatment or trauma. The internal examination found no malformation or visceral malposition. There was nonspecific polyvisceral congestion, as well as global cerebral edema without hemorrhage or mass effect, which could be attributed to the prolonged resuscitation. Several centimetric and infracentimetric flexible lymphadenopathies were observed at the cervical and mesenteric levels, which may be trivial at this age. The examination also confirmed a pericardial effusion of about 30 mL and bilateral pleural effusions of a few milliliters.

Pulmonary, hepatic and cardiac tissue fragments collected during autopsy were negative for a panel of viruses tested by PCR. Bacterial culture found postmortem contaminants, i.e., some lactococcus lactis in the liver and lungs, with klebsiella oxytoca after enrichment in the lung tissue.

Histopathological examination of the tissues was normal except in the lungs and heart. Diffuse edematous lesions associated with severe alveolar hemorrhages were observed, particularly in the left lung. Rare foci of inflammatory interstitial lesions and discrete bronchitis lesions of the pedicular bronchi were also present in both lungs. Mild to moderate inflammatory infiltrate consisting of T lymphocytes and macrophages (respectively, about 7 per field and 9 per field under × 40 magnification) was found in the myocardium and epicardium, consistent with the diagnosis of myoepicarditis. Edematous foci and some myocyte changes were visualized. Immunolabeling with anti-CD3, −CD45 and -CD68 antibodies highlighted the inflammatory infiltrates. Cardioneuropathy was also observed, with embracing and sometimes penetration of autonomic nerves and ganglion cells by inflammatory cells.

A joint consultation, in the presence of a pediatrician and psychologist, was held with the parents 7 weeks after the death of their daughter. The parents were told that the most likely cause of death appeared to be a cardiac rhythm disorder occurring in the context of myocardial inflammation. Five months after this first consultation, a new meeting with the family was requested because we had just received the molecular analysis of unexplained sudden death genes on an index case. Among a panel of 31 genes, a heterozygous variation was identified in exon 6 of the myosin light chain 2 (MYL2) gene, responsible for the replacement of a glutamic acid by alanine at position 134 p and probably corresponding to a pathogenic variant (class 4 of pathogenicity). At this meeting, we thus proposed a family study to investigate the segregation of this variant with the phenotype and to determine its deleteriousness. Their 20-month-old son was examined by a pediatric cardiologist. Clinical examination was normal, with easily palpated axillary and femoral pulses, normal blood pressure and absence of cardiac murmur. ECG showed a regular sinus rhythm at 126 bpm and conduction and repolarization normal for age. Echocardiography found normal intracardiac architecture, good biventricular function, and the absence of any sign suggestive of cardiomyopathy, valvulopathy or pulmonary arterial hypertension. Molecular analysis of the MYL2 gene, however, revealed the same heterozygous variation as in his sister. The parents were also examined by an adult cardiologist. ECG and echocardiography were normal for both. The mutation in the MYL2 gene was observed in the father only.

These elements prompted a new reading of the cardiac histology by two anatomopathologists in two different laboratories, both of whom reported no evidence of arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).