A 67-year-old male patient was admitted in our department due to a mass in front of the ankle joint for 23 years.
In 1998, his right foot was accidentally injured by a brick that fell from a height. He developed pain and swelling in the front of his right foot and calf. He went to a local hospital and was diagnosed with a soft tissue infection. The patient developed a hard mass on the right ankle 3 mo after the injury, about the size of an egg, with no limited ankle joint movement. He then went to the local hospital for treatment and surgery was suggested. The patient did not undergo surgery as the mass did not cause obvious pain and did not affect his joint function.
Three years ago, the patient experienced an accidental sprain of the right ankle with ankle immobility, and was admitted to our department for surgical treatment.
The patient had no remarkable medical history, no history of hypertension, diabetes, hepatitis, tuberculosis, drugs, or food allergies.
A lump was seen in front of the dorsum of the right foot and the middle and lower part of the calf, which was obvious on the right dorsum; the right calf was slightly swollen, the skin was slightly translucent, there was no obvious tenderness, and the skin temperature was not elevated. The mass on the right dorsum was approximately 6 cm × 7 cmin size and non-movable, with a hard texture, unclear boundary, unsmooth surface, no obvious tenderness, no obvious boundary with surrounding tissues, and there was no right ankle joint movement. The blood supply, sensation and movement of the extremity were good.
Routine blood tests showed that C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, alkaline phosphatase, blood sugar, and blood trioxypurine were normal.
X-ray showed a bone mass in front of the right tibia. Computed tomography (CT) showed multiple patchy bone masses with uneven bone density in front of the upper segment of the right tibia and the dorsum of the right foot. The edge of the right ankle joint was osteosclerotic with adequate joint space.