A 71-year-old man presented to his family physician with upper right leg pain. His symptoms progressed with deterioration in his balance and decreased strength and coordination in his upper limbs. Functionally, the patient remarked being clumsy at home, dropping objects on a regular basis, unable to do buttons and/or zippers, and excluded several activities of daily living due to these limitations. The patient had no previous spinal trauma and an unremarkable family history. His previous surgical history included a bilateral hip replacement, tonsillectomy, and carpal tunnel release. A referral was then made to neurosurgery for further management.
Neurological examination revealed an unsteady gait with the inability to heel-to-toe walk and a positive Romberg’s sign. He was unable to sit comfortably and exhibited a reduced range of motion of the neck in all planes. Examination of his upper limbs revealed deficits that were particular to his right side. This included atrophy in the first web space, decreased grip strength (4−/5), poor finger function and reduced sensation. Left arm and hand involvement was present but to a lesser degree. Lower limb involvement included decreased sensation in both feet and in the right L3 dermatome. Reflexes were brisk.
Due to the neurological findings, computed tomography (CT), and nerve conduction study (NCS) were obtained. NCS revealed no abnormal findings while the CT scan showed a mass (28x15x39mm) that compressed the cervical spinal cord at C2.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained revealing a congenitally narrow cervical spinal canal and significant compression of the spinal cord at C1 and C2 . Some canal stenosis, in the thoracic and lumbar regions, was present. This was secondary to degenerative changes and ligamentous hypertrophy.
A diagnosis of cervical myelopathy secondary to a C2 mass was made. Informed consent for surgery was obtained. Surgical management consisted of decompression of the cervical spinal cord with a posterior cervical fusion of C1-C3. Tissue biopsies were obtained and sent to pathology for investigation.
CT imaging was performed in the early postoperative period which demonstrated no bony or hardware complications. MRI imaging was done 6 months postoperatively which illustrated the decompression of the cervical spinal cord. Follow-up clinical examination at that stage found increased grip strength, mobility, and balance with an overall improvement as compared to pre-operative symptomology. He was referred to physiotherapy to aid with rehabilitation.
Further radiological investigations were obtained to verify that the mass was not secondary to systemic amyloidosis. Results were negative, leading to the confirmation of primary solitary amyloidosis treated with uncomplicated cervical spine surgery.
Furthermore, the patient has been referred to Cardiology and completed a MIBI scan with no evidence of cardiac infiltration. Additional cardiac studies and genetic assessment are planned but have not yet been completed at the time of this report; however, it is suspected the ATTR subtype is non-genetic in nature. The patient is receiving further work-up regarding his lumbar spinal stenosis as it requires treatment.