30-year-old male patient from the city of Intuto, located 172 km from the city of Iquitos, in the Peruvian Amazon. He has a history of untreated type 2 diabetes mellitus. He presents to the emergency department of the Regional Hospital of Loreto with convulsions, loss of consciousness and functional limitations, accompanied by chills, headache, feeling of heat and poor general condition. His vital signs at the clinical examination were as follows: BP: 90/60 mmHg; HR: 67/min; respiratory rate: 20/min; T°: 36.5 °C; oxygen saturation: 96%; weight: 60 kg; BMI: 19.6 m². He also presented pallor ++/+++, prostration, general malaise, coldness of extremities, sensory disorder, myalgia and arthralgia.

The illness lasted 14 days and began with convulsions of 1 to 2 minutes with a frequency of 5 to 6 times a day. Two days before admission, he presented loss of consciousness and limited motor function, so he was transferred to the nearest health center, where he was given a thick and extended gout examination, with observation of Plasmodium vivax trophozoites and initiation of treatment. However, the doctor decided to refer him to a health center of greater complexity, so the patient went to the emergency department of the Regional Hospital of Loreto where he was hospitalized.

The patient received intravenous artesunate 14.4 mg at admission, repeated at 12 and 24 h, all doses diluted with 5% dextrose in volume of 5 to 10 ml in a 5 min bolus. Artesunate was continued at 24 mg orally until day 5. Simultaneously with the initiation of intravenous artesunate, 600 mg of clindamycin diluted in 50 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride was infused over 20 to 30 min every 12 h for 5 days. Subsequently, a packed red blood cell transfusion was performed, after which primaquine was continued for 7 days.

After receiving the treatment, the patient underwent a new examination for thick blood without observing the parasite. The laboratory examinations showed a depression of the three series of blood cells with a peripheral sheet extension, typical granulocytes ++, atypical lymphocytes +. In the erythrocytes series, microcytosis with anisocytosis and basophilic punctate was observed. The abdominal ultrasound showed splenomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion. A lumbar puncture was performed with analysis of cerebrospinal fluid. The patient showed clinical improvement with a neurological sequela of monoparesia of the motor nerves in the lower left.
