A 25-year-old Saudi male with a known medical history of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, for which he takes valproic acid, presented to the emergency room with a 1-week history of left leg pain that suddenly worsened to severe anterior leg pain and swelling.

The patient had been in his usual state of health until 1 week prior when he rapidly climbed multiple stairs at his university, triggering bilateral leg pain. Three days later, the pain was localized to the left leg, specifically over the shins, and rated a severity of 10/10. The pain was associated with notable swelling and inability to bear weight. There was no history of pain in other parts of the body, fever, change in urine volume or color, cough, runny nose, sore throat, shortness of breath, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, chest pain, recent seizure episodes, trauma, or recent travel. The patient denied drug use.

On examination, the patient appeared well, with a thinly built body, but in severe pain. Vital signs were within normal limits. Inspection of the left leg revealed swelling over the leg and foot along with an erythematous rash compared with the right leg. Palpation of the left leg and foot revealed severe tenderness. Pitting edema was present over the left leg up to the midshaft. Sensation and vascularity were intact, confirmed by Doppler ultrasonography. There was no evidence of pallor, extensive erythema, swelling, blisters, calf swelling, tenderness over the deep vein territories, or joint effusion in the knee or ankle. While the range of motion was normal, pain was noted during dorsiflexion. Weight-bearing was possible but painful.

Laboratory investigations revealed elevated inflammatory markers with an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 32 mm/hour (normal range: 0–13 mm/hour) and a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 242.8 mg/L (normal range: 0–5 mg/L). Creatine kinase (CK) levels were elevated at 15,384 U/L (normal range: 26–174 U/L). Other laboratory results, including complete blood count, electrolyte levels, renal function, and coagulation profile, were within normal limits.

A bedside deep vein thrombosis ultrasound study of the lower limbs yielded negative results. Radiography of the left leg revealed no acute osseous abnormalities. The soft tissues were unremarkable, and alignment and joint spaces were maintained. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the left leg showed changes suggestive of underlying edematous alterations in the anterior compartment. No definite gas foci, vascular stenosis, or thrombosis was detected.

Initially, the patient was treated for rhabdomyolysis with intravenous fluids and strong analgesia. Despite the intravenous administration of multiple doses of morphine, the pain continued to increase. Given the complexity and unclear etiology of the patient’s symptoms, an orthopedic surgeon was consulted to facilitate a comprehensive evaluation and establish a diagnosis. The impression was left leg compartment syndrome, and an immediate fasciotomy was performed. Under general anesthesia, a 40-cm lateral longitudinal incision was made 3 cm posterior to the lateral edge of the tibia. All muscles in the anterior compartment were dusky, dark in color, not contracting, with no bleeding, and firm in consistency, indicating muscle necrosis. The tibialis posterior, extensor digitorum longus, and extensor hallucis longus muscles were debrided and nearly completely removed. The wound was closed primarily without tension after 1 day, and the patient was discharged 2 days after the initial surgery.

After the procedure, the patient remained conscious with stable vital signs. He was able to walk with the assistance of a walker frame and was partially able to bear weight on the leg. Neurovascular status was normal and intact. The patient was referred for physical therapy and follow-up appointments for wound care and drainage.

One week after the fasciotomy closure, the wound on the left leg was examined and found to be clean and dry. The patient was able to walk with a cast boot and tolerably bear full weight on the leg. The neurovascular status of the leg was normal and intact. One month after the procedure, the patient was instructed to continue daily home exercises. Unfortunately, the patient did not continue follow-up, and no further information could be obtained.