A 38-year-old white Arabian woman, gravida 1, parity 0, abort 1, sought medical advice in our outpatient clinic with complaints of lower abdominal pain that had started 2 days earlier. The pain had first started as mild cramps, which then suddenly intensified nearly 2 hours before her presentation to our clinic, spread to her groin and femur, more prominent on the right side, and became an ongoing pain. The patient had not had any complaints of pain until 2 days earlier in her anamnesis, and she stated that her nausea had started together with the intensification of pain, but she had not vomited. In her medical history, the patient stated that a doctor she had sought medical advice from for infertility about 3 years ago had recommended bilateral salpingectomy and in vitro fertilization treatment due to hydrosalpinx, but the patient did not undergo these procedures. She had undergone no previous abdominal operation. In the patient’s physical evaluation, we measured TA 110/70 mmHg, pulse rate 95 beats/minute, and no fever. The patient’s abdominal examination revealed significant defenses and rebounds in the lower abdominal quadrants, and significant sensitivity was detected in the upper and middle quadrants. Cervical movements were painful during the gynecologic examination. Transvaginal and abdominal ultrasonographic (US) examinations revealed that the uterus was normal, both ovaries were separated and normal, and two irregular cystic masses of 35 mm and 40 mm (possibly hydrosalpinx) were observed in the region close to the left adnexal lobe, and minimal free fluid was seen in the pouch of Douglas. Laboratory test findings were as follows: white blood cell count 9.46 × 103/mm3, hemoglobin 9.3 g/dl, hematocrit 28.67%, and β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) detected as negative. Tumor marker values were within normal limits (CA 125, 8.6 U/ml; CA 15-3, 12.08 U/ml; CA 19-9, 9.73 U/ml; carcinoembryonic antigen, 1.57 ng/ml). A decision was made to perform emergency surgery because acute abdominal findings were apparent, with the patient describing severe pain, clinical findings progressing, and adnexal pathology being detected by US. As preoperative diagnoses of the patient, ovarian cyst rupture and ectopic pregnancy were suspected, and fallopian tube torsion was also suspected due to the normal appearance of the ovaries and the appearance of hydrosalpinx by US. The diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy was excluded because of the negative β-hCG finding. The patient underwent laparotomy with a Pfannenstiel incision. The uterus and both ovaries were normal in abdominal observation. Hydrosalpinx was found in the right tube, and it was torsioned around itself four times and necrotic . In the left tube, hydrosalpinx and 1.5 times torsion around itself were observed. The left tube was torsioned exactly at the junction of the distal hydrosalpinx and the normal proximal tubal region. There was no apparent necrotic appearance in the left tube, possibly due to the fact that circulatory disruption was not complete . Both tubes had hydrosalpinx, and the fimbrial ends were blunt and obliterated. Bilateral salpingectomy was performed on the patient because the right tube had a prominent necrotic appearance, and there was a significant hydrosalpinx in both tubes. The patient was discharged on the second postoperative day without any complaints and without any complications. Histopathological examination revealed bilateral hydrosalpinx with hemorrhagic infarction findings consistent with torsion.