A 29-year-old woman with stage I grade 1 endometrioid endometrial carcinoma presented with lung metastasis.
In 2015, the patient experienced abnormal vaginal bleeding. Her BMI was 20.3 kg/m2. G2P1+1. Ultrasound examination revealed a 3+cm mass in the uterine cavity. In February 2015, she underwent curettage and was diagnosed with FIGO grade 1 endometrioid carcinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging suggested the possibility of cervical invasion. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) was negative. She subsequently underwent comprehensive cancer staging including laparoscopic radical hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, with pelvic washing. Postoperative pathological examinations showed the followings: FIGO grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma infiltrating the superficial muscle layer, and no lymphovascular space invasion. The ovaries and fallopian tubes showed no malignancy. Left and right pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes showed no evidence of malignancy in 26 examined nodes. Peritoneal cytology was negative. A diagnosis of FIGO (2018) stage I endometrioid adenocarcinoma was made. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed that the tumor tissue had a high expression of estrogen receptors (ERs) and progesterone receptors (PRs) and normal DNA mismatch repair (MMR) protein expression . IHC staining for p53 showed a wild-type pattern . Notably, clustered nuclear staining of β-catenin was detected . A postoperative CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was negative. According to the NCCN Guidelines at that time, the patient did not receive adjuvant therapy. The patient was followed up regularly in another hospital. In June 2019, she returned to our hospital with an irregular cough without apparent cause. A pulmonary CT scan showed multiple high-density pulmonary nodules in the anterior basal region of the right lower lobe and right middle lobe of the lung, indicating metastatic tumors . She then underwent thoracoscopic resection of the affected lobes. IHC confirmed an FIGO grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma infiltrating the lung tissue. The patient was then treated with six cycles of combined chemotherapy of paclitaxel and carboplatin. Combined with the computed tomography scan result and the cancer antigen 125, complete remission following treatment was confirmed. The patient was followed up regularly for 18 months after completing chemotherapy, and no tumor recurrence occurred during this period.
The patient denied a history of systematic diseases and a history of smoking.
The patient denied a personal and family history of related diseases.
There was no physical examination.
Routine blood test, liver and kidney function, and tumor markers like cancer antigen 125 (CA125), cancer antigen 199 (CA199), carcinoembryonic antigen(CEA), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were normal.
A pulmonary CT scan showed multiple high-density pulmonary nodules in the anterior basal region of the right lower lobe and right middle lobe of the lung, indicating metastatic tumors .
To gain further insight into the driver gene mutation mediating metastasis, targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) of 688 cancer-related genes was performed on both primary tumor and lung metastasis specimens (Supplementary Table ). DNA was extracted from the paraffin-embedded specimens and blood samples from the patient to evaluate somatic and germline mutations, respectively. The variant frequency for each sample was calculated as the percent variant reads from total reads. The data showed that there was no germline mutation in this patient. Somatic mutations of 44 genes were detected in primary tumor samples. Mutations of PTEN (p.P248Lfs*8), CTNNB1 (p.D32A), BCOR (p.N1425S) and CBL (p.S439N) were detected in the lung metastasis, which were shared by primary tumors . Exonic sequence data across all genes showed no MMR deficiency signature, ultramutated phenotype in POLE or TP53 mutation for both primary and metastatic tumors . According to genomic classification, the patient belonged to the CN-low group.
IHC of the postoperative sample after primary surgery revealed the following: ER + + + , PR + + + , β-catenin + + + , PTEN + + , P53-, and Ki67 25% . The expressions of four MMR proteins (MSH2, MLH1, MSH6 and PMS2) were retained in primary and metastatic tumor tissues, suggestive of microsatellite stable carcinoma, which was consistent with the NGS results . IHC of pulmonary metastatic lesion was as follws: Napsin-A (-), TTF-1 (-), PAX-8 ( +), Ck7 (-), ER (+ +), and PR (+ + +).We evaluated β-catenin by IHC in primary and metastatic tumors, and found clustered nuclear location of β-catenin in both the primary tumor and lung metastatic tumor , indicating high β-catenin activity.
Screening of gene mutations in endometrioid carcinoma was performed using the TCGA. The results showed that there are 130 mutations of CTNNB1 in 399 cases of endometrioid adenocarcinoma, including 2 cases with mutation of D32A.