12-year-old male patient from the community of Santa Clotilde in the Napo River located 1113 km from the city of Iquitos in the district of Napo, Province of Maynas, region of Loreto. With no relevant infectious history, on day one (05/10/2022) he was bitten by a Bothrops (Jergón) snake while walking along the banks of the Napo River. According to the mother, the snake was about 50 cm long, with a triangular head, brown color, dark spots, and yellow tail. Three hours after the bite, he developed intense pain and bleeding in the area of the bite, lateral face of the right leg, for which he received home remedies (a glass of water and salt and a second glass of water and sugar). The next day (06/10/2022), the pain persisted, accompanied by inflammation in the leg, for which he was given intramuscular penicillin. On the third day (07/10/2022), the pain persisted in the area of the bite and the patient presented edema in the face, for which he was transferred to a health center where he was given four vials of anti-venom serum made by the National Institute of Health of Peru, dexamethasone and chlorpheniramine. On the fourth day (08/10/2022), he developed increased edema, and due to persistence of the clinical picture he was transferred by air to the city of Iquitos, arriving at the Regional Hospital of Loreto on the fifth day (09/10/2022), in the evaluation the patient was hemodynamically stable, with vital signs within the normal ranges. In the physical examination, cutaneous pallor, facial and cervical edema, as well as ecchymosis in the lateral face of the right leg were observed.

The parotid glands in the face were markedly swollen, suggesting a likely complication secondary to the Bothrops envenomation.

The initial blood count revealed mild anaemia with a haemoglobin level of 9.9 g/dL (normal value ≥ 12.0 g/dL). The rest of the complementary studies, including the coagulation profile, were within the normal parameters. He was given treatment with intravenous hydration of 0.9% sodium chloride and an antibiotic regimen with ceftriaxone (1.5 g every 12 hours) and clindamycin (385 mg every 8 hours), supplemented with the administration of four vials of anti-venom serum (National Institute of Health) and metamizol (950 mg) for the control of pain.

After 7 days of treatment, the patient showed a significant improvement, remaining hemodynamically stable with a notable decrease in edema and pain. Finally, he was discharged on (13/10/2022) with medical indications to continue the outpatient follow-up.
