A 31-year-old male patient presented to our clinic with symptoms of neck pain, back pain (pain in the lower cervical and upper thoracic region), and numbness in both arms for the last 3 months. His physical examination revealed hypoesthesia at the C4 and C5 dermatomes in both arms with no loss of strength. Cervical computed tomography (CT) showed a destructive and compressive lesion in the C4 vertebra corpus . The retropulsion caused by compression had narrowed the canal. The lesion was also seen to be completely wrapped around the vertebral foramen at the right C4 level and to extend to the lateral mass posteriorly in the axial sections on CT . Weinstein, Boriani, Biagini (WBB) classification was used for the classification of the tumor . In this case, the tumor was located at the regions 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 and invaded all the layers except the dura mater. Corpectomy was performed to the C4 vertebra with an anterior approach together with discectomy to the upper and lower disc spaces during surgery. The lesion was seen to extend to the right C4 vertebral foramen in the surgical observation after corpectomy, and the tumor was carefully dissected 360° around the vertebral artery at this level. Once the vertebral artery was revealed, we entered between the mass extending posteriorly to the lateral mass, the spinal cord, and the vertebral artery and performed meticulous intracavitary curettage. In order to ensure stability after tumor excision, the upper and lower corpus endplates were decorticated with the curette. A corpectomy cage was placed into the C4 space, and the system was fixed by placing a plate screw on the upper and lower vertebra from the anterior . There was no additional neurological deficit postoperatively. The patient’s neurological complaints improved during the postoperative period. There was no residual or remaining tumor after resection. The pathological microscopical evaluation revealed a tumor rich in osteoclastic multinuclear giant cells interspersed in a stroma composed of cells with oval-fusiform nuclei. The pathological diagnosis was giant cell tumor of the bone . No recurrence was seen during 3 years of follow-up .