A 43-year-old man with mild type 2 diabetes mellitus visited the hospital where he received his medications for diabetes mellitus, owing to persistent dizziness, anorexia and general fatigue for 1 month before the consultation. He showed significant weight loss of 15 kg during that 1 month. Approximately 2 weeks before the emergence of his clinical symptoms, he walked around a cave where he encountered a lot of bird droppings and feathers. Since abdominal CT revealed bilateral adrenal masses, he was introduced to a larger hospital for advanced examination. On admission, physical examination revealed a height of 167 cm and a weight of 62 kg. The remainder of the examination findings were normal without signs of meningitis. Laboratory data included white blood cell count of 7,390/μL with 61.7% neutrophils, 23.9% lymphocytes, 2.4% eosinophils, 0.5% basophils and 9.4% monocytes, hemoglobin of 12.6 g/dL and platelet count of 313,000/μL. Although the serum sodium level (133 mEq/L) was slightly decreased, the serum levels of potassium, chloride, creatinine and fasting glucose were normal. The HbA1c was 6.2%. The level of γ-gamma glutamyl transpeptidase was elevated to 116 U/L without increased levels of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase. The serum C-reactive protein level was elevated (5.04 mg/dL). On endocrinological examination, low basal serum cortisol (2.3 μg/dL; normal: 4.0-18.3) with high serum adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (843 pg/mL; normal: 7.2-63.3) was observed, indicating primary adrenal insufficiency. In addition to the low blood levels of aldosterone (28.5 pg/mL; normal: 38.9-307) and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (55 μg/dL; normal: 70-495) synthesized and released by the adrenal cortex, the 24-hour urine adrenaline (1.6 μg/day: normal: 3.4-26.9) and epinephrine (< 0.01 mg/day; normal: 0.04-0.19) levels were markedly reduced, indicating that the adrenal medulla was also devastated. Rapid ACTH (Cortrosyn) stimulation revealed the absence of a serum cortisol response (baselines of 1.1 μg/dL to 1.1 μg/dL and 1.1 μg/dL at 30 and 60 minutes after the ACTH challenge, respectively). Primary adrenal insufficiency was diagnosed and a regimen of oral hydrocortisone (20 mg/day) was prescribed.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed bilateral adrenal masses (right: 5.2 × 2.7 cm; left: 3.7 × 3.6 cm) . The differential diagnosis of the adrenal masses included metastatic carcinoma, tuberculosis, fungal infections, bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and sarcoidosis. An intensive whole-body examination failed to detect a primary lesion for malignancy. The QuantiFERON-TB test and serum human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody enzyme immunoassay were negative. Re-examination of the abdominal CT at 1 month after admission revealed a liver abscess that was thought to be an invasion from the right adrenal mass . Whole-body 18 F-FDG PET showed intense uptake by the bilateral adrenal glands and liver.
To make a diagnosis, a fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the liver mass was performed. The pathological diagnosis of the liver abscess showed multiple foci of necrotic and degenerative cells with infiltration of neutrophils. No malignant cells or epithelioid granulomas were observed in this specimen. Alcian blue staining demonstrated the presence of 5-μm spherical yeast-like organisms, such as Cryptococcus spp., interspersed within the foci. Since the serum cryptococcal antigen titer was 1:256, cryptococcosis of the bilateral adrenal glands and liver was diagnosed. A lumbar puncture revealed clear cerebrospinal fluid with a white blood cell count of 1/μL, normal levels of protein and glucose and negative cryptococcal antigen titer.
After 4 months of fluconazole treatment at a daily dose of 400 mg, the size of the liver abscess was reduced, but no significant changes were observed in the bilateral adrenal masses and the serum cryptococcal antigen titer was still elevated at 1:128. Additional treatment with liposomal amphotericin B at 150 mg daily for 6 weeks (a cumulative dose of 6.3 g) was not effective.
Since it was conceivable that the bilateral adrenal glands were the apparent foci of the persistent fungemia, the patient was referred to our hospital and a laparoscopic left adrenalectomy was performed to control the cryptococcosis. Resection of the right adrenal mass was not executed as the first operation to avoid injury to the adjacent liver. The size of the resected mass was 5 × 4 cm . Histological analysis revealed that the adrenal tissue was widely replaced by massively necrotizing granulomas and fibrous tissue. Many fungi structures, similar to Cryptococcus spp. cells were detected by PAS and Grocott staining .
Fluconazole therapy was continued after the adrenalectomy. At 3 months after the adrenalectomy, a significant size reduction of the right adrenal mass was observed by abdominal CT . The serum cryptococcal antigen titer also decreased to 1:16 at 2 months after the adrenalectomy, and 1:4 at 5 months after the operation. There were no signs of relapse in imaging analyses and the serum cryptococcal antigen titer remained at 1:4 for the subsequent 9 months .