A 3-months-old female was referred to our department because of suspicion of child physical abuse. She was born at term, a product of uneventful gestation. At birth her weight was 3310 gm, length of 51 cm and her occipito-frontal circumference was 33.5 cm. No irritability, feeding or pulmonary abnormalities, and fever were recorded. The mother was 29-year-old-gravida 2, married to a 33-year-old-unrelated man. She had no history of spontaneous abortions, stillbirths, prematurity and or polyhydramnios. No maternal use of medications or antenatal illnesses was reported. Physical examination of the baby showed normal facial features, no blue sclerae, normal nose but swelling of the mandible was noted. There were swellings of some of the long bones (right leg, and radius). Neither feeding abnormalities nor fever was present. Her chest was noted to be symmetrical and of normal appearance. Hands and feet were normal. There were no associated signs of abnormal skin stigmata such as fragility/extensibility and or ligamentous hyperlaxity was noted. Hearing, vision and neurological examinations were all normal. Laboratory studies including metabolic tests, which aimed to tests calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D metabolism were normal. No specific genetic test has been done for this baby.
Anteroposterior radiograph of the skull showed massive sclerosis of the skull bone associated with significant cortical hyperostosis and enlargement of the mandible secondary to cortical new bone formation . Lateral skull radiograph showed sclerosis of the skull base (arrow) and hyperostosis of the calvaria . Coronal MRI imaging showed significant calvarial/facial and mandibular hyperostosis . Anteroposterior radiograph of the radius showed cortical new bone formation associated with subperiosteal thickening. Note marked bloating along the diaphysis with sparing of the epi-metaphyseal components associated with expansion of the bone marrow cavity and a persistent-like deformity . Anteroposterior radiograph of the tibia showed a thick and broad ballooning occupies the diaphyses (proximally and distally) there is gaining in the diameter comes from subperiosteal new bone apposition by intramembraneous bone formation .