The patient was a 45-year-old Asian (Japanese) woman, who presented polycystic ovarian syndrome, hypertension, hyper-urinary acid, bladder stone, urinary stone, progressive renal dysfunction, and lipid abnormality. When she was 3 years old, she visited our hospital because of hypoglycemia, liver enzyme elevation, and hepatomegaly. She was diagnosed as having GSD type Ia based on the loss of G6Pase activity in the liver (< 0.3 µmol/minute/g tissue).
In the first stage of life (3 years to 6 years), she needed frequent feedings and a night time cornstarch regimen until 7 years of age. After 8 years of age, her hypoglycemia improved and her glucose levels could be maintained with cornstarch intake twice a day. However, she had several complications such as kidney stones and hepatic adenomas with hepatomegaly.
At 20 years of age, her BMI increased (to 24.2) and she presented hyperglycemia after food intake . The blood glucose dynamics indicated type 2 diabetes mellitus as described in Fig. [Fasting glucose: 123 mg/dl, homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) 9.23]. Therefore, cornstarch feeding at night was stopped.
At 40 years of age, she presented hyperglycemia (200–260 mg/dl after feeding and dumping syndrome-like symptoms such as nausea, general fatigue, and dorsal pain). Moreover, the dumping syndrome-like symptoms worsened, resulting in poor quality of life. At first, she misunderstood that the complication was related to hypoglycemia and thus increased feeding, leading to an increase in body weight (maximum BMI was 26.4). Laboratory tests indicated elevated triglycerides (880 mg/dl) and abnormal liver function tests . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen revealed multiple liver adenomas with diffuse steatosis. Investigation of diabetes showed an insulin level of 68 µIU/ml (normal range: ≦ 18.7 µIU/ml), with fasting blood glucose levels of 126 mg/dl (normal range: 70–114 mg/dl). HOMA IR was calculated as 22.1 (N < 2.5), indicating severe insulin resistance.
At first, she attempted lifestyle modifications such as a lower carbohydrate diet, elongation of feeding time, and exercise. However, her condition did not improve. To avoid severe hypoglycemia and improve liver function, she was experimentally treated with luseogliflozin hydrate additionally, an SGLT2 inhibitor, at a dose of 2.5 mg daily, after obtaining informed consent. After this intervention, she decreased her cornstarch intake, and her dumping syndrome-like symptoms disappeared completely. In addition, her body weight (BMI 21) and insulin resistance both decreased remarkably (HOMA-IR 4.49; Fig. ).