A four-month-old female child presented with five day's history of non-projectile vomiting, three episodes of food contents vomitus per day, aggravated by feeding. This condition was accompanied by on and off lower grade fever and one episode of passing black tarry stool. She was prescribed ampiclox syrup 5mls po 8hrly for five days and paracetamol syrup 3mls po 8hrly for five days, at a nearby hospital as an outpatient. The child's health was reported to be in good progress for about three days. Over the course of the illness, the mother noted a protruding, self-reducing mass per anal, non-painful, not bleeding, no vomiting, and no abdominal distention associated with passing a normal soft stool, rectal prolapse diagnosis was reached, and she was referred to our center for father management.
On physical examination; the child was alert and active, not pale, not dehydrated and afebrile.
Vital signs; blood pressure = 95/45, pulse pate = 110bmn, respiratory rate = 45 cpm Spo2 = 98 % on room air and body temperature = 36 °C.
Per-Abdominal Examination; not distended, soft abdomen, no tenderness, palpable mobile, free mass on the left lower quadrant which was mobile and non-tender.
Digital Rectal Examination; an obvious circumferential protruding mass per anal on straining, which reduces spontaneously; no other lesion is seen. .
Plane abdominal x ray done shows nothing significant.
Abd ultrasound findings were specific to features of intussusception, including the “target sign,” with a remarkable end and suggestive features of edematous bowel.
Electrolyte results revealed mild hyponatremia of 133.01 mmol/l, with normal chlorine and potassium levels, CBC was essentially normal paramitas, with Hb 11.3 g/dl.
The diagnosis of intussusception was based on the history, clinical examination, laboratory, and radiological results. Plan for emergency laparotomy procedure reached, in which intraoperative finding was ilea caecum intussusception, which advanced to the anus with edematous bowel , milking was managed only up to the level of transverse colon, then it was impossible to progress up to the caecum due to oedema, hence right hemicolectomy was done and ilea transverse end-end anastomosis performed. The child was admitted to the pediatric ICU, whereby on the 2nd day, the child was doing well and transferred to a general ward, started to feed and pass stool normally. On the 4th day the patient was discharged home, and with a follow up on surgical outpatients' clinic for six weeks, with no complications were reported.