A 40-year-old man with unstable Type I diabetes mellitus (with positive anti-insulin antibodies) was followed-up in the diabetology department of Strasbourg University Hospital. The duration of his diabetes was 35 years, during which he had normal renal function, no hematuria, stable microalbuminuria, and no other diabetic complications. Pre-transplant tests revealed neither HLA antibodies nor positive EBV serology, with negative CMV serology, normal cardiovascular exploration, and hepatic morphology. Since he did experience recurrent severe hypoglycemic episodes, the patient was included in the TRIMECO trial . In this trial, the patient received two pancreatic islet allografts using a percutaneous transhepatic portal approach over a 3-month period, without any immediate complications. Immunosuppressive induction for the first procedure included anti-thymocyte globulin (Thymoglobulin®, Sanofi Genzyme) at 0.5–1.5 mg/Kg/day for the first 3 days and anti-TNF-alpha etanercept (Enbrel®, AMGEN) on Day 0, which was decreased to 25 mg on Days 3, 7, and 10. Maintenance immunosuppression was conducted using 1000 mg of mycophenolate mofetil (Cellcept®, Genentech) twice a day and a CNI, tacrolimus (Prograf®, Astellas), twice a day, depending on the residual plasma levels (objectives: 9–13 μg/L for the first 3 months, then 6–9 μg/L thereafter). Induction for the second procedure consisted of 20 mg of the interleukin 2-receptor antagonist basiliximab (Simulect®, Novartis) on Days 0 and 4, along with etanercept. The total number of islets that were injected was 950,000 IEQ (islet equivalents to 150 pancreatic islet diameter). Two months after the second procedure, the patient became insulin-independent with a fasting C-peptide level of 2.3 μg/L (0.77 nmol/L), fasting glycemia of 5.7 mmol/L, and HbA1c of 5.1% (32 mmol/mol). This resulted in the disappearance of his hypoglycemic episodes. About 4 and 8 months after the second procedure, the patient was hospitalized due to recurrent watery diarrhea with Stage 1 acute kidney injury (AKI) , without any signs of hematological TMA. All microbiological explorations (bacterial, virologic, and parasitological in blood and feces) were negative, and kidney function returned to the normal range after intravenous hydration. This digestive episode was possibly linked to an undesirable effect of either mycophenolate mofetil or tacrolimus. However, these drugs were not discontinued.
About 15 months after the second procedure, the patient was readmitted to hospital for Stage 3 AKI and high blood pressure (200/100 mmHg). All blood and urine analysis results are presented in Table . The renal ultrasonography was normal, and the association of mechanical hemolytic anemia–thrombocytopenia and acute renal failure led us to suspect aHUS . A hemodialysis session was initiated, along with plasma exchange (PEX; 60 mL/Kg) for 11 days. At this time, the first hypothesis established was direct endothelial toxicity due to overdosing of tacrolimus, in the context of dehydration from recurrent watery diarrhea, given that the trough tacrolimus level was at the upper limit of recommended targets. Since the suspicion was AKI/HUS induced by tacrolimus, the patient was first switched to ciclosporin (Neoral®, Novartis). He was subsequently switched to everolimus (Certican®, Novartis, anti m-TOR) after histological analysis of the renal biopsy results favored a typical TMA process . The poor response to PEX and low C3 level led us to suspect aHUS, so eculizumab (Soliris®, ALEXION) was initiated. Eculizumab was started 18 days after AKI was diagnosed, at a weekly dose of 900 mg for the first 4 weeks. Thereafter, therapy was maintained at 1200 mg per week for a further 2 months . At the same time, everolimus was similarly switched to cyclosporine. Although the thrombocytopenia resolved after 8 days of PEX, eculizumab administration was not followed by a recovery of renal function. During AKI, the islet graft remained functional. Despite the patient’s C-peptide level remaining uninterpretable in AKI, external insulin therapy was not deemed necessary to maintain normoglycemia.
After receiving the patient’s written informed consent, blood samples were taken to screen for the six genes associated with aHUS. A rare nucleotide change (c.1775G > A) was detected in exon 14 of the C3 gene, resulting in an arginine-to-glutamine substitution in the C3 protein at position 570 (p.R592Q). This heterozygous variant, which has already been reported in patients diagnosed with aHUS , is an exposed amino acid located near the membrane cofactor protein (MCP) binding site. Functional analysis using a recombinant protein demonstrated decreased binding of the C3 variant with MCP, compared to the wild type, as well as a reduced rate of C3 cleavage by Factor I with MCP as the cofactor. This variant led to an indirect function gain, relative to complement activation, which explains the permanently low level of C3 in the patient’s plasma that was observed . Genetic evaluations that were conducted on two sisters revealed the same C3 gene mutation, which contraindicated a related living kidney donation.
The 40-year-old male patient eventually spent 1 year on hemodialysis treatment before undergoing brain-dead-donor kidney transplantation. There was no evidence for HLA immunization prior to transplantation, and preoperative HLA scoring identified four mismatches in HLA Class I, with none in HLA Class II. Cold ischemia time was 16 h. Immunosuppressive induction included basiliximab (Simulect®, Novartis), and eculizumab was continued at a dosage of 900 mg on Days 0, 1, 8, and 15, and then every other week at a dosage of 1200 mg to prevent aHUS relapse. Evidence of hematological TMA was absent in the immediate kidney transplantation follow-up. After kidney transplantation, the immunosuppressive regimen was modified to cyclosporine and mycophenolic acid (Myfortic®, Novartis). Three months after kidney transplantation, renal and pancreatic islet functions were considered excellent, with plasma creatinine levels at 94 μmol/L (1.06 mg/dL) and an HbA1c level of 5.5% (36.5 mmol/mol), without insulin therapy. Kidney function remained satisfactory 12 months after renal transplantation, with a plasma creatinine level of 87 μmol/L (1.0 mg/dL) without TMA lesions at the per-protocol kidney biopsy. Four years after renal transplantation, the patient is still treated with eculizumab, his plasma creatinine is 99 μmol/L, his low C3 level persists, and his pancreatic islet function is satisfactory. He has been insulin free for 5 years. The laboratory results pertaining to the 4-year follow-up are detailed in Fig. .