67-year-old woman with a history of hypertension, obesity, former smoker of 20 packs/year and pulmonary thromboembolism in 2020. She had no known history of immunosuppression, nor regular consumption of antibiotics or corticosteroids. She consulted the emergency room for abdominal pain of 4 days' evolution, located in the epigastrium and right hypochondrium, of a colic type. She also had nausea and vomiting. In the 24 hours before the consultation, she added jaundice, coluria and acolia. In the physical examination, she had jaundice, painful abdomen in the right hypochondrium, without peritoneal reaction. The laboratory analyses showed a normal white blood cell count and hyperbilirubinaemia with a direct predominance (total bilirubin 2.7 mg/dl). An abdominal ultrasound was performed, which reported a thin-walled gallbladder with a 17 mm stone and an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), which reported a lithogenic image embedded in the mouth of the common bile duct of 6 mm, associated with mild dilation. With a diagnosis of mild cholangitis, the patient initiated treatment with ampicillin sulbactam. She evolved with leukocytosis, febrile records, increased bilirubin, as well as oligoanuria and altered level of consciousness, so the treatment was changed to piperacillin tazobactam and an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed, in which a dilation of the extrahepatic bile duct was observed (9 mm) with lithogenic images inside, the sphincteropylothomy was performed, and the exit of purulent material and lithogenic fragments was observed. A biliary stent was placed. Blood cultures were taken, which were negative. After the procedure, the patient evolved afebrile, with an improvement in the clinical picture. Gram-negative bacilli and yeasts were identified in the direct microscopic examination of the bile liquid, and Klebsiella pneumoniae BLEE and Candida glabrata were isolated in the culture. The patient completed 7 days of treatment with piperacillin tazobactam and anidulafungin, with a good evolution and subsequent hospital discharge. The patient signed the corresponding informed consent.
