A 65-year-old non-smoking and non-drinking woman had split-graft deceased-donor LT for end-stage primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) . No pre-LT induction immunosuppressant was given. Her post-LT immunosuppressants included oral tacrolimus (1 mg twice daily) and mycophenolate mofetil (180 mg twice daily). She also had prednisolone (10 mg twice daily) immediately after LT and gradually tapered to 5 mg daily. Prophylactic medication included fluconazole (200 mg daily), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) (480 mg daily) and acyclovir (400 mg tds) were also given for 3 months. She developed biliary anastomotic stricture and bile leakage, which improved with repeated endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with balloon dilatation without stenting. The last endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed at 22 months after LT. At 25 months after LT, she was admitted because of a 2-day history of fever, dyspnea and dry coughing. At admission, her blood pressure was 132/80 mmHg, pulse 106 beat per minute, and SpO2 88% at ambient air. SpO2 improved to 95% with supplemental oxygen (2 L/min) via nasal cannula, but rapidly deteriorated requiring 100% oxygen via re-breathing mask to maintain SpO2 ≥ 92%. Chest X-ray and other investigations were performed . Pneumocystis jirovecii, CMV and RSV were detected in bronchoalveolar lavage by respective accredited in-house polymerase chain reaction. Her condition improved with intravenous TMP-SMX (trimethoprim component at 15 mg/kg/d divided in every 8 h), a tapering dose of corticosteroid for PCP and intravenous ganciclovir (5 mg/kg every 12 h as induction, followed by 5 mg/kg every 24 h as maintenance) for CMV. Her immunosuppressants were reduced and tapered during the PCP treatment. On day-10 TMP-SMX, her chest X-ray showed subcutaneous emphysema bilaterally and right pneumothorax suspected of pneumomediastinum . Computed tomography of the thorax confirmed the presence of right pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema . She was managed with 7-day chest drain in situ with a standard Argyle-type chest tube of Fr-32 until her right lung re-expanded, in addition to 21-day TMP-SMX. She was not put on mechanical ventilation. She survived and was discharged on day 31 after admission. Chest X-ray on discharge showed resolution of the pneumothorax .