A 49-year-old female with a body mass index of 17 kg/m2 presented for pathological fracture of right femoral bone head with metastatic adenocarcinoma and was scheduled to undergo bone tumor resection and artificial bone replacement. She was diagnosed with Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome at the age of 30 and accompanied with multiple pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) and pheochromocytoma. She had a history of brain abscess, takotsubo cardiomyopathy and preoperative coil embolization of the AVMs. She did not have any history of recurrent epistaxis or gastrointestinal bleeding.
A preoperative physical examination did not reveal any special finding on her body surface. Blood pressure was 105/64 mmHg, with doxazosin at a dose of 3 mg per day, and heart rate was 97 bpm. Peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 86% in room air, possibly due to the remaining pulmonary AVMs, but the Hugh-Jones classification was class I. Blood tests were remarkable only for hemoglobin level of 11.2 g/dL. Urinary adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine levels were 14.2 mcg/day, 965.8 mcg/day and 807.3 mcg/day, respectively. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed negative T-waves on V3-5 and a transthoracic echocardiogram showed a peripheral left ventricle hypertrophy with an ejection fraction of 67%. Preoperative image examination revealed bilateral pulmonary AVMs , but no AVM in the brain or in the spinal cord, and a pancreas tail tumor, which was considered to be the origin of the metastatic bone tumor.
Preoperative estimation of the operation duration was 5 h, and estimated intraoperative blood loss was 500 mL. She was in anxiety and wished to have sedation during the procedure.
Combined spinal and epidural anesthesia was planned in order to reduce the risk of rupture of the pulmonary AVMs due to inadequate pain control and positive pressure mechanical ventilation. We planned to add sedation by general anesthesia with a supraglottic airway device (SGA) to maintain spontaneous ventilation because of the estimated long duration of surgery, her mental status and large amount of blood loss.
After entering the operating room, a peripheral venous line was secured, and a pericapsular nerve group block was performed using 20 mL of 1% lidocaine in order to relieve the pain of transferring between beds in the operating room and of positioning for spinal and epidural anesthesia . Then the patient was positioned laterally on the left side, an epidural catheter was inserted at the L2-3 lumbar intervertebral space, and spinal anesthesia was performed at the L3-4 lumbar intervertebral space using 3.3 mL of 0.5% isobaric bupivacaine. After changing to the supine position and confirming Th10 or lower levels of the block, SGA device (Air-Q®, Cookgas LLC, USA) was inserted with 50 mg propofol and 75 mcg fentanyl, and spontaneous breathing was maintained with concentrations of 1.0–1.5% sevoflurane. Under sedation, a central venous line and an arterial line were secured, and processed regional cerebral oxygen saturation (rSO2) was monitored in addition to standard monitoring including 5-lead ECG, pulse oximetry and capnography. Although no major blood pressure changes were observed during induction of anesthesia, her systolic blood pressure fluctuated in the range of 70 to 220 mmHg during the operation, necessitating frequent boluses of phentolamine and nicardipine. Her SpO2 and rSO2 were stable in the range of 89–92% and 55–60%, respectively, under a fraction of inspired oxygen of 0.3. Neither positive end-expiratory pressure nor pressure support was applied, and respiratory rate of spontaneous breathing was 20–30 per minute with expired carbon dioxide concentration of 30–38 mmHg during the procedure. There was no difficulty or trouble in managing her airway with an SGA device in the lateral position. No epidural local anesthetic agent was required, and the total amounts of fentanyl used during the procedure was 300 mcg. The surgery was competed in 170 min and the total amount of hemorrhage was 630 mL. A total of 1953 mL of Ringer’s solution and 4 units of red blood cells were administered during the procedure with 630 mL of urine output. After confirming emergence from anesthesia without a new neurological abnormality, the SGA device was removed in the operating room.
After the operation, she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) as planned. Her pain was well controlled with patient-controlled epidural analgesia. Her postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged from the ICU on postoperative day 1.