A 49-year-old Caucasian male was referred to Cardiology Clinic with progressive shortness of breath on exertion; New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional Class II. He denied any other symptoms suggestive of heart failure, arrhythmias, or ischaemia. He had no history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, respiratory illnesses, renal disease, or coronary artery disease. The patient smoked since adolescence but quit 4 years prior to his visit. The patient was not on chronic medications. He was estranged from his family for a very long time, and he had no details about their medical history or care.
On physical examination, the patient was found to be tall at 198 cm, and weighed 101 kg. He had a blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg sitting, heart rate of 70 beats per minute, cardiovascular examination revealed jugular venous pulsation to be within normal limits, a normal S1 and S2, no S3 or S4, and a systolic ejection murmur, Grade 1/6 on the Levine scale, over the aortic area with no radiation. There was no evidence of heart failure, including no pedal oedema. He had a positive wrist sign, and dysmorphic features including enophthalmos, malar hypoplasia, retrognathia, and pectus carinatum. The rest of his physical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory workup included a normal haemoglobin and creatine of 151 g/L and 84 μmol/L, respectively. Electrolytes and liver function results were within normal limits.
An electrocardiogram was performed and was normal . Heart failure biomarkers (BNP or NT-proBNP) would have been useful to diagnose heart failure but were not available within the regional health care system. He underwent stress myocardial perfusion imaging that ruled out ischaemia but demonstrated a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 36% at rest and 43% post-stress. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed left ventricular (LV) global hypokinesis, with LVEF of 40–45%. There was mild aortic insufficiency. The aortic root was dilated at 4.9 cm in diameter and Z-score of 4.66 .
Computed tomography angiography of the thoracic aorta revealed dilated coronary sinuses at 4.4 cm × 4.6 cm × 4.8 cm . A cardiac MRI study revealed a mildly reduced LVEF at 43%, with evidence of mild concentric LV hypertrophy (Video 1).
Given the patient’s clinical features, and the dilated aortic root, MFS was suspected, but he did not meet the criteria for diagnosis when applying the revised Ghent Criteria for Diagnosing Marfan Syndrome , with only the presence of aortic Z-score > 2 and 4 points for systemic findings. Therefore, genetic investigations were sent. The molecular genetics report for MFS and related aortopathies revealed that this patient is heterozygous for a sequence variant in the fibrillin-1 gene (FBN1), designated NM_000138.4: c.7016G>C , which is predicted to result in the amino acid substitution p. Cys2339Ser. Cysteine residues in fibrillin-1 (FBN1) form disulfide bonds which are important for proper protein folding. The substitution of a different amino acid in FBN1 can create or destroy a cysteine residue and results in disruption of the disulfide bonds which causes protein misfolding that has been reported to cause MFS phenotypes., This particular variant has not been reported previously and is absent in the Genome Aggregation Database (GnomAD) population database, as well as ClinVar, which are the resources that aggregate, harmonize, and archive sequencing data and the relationships among genetic variations and phenotypes.
Different substitutions affecting the same amino acid residue (p.Cys2339Tyr; p. Cys2339Arg; p. Cys2339Gly) were reported to be pathogenic for MFS.,
The patient was started on ramipril and metoprolol with titration as tolerated. According to guideline recommendations,, the patient underwent a valve-sparing root replacement, an excellent outcome, and recovery . There were no postoperative complications. At 13 months of follow-up, the patient’s shortness of breath was resolved and he was pleased to return to his excellent premorbid status. The patient’s echocardiogram at 13 months post-operatively revealed an intact aortic repair and graft, with only mild aortic valve insufficiency and an improved LVEF at 55%. The patient remains clinically well.