Our patient was a 19-year-old woman who was the restrained driver in a roll-over accident at highway speed. Her Glasgow coma scale was 4 with extensor posturing. She was sedated, paralyzed, intubated, and transported to our hospital as a level 1 trauma. Her medical history was unremarkable.
CT imaging of the head revealed multiple punctate hemorrhagic lesions, early effacement of the gray-white junction and diffuse traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage .
An intraparenchymal ICP monitor was placed with initial readings of 23–25 mmHg. Supportive care was instituted with midline placement of the head and elevation of the head to 30°, sedation with propofol and analgesia with fentanyl. She required bolus doses of 20% mannitol for ICP surges with physical stimulation. On hospital day 3 she developed refractory intracranial hypertension and fever which persisted through hospital day 12 despite aggressive medical management. She was very sensitive to any physical stimulation, particularly changes in position or tracheal suctioning which resulted in ICP spikes. Osmotic therapy including alternating boluses of 20% mannitol and 23% saline were used to treat ICP surges. Maintenance fluids were changed to 3% saline solution in order to induce mild hypernatremia and decrease the need for rescue osmotic therapy. We induced mild hypothermia (35°C) using the Arctic Sun device (Bard, Inc., Atlanta, GA, USA) as an adjuvant to osmotic therapy with pharmacological neuromuscular paralysis to control the shivering response. Several attempts at reducing the degree of metabolic suppression by slowly increasing the core body temperature and lightening the degree of neuromuscular paralysis and propofol requirement failed. She consistently required a temperature under 35°C and a dose of Propofol greater than 40 mcg/kg/min to maintain control of her ICP. A repeat CT scan on hospital day 11 did not show significant cerebral edema to explain the persistent and refractory intracranial hypertension. It was noted that despite adequate hydration and apparent intravascular euvolemia, she was consistently tachycardic with intermittent periods of hypertension. This raised the possibility of sympathetic hyperactivity for which she was started on propranolol with only marginal decrease in the heart rate. On hospital day 12 a bolus of 4 mg of morphine was administered following a rise in ICP to 30 mmHg in an effort to determine if the elevation in ICP was due to a sympathetic surge. Immediately following the administration of morphine the ICP rose steadily from a baseline of 30 mmHg up to 55 mmHg over 3 min without any appreciable change in heart rate or blood pressure. The transient but significant rise in ICP was easily managed with hyperventilation and administration of 1 g/kg of 20% mannitol. Following this unexpected surge in ICP after administration of morphine, the fentanyl infusion she had been receiving since hospital day 1 was discontinued with an ensuing decline in ICP over the next 24 h which reached single digits for the first time since monitoring was started. No new interventions were introduced during this period. Parallel with the normalization of ICP was a resolution of her persistent sinus tachycardia and intermittent arterial hypertension. Permitting transient increases of ICPs up to 30 mmHg after stimulation, we were able to rapidly resume normothermia (36.5°C), discontinue neuromuscular paralysis, and transition from propofol to a low dose of midazolam without the need for rescue doses of hyperosmolar therapy . Before discontinuation of the ICP monitoring, her ICPs had steadily settled below 15 mmHg.