A 31-year-old Egyptian male with American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) I physical status, with history of polytrauma since 1 week, had a left arm and right leg fracture. A complete trauma survey was done at the time of admission, with no other injury and acceptable laboratory and radiological investigations.The operation was done first to the fracture on left hand under general anesthesia with no complications. Then after 1 week, the patient was scheduled for an operation on the right leg. While sitting in the L3–L4 interspace, a 22-gauge needle with a Quincke tip was used to deliver spinal anesthesia to the patient. About 120 seconds after receiving an injection of 20 mg (4 ml) of hyperbaric bupivacaine 0.5%, the patient had significant back and gluteal discomfort, followed by myoclonic movements in the lower limbs and a generalized convulsion.
The arterial blood pressure of the patient was elevated to 170/100 mmHg, and his heart rate increased to 120 beats per minute. Immediate intravenous sedation with midazolam (5 mg) and fentanyl (50 μg) was delivered with no response in seizure termination. Phenytoin (1000 mg) was given by intravenous infusion and we subsequently applied the airway, breathing, and circulation (ABC) protocol. General anesthesia was induced by a thiopental sodium (250 mg) and atracurium (50 mg) infusion, the trachea of the patient was intubated, and respiratory parameters on mechanical ventilation were as follows: tidal volume (TV) 500 m/minute, respiratory rate (RR) 16 cycles/minute, fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2) 100%, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 0 mmHg.
Maintenance of anesthesia was attained by isoflurane 1.2 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) and atracurium 10 mg every 20 minutes, and subsequent doses of thiopental sodium (100 mg) to control seizures. Although with the above interventions, the patient developed focal seizures in the hand and leg. The attending anesthesiologist had suspicions regarding intrathecal administration of the incorrect medicine after discovering a used TXA ampoule (500 mg/5 ml) in the trash. So, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lavage was done by inserting two spinal 22-gauge Quincke tip needles on level L2–L3 (drainage) and the other on L4–L5. Intrathecal normal saline infusion (150 ml) was done in 1 hour by passive flow. During CSF lavage, vital signs were as follows: blood pressure (BP) 140/85 mmHg, pulse 140 beats/minute, and the patient was on mechanical ventilation (MV) with FIO2 100 and oxygen saturation (SO2) 98%. Arterial blood gases (ABG) were pH 7.42, PaCO2 37, PaO2 157, and HCO3 24 after CSF lavage. The patient was stabilized, and he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
About 2.5 hours after the injection, the patient was transferred to the ICU and with volume-controlled ventilation mode, the MV was continued. The patient was put on MV, and thiopental sodium infusion was continued, with 100 mg/hour increased to 300 mg/hour, but the patient developed multiple generalized myoclonic seizures so atracurium was started by loading 50 mg then 5–10 μg/kg/hour as apart of complete general anesthesia. However, the seizures were not controlled so we put the patient on an anesthesia machine and continued MV with isoflurane 1.2 MAC, with thiopental sodium 300 mg/hour and 10 μg/kg/hour atracurium.
A central venous catheter was inserted on the right subclavian vein. The initial postoperative ABG examination showed pH of 7.44, PaO2 of 170, PaCO2 of 47, and HCO3− of 27. The MV parameter was adjusted to produce hyperventilation to target PaCo2 of 35–40 mmHg with continuous monitoring with capnogram. A complete blood test indicated no evidence of hepatic, renal, or hematological malfunction. Six hours postoperatively, the patient suffered tonico–clonic seizures of the upper limbs and face, which were managed by a continuous infusion of sodium thiopental (3–5 mg/kg/hour), atracurium 10 μg/kg/hour, isoflurane 1.2 MAC, and 150 mg phenytoin every 8 hours.
Cranial computed tomography revealed no abnormality and fundus examination revealed papilledema, so protective brain strategies continued with mannitol 20% 150 ml every 8 hours for 2 days and isoflurane 1.2 MAC and mild fluid restriction and lasix 20 mg every 12 hours. To avoid ventricular arrhythmia, amiodarone was administered prophylactically at a dose of 10 mg/kg/24 hours for 24 hours. The patient developed sinus tachycardia and his heart rate increased to 150 beats/minute, which was controlled by an amiodarone infusion. After 3 hours from admission to ICU, the patient’s blood pressure decreased, with mean arterial blood pressure below 50 mmHg, and investigations showed normal electrocardiogram (ECG) sinus rhythm. Central venous pressure (CVP) was 10 cm H2O, so norepinephrine infusion was started at 0.05 μg/kg/minute to maintain tissue and cerebral perfusion. The mean arterial blood pressure then improved with norepinephrine and maintained above 75 mmHg.
On the second day postoperatively, the sedation began to decrease: first isoflurane to reach 0.6 MAC, then isoflurane was stopped, and thiopental sodium was decreased to 200 mg/hour. The patient developed one-time seizures on the face and upper extremities, so sedation was continued for another 24 hours with decreasing thiopental sodium to 200 mg/hour only. Also, the patient became feverish (39 °C) in the second day so, 1 gm intravenous acetaminophen was given every 6 hours.
Norepinephrine was stopped after 24 hours as mean arterial blood pressure was maintained over 75 mmHg without support.
On the third day after surgery, sedation was discontinued. As the patient’s degree of consciousness improved, he moved his head and upper extremities in response to painful stimuli and absence of deep tendon reflexes in the lower limbs. On the fourth day postoperatively, he opened his eyes in response to voice instructions, followed simple directions, and breathed on his own. The trachea was extubated, and all neurologic examinations were acceptable. The patient was discharged from the ICU on the sixth day and transferred to the ward after 48 hours from weaning from MV. The patient was discharged home with recommendation to follow-up with neurology and to be fully evaluated after 6 months. The patient was monitored at 6-month and 1-year intervals and found to be in excellent condition with no neurological symptoms.