In August 2015, a 26-year-old morbidly obese African American man presented to the hospital with increasingly generalized weakness for 2 months and light-headedness for 4 days. His BMI was 54 kg/M2, and he had been on a special diet for a few months with a weight loss of 50 pounds. The diet was mainly composed of vegetables but of unknown detail. He sweated profusely while working as a chef in his own kitchen for a web-based catering service. He had childhood asthma and a pulmonary embolism at age of 21 years. He was born in Hartford, Connecticut to an African American father and a Caucasian mother (a Brazilian immigrant). He moved to Fresno, CA in 2010 and started working for his own catering service in 2015. On exam, his blood pressure was 138/73 mmHg with a pulse of 91 beats/min. His mucous membranes were dry. Laboratory tests showed severe hypokalemia (serum potassium of 1.5 mEq/L) and metabolic alkalosis with prerenal azotemia . Arterial blood gas revealed a pH of 7.55, PaCO2 of 50 mmHg, PaO2 of 60 mmHg and bicarbonate of 42 mEq/L. The urine sodium (< 10 mEq/L) and potassium (13.8 mEq/L) were both very low . These findings were consistent with extrarenal losses of potassium. In addition, his 24-h urine aldosterone was normal at 5.4 mcg/d (normal 2.3–21) and free cortisol was also normal. His thyroid function was normal, as were renal ultrasound and renal Doppler ultrasound. After given intravenous normal saline and potassium, he was discharged and prescribed with potassium chloride 20 mEq two tabs bid.
In follow-up, the patient’s potassium was tapered off. His potassium remained normal through the winter, and so he was discharged from the nephrology office (YC) in April, 2016. His hypokalemia was considered a result of his reduced oral intake while on a special weight loss diet combined with excessive sweating during a Fresno summer. In July 2016, he visited the ER and was found to have a blood pressure of 150/80 mmHg, hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. He was given intravenous potassium and discharged the next morning. In July 2017, he was admitted to an outside hospital for the same problems, and another nephrologist was consulted.
In July 2018, he was again admitted for the same complaints . Nephrology consultation (YC) was involved. Oral potassium chloride was prescribed at discharge. Because of repeated summertime hypokalemia with excessive sweating, CF was suspected. Initially, the pulmonologist was reluctant to pursue a test for CF because the patient lacked evidence of CF, was morbidly obese, and was from a low incidence demographic. However, further discussion with our CF expert (DL) led to disease specific tests.
HRCT showed clear lungs and pulmonary function test was normal. Lipase was low at 8 U/L (normal 12–53). Pilocarpine sweat test demonstrated chloride of 101 mEq/L on the left arm and 106 mEq/L on the right arm (normal < 60). Genetic testing revealed two CFTR mutations: heterozygous p.F508Del (pathogenic mutation) and heterozygous (TG)12-5 T in trans conformation, also known as c.[1210–12[5];1210-34TG[12]]. The diagnosis of CF was finally established.
The potassium dose was tapered off over the following 3 months, and the patient’s potassium level remained normal through the winter. In March 2019, his potassium was normal. In anticipation of warmer weather, potassium chloride 20 mEq bid was prescribed. He was advised to moderately increase sodium chloride intake in the summer, but to avoid its excess due to concerns for elevated BP. The monthly lab showed his potassium was maintained at 3.6–4.0 mEeq/L throughout the summer of 2019 while he continued to work in his kitchen. Our long-term plan is to supplement him with potassium from April to October every year. However, his body weight has increased steadily, with a most recent BMI of 87 Kg/M2. He is reluctant to consider bariatric surgery because his mother’s surgery was accompanied by complications. He appreciated that we had made a diagnosis and gave informed consent for publication.