An 85-year-old Chinese woman with underlying hypertension, dyslipidemia, and a previous history of right total knee replacement surgery seven years earlier presented
with painful right knee swelling, accompanied by pus discharge, for three months. She denied any recent trauma or procedures. On admission, she was afebrile,
and her right knee appeared diffusely swollen, erythematous, and tender with a sinus tract formation. The total white blood cell count was 7.8×103 cells/µL with an
elevated C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Radiology findings revealed radiolucency
over the distal femur and proximal tibia .
She was diagnosed with right knee PJI and osteomyelitis. Therefore, intravenous clindamycin and ciprofloxacin were started as empirical therapies.
She underwent the removal of the implant and an arthrotomy washout. The intraoperative findings were suggestive of osteomyelitis changes.
The intraoperative synovial fluid was inoculated in BD Bactec Plus Aerobic/F and BD Bactec Lytic/10 Anaerobic/F vials, which were incubated using BD BACTECTM FX (BD, USA).
The aerobic bottle blood culture was positive after 72 h of incubation. The gram stain showed gram-positive ellipsoidal budding yeast cells ,
and the organism appeared as cream-colored smooth, glistening colonies on the Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (Isolab, Malaysia) and whitish colonies on the CHROMagar (Isolab, Malaysia),
as displayed in , respectively.
The slide culture on the corn meal agar only demonstrated blastoconidia, and it was negative for both germ tube and urease. The same growth was also obtained from bone marrow specimens.
The organism was identified as Candida utilis (C. utilis) with a probability of 95% using the VITEK® 2 yeast identification system (bioMérieux, France).
However, a final microbiology report revealed that Cy. fabianii was identified by Bruker MALDI-TOF, which was also confirmed by molecular DNA sequencing methods.
The DNA extraction of the isolate was performed using the Quick-DNA Fungal/Bacterial Miniprep Kit (Zymo Research, California, USA), following the manufacturer’s protocol.
The D1/D2 domain of the large subunit (LSU) ribosomal RNA gene was amplified from the DNA template by NL1 and NL4 primers. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) was
performed using Mastercycler Gradient (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The PCR protocol was conducted with an initial denaturation at 95°C for 1 min, followed by 35 cycles
of denaturation (95°C for 15 sec), annealing (58°C for 15 sec), and extension (72°C for 10 sec) . The PCR product was then visualized using a 1.5% agarose gel by electrophoresis. The sample was then sent to the 1st BASE company (Apical Scientific, Malaysia) for PCR purification and sequencing.
Sequencing analysis was performed using Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software (version 11.0.10, Arizona, USA),
and alignment was made to both forward and reverse sequencing results using the MUSCLE algorithm. The 595 DNA bp was subsequently matched to the database from
the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST).
The result was a 100% match to Cy. fabianii CBS 5640 (GenBank Accession Number KY107357). For phylogenetic analyses, the D1/D2 region
of the LSU rRNA gene was constructed using the MEGA software, and phylogenetic trees were generated by the neighbor-joining statistical method with 1000 bootstrap
replications using the Tamura-Nei substitution method .
All available LSU sequences closely related to this species and other distant yeast species were retrieved from the NCBI GenBank database.
Antifungal susceptibility testing was performed using VITEK® 2 AST-YS08 (bioMérieux, France), and the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values
were interpreted based on Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute M60 interpretative breakpoints for Candida species . It was susceptible to amphotericin B (MIC<0.12 µg/ml), fluconazole (MIC<0.5 µg/ml), voriconazole (MIC<0.12 µg/ml), and micafungin (MIC<0.25 µg/ml).
No growth was obtained from blood and tissue cultures. The patient completed intravenous fluconazole for two weeks and was discharged with oral fluconazole and
ampicillin-sulbactam planned for a total of 12 and 10 weeks, respectively.