A 34-year-old female was admitted for traumatic brain injury. She slipped on the bathroom floor and fell, resulting in loss of consciousness. She regained consciousness after a few minutes but did not seek consult. She was initially well but started to complain of intermittent right-sided headache 3 days postinjury, prompting consult at a general clinic. Cranial CT scan showed a large acute epidural hematoma on the right temporal area, measuring 41 cc in volume and resulting in a midline shift of 0.4 cm. The lateral and third ventricles were enlarged but did not exhibit transependymal effusion, and the cerebral sulci were effaced. There was also a linear and nondisplaced right temporal bone fracture [-]. She was advised to seek neurosurgical consult at the emergency room but did not comply until the 5th day postinjury.
Her medical history was significant for a diagnosis of congenital hydrocephalus from aqueductal stenosis, but she did not undergo surgery. She was also an epileptic maintained on phenobarbital, with the last seizure episode occurring about 15 years ago. She had a recent history of mild COVID-19 infection 5 months prior. Despite having hydrocephalus, she did not exhibit developmental delays as a child and underwent schooling at the proper age. She finished high school at the top of her class, earned a bachelor’s degree at age 20, and is currently pursuing a master’s degree while employed full time.
On examination, the patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15 with equal and briskly reactive pupils. She was slightly macrocephalic, and her head circumference of 59 cm was in the upper 97th percentile when plotted against her height. Her visual acuity was 20/25 bilaterally, and fundoscopic examination did not show papilledema. She did not have any craniopathies or sensory or motor deficits. A repeat cranial CT scan performed on the 5th day postinjury showed stable size of the hematoma. She still had mild headache, but it was markedly decreased in severity compared to 2 days prior.
Because the patient was asymptomatic except for mild headache and was already on the 5th postinjury day, it was decided to treat the patient conservatively with analgesics and close clinical monitoring at the neurosurgical ward. The patient’s headache resolved and she did not develop any deficits; thus, she was sent home on the 8th day postinjury.
A repeat cranial CT scan was performed 3-week postinjury, which showed a decrease in the size and attenuation of the epidural hematoma. A transcranial Doppler study revealed that the pulsatility indices of all the intracranial arteries were within normal limits and did not show signs of increased intracranial pressure.
The patient’s latest follow-up was at 10-month postinjury. She continued to be well and asymptomatic and did not have any new complaints.