A 48-year-old female from Tibet, China was admitted to our hospital for a 4-month history of intermittent pain of chest and back. Each time the pain attacked would last about 1 h and usually twice a day, and it often followed with mild fever and headache. The patient engaged in sheep and cattle raising, without any other heart diseases had occurred before. Electrocardiography demonstrated sinus bradycardia at a rate of 47 beats per minute without ST segment or T wave changes, either conduction abnormality. Cardiac murmur was not found within each cardiac cycle. For routine laboratory tests, all results remained in the normal limits, except an elevated percentage of eosinophils (6.3%).
Chest radiography showed no lung parenchymal abnormality, either no pleural effusion. Among further cardiac examination, the main anomaly found by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was a slightly weak-echo mass located at the myocardium of the right ventricular apex . TTE revealed normal cardiac function. Moreover, a small patent foramen ovale, mild tricuspid regurgitation and pericardial effusion were revealed. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a soft tissue nodule without enhancement located in the IVS near the right ventricular apex, the boundaries between the mass and surrounding myocardium were indistinct . To clarify the diagnosis, enhanced MRI of the heart was carried out and revealed a cystic, heterogeneous-intensity IVS mass (3.0 cm× 2.8 cm) which was isointensity in T1-weighted images, slight hyperintensity in T2-weighted images, and no significant enhancement in contrast-enhanced images . Imaging characteristics of CTA and MRI suggested the possibility of cardiac HD [, ], thus, further antibody assay of parasite was performed with a positive result of Echinococcus granulosus antibody.
Given the radiological findings and clinical features, we recommended the patient received surgery to excise the cyst. The patient consented to surgical treatment and signed the operation agreement. During the operation, a median sternotomy was performed, then cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was initiated through aortic and bi-caval cannulation. The patient was anticoagulated with 1 mg/kg heparin administered intravenously, while antegrade cardioplegia was administrated to induce cardiac arrest. A mass could be seen at the apex of the heart. Then, we performed regular right atriotomy, and the cyst was exposed through the atrium incision and tricuspid orifice. After puncturing and drawing the cyst content, 3% hypertonic saline was injected into the cyst, and then, excision of the cyst was done. Physiological saline was injected into the residual cavity to verify the presence or absence of ventricular shunt. After that, the residual cavity was plicated with continuous sutures. At last, closed the right atrium, and poured 3% hypertonic saline into the pericardial cavity to prevent local dissemination. Intraoperative TEE showed no mitral or tricuspid regurgitation, either no residual shunt on the IVS, Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of cardiac HC . Albendazole, with the dose of 400 mg twice daily, was told to be regularly used for 24 weeks postoperatively to prevent recurrence and metastasis of hydatid. Postoperative vital signs were stable and the patient was discharged home without symptom of chest pain and other complications.