A 36-year-old African American female with significant medical history of obesity and hypertension presented to the emergency department with headache, altered level of consciousness, fever, and severe neck stiffness. The patient was previously evaluated by multiple providers in the emergency department (urgent care) and was diagnosed with chronic allergic sinusitis. She was prescribed multiple courses of antibiotics with supportive care and sent home. She had recent animal exposure to a stray cat and consumed deli meats regularly. There was no history of recent travel. She denied any mosquito or tick bites.
On physical exam, the patient was febrile, tachycardic, tachypneic, and disoriented to place and time with inappropriate responses to questioning, and nuchal rigidity was present. Complete blood cell count revealed a white blood cell count of 16.88 × 109 per liter with 80% band forms and 14% segmented neutrophils. Comprehensive metabolic panel showed no electrolyte abnormalities or renal or liver dysfunction. Urine analysis was within normal limits. CSF analysis revealed WBC count of 7810 cells/μL with 83% neutrophils, red blood cells count of 22 cells/μL, protein of 267 mg/dL, and glucose of 27 mg/100 mL. Gram stain, West Nile Virus antibody titer, and Coccidioides antibody were negative. Serum lactate was within normal limits. Unfortunately, the patient had received intravenous (IV) antibiotics prior to lumbar puncture and the CSF cultures remained negative. The CSF was not sent for detection of bacterial antigens.
Despite the negative gram stain and cultures of the CSF, the clinical presentation and results of lumbar puncture were consistent with bacterial meningitis. In the emergency department, the patient was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics and antivirals with vancomycin, piperacillin/tazobactam, and acyclovir. On the medicine service, antibiotics and antivirals were transitioned to standard therapy for bacterial meningitis with ceftriaxone and vancomycin. The patient had resolution in her altered level of consciousness by the following day and was able to answer questions.
Upon further questioning, she endorsed persistent unilateral clear nasal drainage lasting months and postural headache that was worse when standing or sitting and relieved by laying down. At this time, there was high clinical suspicion of CSF rhinorrhea. Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the sinuses initially indicated findings consistent with chronic sinusitis. However, the patient continued to have copious unilateral clear nasal discharge. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbits was completed which showed findings consistent with CSF rhinorrhea and bony defect of the basal skull . Additionally, her nasal discharge was positive for beta-2 transferrin. Otolaryngology was consulted for further evaluation. The patient was taken to surgery and intraoperative findings were consistent with CSF rhinorrhea of the left sphenoid sinus. The mucosal defect was repaired with free septal mucosal graft and tissue seal. The patient recovered without complications and was discharged home to complete a course of IV antibiotics.