A 58-year-old female presented to our clinic with a one-year history of blurry vision in her left eye. Her ocular history was unremarkable, except for the intolerance to contact lenses and amblyopia in her right eye. Her best-corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) was 0.20 with -9.00/-1.50 x 25◦ in the right eye and 0.80 with +4.00 sphere correction in the left eye. Distance visual acuity was measured using a standard Snellen acuity chart at 6m and presented in decimals. Her best corrected near visual acuity (CNVA) was J9 with +2.50 and J1 with +2.50. The Jaeger eye chart was used in testing near vision acuity. On this card, on which paragraphs of text are printed, text sizes increase from 0.37 mm to 2.5 mm.
Slit-lamp examination revealed incipient cataracts in both eyes, otherwise normal anterior segment findings. A dilated fundus examination revealed vitreous liquefaction and myopic macula in the right eye, otherwise normal findings of a posterior segment in both eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP), measured with iCare (Tiolat Oy, Helsinki, Finland), was average at 18/19 mmHg (including correction factor of the corneal thickness). The axial length of the eye measured by the IOL master (IOLMaster 700; Carl Zeiss Meditec) of the right eye was 27.96 mm and 22.44 mm of the left. As a solution to the patient’s problem, due to intolerance to contact lenses, we had two possibilities: to implicate implantable collamer lens (ICL) or cataract surgery with intraocular lens (IOL) implantation. ICL implantation was no option due to the incipient cataract that already existed and the possibility of its progress in the future. So we decided on the second option. We wanted to choose an intraocular lens with which she would get the maximum. Considering the anisometropic amblyopia, we decided to implant the Eyhance lens. This type of lens has been designed to improve visual acuity contrast sensitivity and reduce the effects of glare in patients who have undergone cataract surgery. The procedure involved removing the patient’s natural lens and replacing it with the Eyhance lens. After a month, the patient’s visual acuity significantly improved in both eyes, with her best CDVA of the right eye now at 0.35 and her left eye at 0.95. Near visual acuity also improved, with the patient now able to read at J4 and J1 for her right and left eye, respectively, with +1.50 sphere correction. These improvements in vision have likely improved the patient’s quality of life and ability to perform daily activities. It’s important to note that cataract surgery carries potential risks and complications that the doctor should discuss with the patient beforehand. For this reason, it’s crucial that patients are well-informed about the procedure and its possible outcomes to make an informed decision about their treatment options.