A 61-year-old woman with a past medical history of type II diabetes, breast cancer, and major depression presented to the emergency department after an intentional overdose with fluoxetine (139 tablets of 20 mg), risperidone (6 tablets of 1 mg), bromazepam (90 tablets of 3 mg), zolpidem (40 tablets of 10 mg), naproxen (20 tablets of 500 mg), and clemastine (5 tablets of 1 mg). Quantities were determined by counting the remaining pills in the blister packaging. Upon arrival, the patient was somnolent but able to open her eyes on request (E3M6V5). Vital signs showed a blood pressure of 146/57 mmHg, a regular heart rate of 55/min with strong peripheral pulsations, a respiratory rate of 16/min, oxygen saturation levels varying between 95 and 100% at room air, and a body temperature of 36.2 °C. Her husband suggested that the pills must have been ingested 3 to 8 h prior to hospital admission. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm of 61 beats per minute with a prolonged corrected QT interval (QTc) of 503 ms as shown in Fig. . During admission, all ECGs were performed using a GE MAC 5500 HD electrocardiograph. The tangent method was used in order to define the end of the T-wave in the lead with the longest QT interval. All measured QTc intervals were corrected for cardiac frequency using Bazett’s formula .
Initial laboratory findings showed a microcytic anemia (Hb 5.4 mmol/l, MCV 77 fl) with low serum ferritin (6 μg/l), along with a mild leukocytosis of 11.2/nl. Serum electrolytes, as well as liver and kidney function, were normal (Na+ 135 mmol/l, K+ 4.3 mmol/l, creatinine 89 μmol/l, corrected calcium 2.37 mmol/l, PO43− 1.41 mmol/l, magnesium 0.83 mmol/l). Arterial blood gas analysis showed a base excess of − 4.9 mmol/l (pH 7.37, pCO2 4.6 kPa, pO2 12.1 kPa, HCO3− 20 mmol/l). A chest X-ray displayed no aspiration pneumonia nor other cardiopulmonary anomalies. The patient was admitted to the ICU for observation, where she received intravenous fluids along with 40 mg of pantoprazole for the prevention of peptic ulcer disease due to the substantial ingestion of naproxen. This was administered only once due to the risk of further QTc interval prolongation. Initially, our patient remained hemodynamically stable and showed improved neurological function. Twenty-two hours after hospital admission, a second ECG showed normalization of the QTc interval to 458 ms, suggesting peak serum levels of the ingested drugs had passed. After psychiatric evaluation had taken place, our patient had fallen to the floor in search of the restroom. On examination, both her muscle strength and coordination were slightly disturbed. Due to the overall severity of the intoxication and the persistence of neurological symptoms, it was decided to observe the patient for one more night at the ICU. Flumazenil was not administered since the patient was fully conscious and already in a monitored environment and due to the risk of adverse effects, especially with chronic benzodiazepine use .
That night, 36 h after admission, our patient developed recurrent short episodes of Torsades de Pointes (TdP) with intermittent loss of cardiac output, as shown in Fig. . Two grams of magnesium sulphate was administered intravenously, after which sinus rhythm was restored. Four hours later, she had complete loss of circulation, after which cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated according to protocol. A 150-J biphasic shock was delivered using an automated external defibrillator (Zoll R-Series ALS). ECG findings consistent with TdP were again observed. Spontaneous circulation was restored after intravenous administration of magnesium sulphate. Our patient was awake and immediately able to maintain a patent airway following the incident. Serum levels of fluoxetine and risperidone and their metabolites were measured in retrospect, as shown in Table and Fig. , . Laboratory findings at the time of the incident showed a mild hypocalcaemia of 2.10 mmol/l with a hypermagnesaemia of 1.72 mmol/l/, most likely caused due to the prior administration of magnesium sulphate. No other electrolyte abnormalities were identified (Na+ 137 mmol/l, K+ 3.8 mmol/l, PO43− 1.24 mmol/l). Subsequent ECGs showed progressive prolongation of the QTc interval up to 565 ms, as shown in Fig. . The patient remained hemodynamically stable for the remainder of the night on continuous infusion of magnesium sulphate (1 g/h). The following day, echocardiography was performed in order to exclude structural cardiac defects, which showed normal heart dimensions as well as a normal left and right ventricular function.