A 71-year-old Asian woman with end-stage renal disease, who had undergone eight years of hemodialysis, presented with spontaneous painful plaque in her left lower calf with the surrounding skin exhibiting violaceous discoloration. Our patient had hypertension, dyslipidemia and osteoporosis but no history of diabetes, connective tissue diseases or chronic viral hepatitis. Because of recurrent thrombosis at the vascular access point for hemodialysis, she had received six months of warfarin therapy that ended five months prior to developing the calf lesion. Our patient had a long history of secondary hyperparathyroidism and had been treated with intravenous calcitriol for many years. Because of frequent episodes of hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, intravenous calcitriol had to be discontinued so often as to result in inadequate control of her secondary hyperparathyroidism. Despite replacing the calcium-containing phosphate binders with sevelamer and shifting calcitriol to paricalcitol, her metabolic problems with calcium and phosphorous showed little improvement. In the previous four years, her serum levels of intact parathyroid hormone typically ranged from 350 to 800pg/mL, her calcium levels were around 9.5 to 10.6mg/dL and her phosphate serum levels were approximately 5.0 to 7.4mg/dL.
In the ensuing weeks, her lesions became ulcerative and eschars covered the wound surfaces . Plain radiographs indicated marked calcification in the vessels of her lower extremities . A network of calcified vessels as small as 0.5mm in diameter was located in the retromalleolar region of her left leg, near the skin lesions . Calciphylaxis was suspected and intravenous STS was administered three times a week after each session of hemodialysis. The maintenance dose was 12g, equivalent to 15.4g per 1.73m2 of body surface area. Her predialysis serum calcium levels demonstrated a notable change from 10.4mg/dL to as high as 11.8mg/dL after initiating STS therapy. The dialysate calcium concentration was subsequently decreased from 2.5 to 2.0mEq/L stepwise and dialysis frequency was increased from three to four times per week. Treatment with paricalcitol (4μg, three times per week) was also stopped. As a result, her predialysis calcium levels decreased to 10.8mg/dL during the remaining STS treatment course . Nevertheless, necrotic changes continued as the ulcers expanded. STS was discontinued after five weeks of treatment. The laboratory data showed that her predialysis calcium levels declined to less than 10mg/dL in one week. Despite a series of efforts including hyperbaric oxygen therapy, diligent wound care and pain control, the lesions worsened and eventually required surgical debridement .
Three months after the onset of skin lesions, our patient was hospitalized and scrupulous debridement was performed to excide the gangrenous tissue. The pathology of the gangrenous tissue revealed necrotic debris and inflammatory cellular exudates. The wound culture exhibited Acinetobacter baumannii growth, so intravenous amoxicillin-clavulanate was administered based on a sensitivity test. Because of the active infection of the skin lesions and fear of deepening or expanding the wound, no tissue biopsy was performed. Computed tomography angiography revealed diffuse vascular wall calcifications and atherosclerotic changes of the low abdominal aorta and bilateral iliac arteries, and marked calcification of the large and small arteries of both lower extremities . Conventional angiography showed a 70% stenosis in her left posterior tibial artery and a percutaneous transluminal angioplasty was performed for dilation. Our patient was discharged after one month of hospitalization, showing improvement of the lesion after aggressive wound care. Cinacalcet was concomitantly administered to treat the hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia. Her predialysis calcium level declined from 9.8 to 8.2mg/dL in two weeks. We adjusted the cinacalcet dosage between 25 and 50mg/day and the dialysate calcium concentration between 2.5 and 3.0mEq/L to avoid symptomatic hypocalcemia. The lesions steadily improved and were completely healed two months after discharge . Repeated plain radiographs in the following two years revealed gradual VC regression in both lower extremities . The network of small vessel calcifications in the retromalleolar region almost completely resolved. During a two-year follow-up period, during which cinacalcet treatment continued, her serum calcium levels typically remained at approximately 8.4 to 9.4mg/dL, her phosphate at 4.1 to 6.4mg/dL, and her intact parathyroid hormone at 250 to 480pg/mL. No vitamin D analogues or calcium-containing phosphate binders were used. Furthermore, no skin lesions recurred.