A previously healthy 12-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital with vision loss, headache and dizziness over 1 month, which was aggravated in the last 5 days. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed a large (19.8 mm*18.5 mm*23.5 mm) irregular mass located in the suprasellar region abutting the left aspect of the optic chiasm. It appeared isointense on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and homogenously hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI). After gadolinium administration, a well-circumscribed enhancing lesion was observed . A small cerebellar lesion was also confirmed.
The mother of the patient underwent surgery for HGB in the CNS (spine, cerebellum) and had pheochromocytomas and pancreatic cysts. On the basis of the mother’s medical history, clinical manifestations and imaging examinations, she was diagnosed with VHL disease, although she refused genetic sequencing. Therefore, the patient was examined for VHL disease before surgery. Sequencing of exon 1 of the VHL gene revealed a c.257C>T mutation (amino acid p.P86L). Ophthalmological examination revealed that the boundary of the optic disc in the left eye was pale and that there were no abnormalities in the right eye. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) was also performed to identify associated lesions and pancreatic cysts . Based on these findings, the patient was definitely diagnosed with VHL syndrome.
He underwent surgery to remove the tumor from the suprasellar region at our neurosurgical department, and histology confirmed the diagnosis of HGB ( and ). The cerebellar lesion was not in the same surgical field as the suprasellar tumor and had no obvious mass effect, so they were not treated at the same time. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that the Ki-67 index was approximately 2%. Furthermore, the neoplasm was positive for EGFR, NSE, CD34 and vimentin and negative for CK-pan, Pax-8, CD10, CD56, S-100, glial fibrillary acidic protein, inhibin, SSTR2, and epithelial membrane antigen .
The patient was transferred to the neurosurgery intensive care unit for postoperative monitoring and was ambulatory on postoperative day 1. Postoperative MRI demonstrated that the lesion in the suprasellar region was completely removed. He was discharged on postoperative day 7, and regular follow-up was performed. Unfortunately, the patient lost vision completely in the left eye after surgery.