A 73-year-old man was diagnosed with colon cancer and underwent right hemicolectomy at our hospital. The final diagnosis of colon cancer revealed adenocarcinoma, type 2, 70 × 40 mm, tub2 > tub1, T4a (SE), int, INFb, Ly1a, V1b, Pn0, N1a (1/30), p-stage IIIB (according to the ninth edition of TNM classification). Computed tomography (CT) before surgery for colon cancer revealed a solid nodule measuring 16 mm in diameter in the laterobasal segment (S9) of the right lung . Three months after the surgery for colon cancer, the size of the pulmonary nodule increased (diameter, 18 mm; Fig. b). The levels of tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (1.7 ng/mL), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (5.2 U/mL), cytokeratin 19 fragment (2.2 ng/mL), and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (66.9 pg/mL), were all within normal levels. The pulmonary tumor was highly suspected to be a metastasis from the colon cancer because of the tumor growth. No other metastases were observed on contrast-enhanced CT. We considered preoperative bronchoscopy. However, the patient preferred surgery for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Preoperative three-dimensional CT (3D-CT) angiography revealed that A7a branched from the right main PA, whereas A7b branched from the A8+9+10 as usual . The A7a and A7b were located on the ventral and dorsal sides of the basal vein, respectively.
Right basal segmentectomy was performed via video-assisted thoracic surgery. The interlobar fissure between the middle and lower lobes was incomplete. Then, we dissected around the inferior pulmonary vein (IPV) to identify the border of the middle and lower lobes. Subsequently, during dissection of the cranial side of V6, we found the A7a that was close to V6 . The A7a branching from the right main PA was observed behind the V4+5 and middle lobe bronchus during surgery . The basal PA except for A7a was divided using a stapler, and A7a was ligated and divided . Then, the basal bronchus was divided using the stapler. After the vein of the basal segment (V7–10) was divided, the intersegmental plane was dissected using the stapler along the inflation and deflation lines. Intraoperative frozen section diagnosis revealed that the tumor was compatible with a metastasis from the colon cancer. The total operation time was 144 min, and the total blood loss volume was 30 mL.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The tumor had reached a maximum diameter of 20 mm, and the final pathologic diagnosis was combined small cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma as opposed to the frozen section diagnosis. The pathological staging of the tumor was p-T1cN0M0, p-stage IA3. Although we proposed completion right lower lobectomy with systemic mediastinal lymph node dissection, the patient did not agree. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy (XELOX) for colon cancer after a discussion with the cancer board in our institution. There was no recurrence of lung and colon cancer at a 1-year follow-up.