A 71-year-old female who had been undergoing oral treatment for diabetes with canagliflozin 100 mg/day, metformin 1,000 mg/day, and saxagliptin 5 mg/day noticed general malaise a month before her emergency department (ED) visit to Kurume University Hospital Advanced Emergency Medical Service Center. Two weeks before her ED visit, her oral intake decreased because of reduced appetite, but oral medications continued at their initial dose. The day prior to her ED visit, her malaise worsened, and she developed nausea and abdominal pain. She consulted a local doctor where it was discovered that she had notable metabolic acidosis (pH, 6.860; CO2, 8 mmHg, HCO3, − 1.0 mEq/L; base excess measurement, below sensitivity); hence, she was urgently transferred to our facility. Her vital signs on admission were as follows: body temperature, 35.0 °C; pulse, 118/min; respiratory rate, 28/min; and blood pressure, 111/75 mmHg. The findings on consultation were notable dryness inside the oral cavity and a cold sensation on distal regions of the limbs. Auscultation of the chest revealed no significant findings, but there was mild tenderness in the lower abdominal region. The blood tests at the time of ED evaluation are shown in Table . Blood gases demonstrated notable metabolic acidosis (pH, 6.89; CO2, 11.4 mmHg; H CO3, 1.9 mEq/L; base excess, − 31.3 mmol/L), but the increase in lactic acid was mild at 3.3 mmol/L, and blood sugar was mildly elevated at 259 mg/dL. Although hyperkalemia was observed accompanying the acidosis, no significant kidney function impairment was observed. We considered a diagnosis of lactic acidosis secondary to metformin, but the patient had not recently been exposed to a contrast agent and the lactate was only mildly elevated, making this diagnosis less likely. Since point-of-care urine testing showed strongly positive urinary ketones and glucose, and plasma 3-hydroxybutyric acid (> 10,000 μmol/L) was also markedly high, DKA was suspected even though there was minimal hyperglycemia. As treatment for DKA, an injection of 0.45% sodium chloride was given as an intravenous drip at 800 mL/h. Blood sugar dropped down to 180 mg/dL after using two units of short-acting insulin; hence, insulin was not used continuously. Since hypoglycemia was a concern, an intravenous drip of glucose was started, and around 6 units/day of insulin was used as appropriate while blood sugar was monitored. Notable acidosis continued after starting treatment, and tachypnea and nausea were not tolerable; sodium bicarbonate was given as an intravenous drip. Although conservative treatments were continued, control of the severe ketoacidosis (pH, 7.18; CO2, 13.5 mmHg; HCO3, 5.0 mEq /L; base excess, − 22.3 mmol/L; 3-hydroxybutyric acid, 9,253 μmol/L) was difficult; thus, from day 2 after hospital admission, continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was started. The acidosis improved because of CRRT over 3 days. The follow-up progress is shown in Table . Hyperketonemia reduced notably after a few days, but urinary sugar continued to rise. Osmotic diuresis set in with urinary glucose as the cause and polyurea was observed; thus, fluid replacement was carried out using Ringer’s solution based on the movement of the urinary sugar. Urinary sugar turned negative on day 16 after admission, and as her overall condition was good, she was discharged on day 18 after admission.