A 32-year-old 38 week-pregnant Caucasian female was admitted to the emergency department with right upper abdominal pain since 2 weeks prior, which suddenly worsened 2 h before admission. She had been diagnosed with Gestational Hypertension and treated with Methyldopa. Initial examination during admission revealed elevated blood pressure of 180/110 mmHg and proteinuria with urinary dipstick test (3+). Laboratory investigation revealed mild thrombocytopenia (125.000/uL), increased alanine-aminotransferase (ALT) level of 10.54 μkat/L (=632 U/L) and aspartate-aminotransferase (AST) level of 13.20 μkat/L (=792 U/L), increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels of 28.10 μkat/L (=1686 U/L), hypoalbuminemia (25.0 g/L), and high serum folate (>20.0 ng/mL). An ultrasound scan of the fetus revealed normal development, with weight estimation at the 5 SD growth curve. Cardiotocography (CTG) examination resulted in pathologic CTG. Diagnosis of preeclampsia with HELLP syndrome was made based on clinical and biochemical features.

Due to the deteriorating condition of the patient and fetal distress, an emergency Caesarean section was performed. A female newborn was delivered with respiratory distress, weighing 2,466 g at 5 SD, APGAR Score of 0/2/5, positive Rhesus, umbilical artery pH value of 7.06 and BE −9.1. The patient was then admitted to intensive care. Within 4 h postpartum, a hypertensive crisis, rapidly progressive severe anemia with thrombocytopenia, as well as liver and renal impairment was recorded. Hemoglobin level went down to 5.7 g/dL, platelet count dropped to 57 × 109/L, haptoglobin level dropped to <7.4 mg/dL, serum creatinine went up to 259 μmol/L, urine excretion deteriorated to around 7 mL/h. With the presence of thrombocytopenia, anemia with fragmentation of red blood cell (RBC) in blood film and evidence of hemolysis, TMA was considered. A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13 (ADAMTS13) levels were sent for examination and daily plasma exchange therapy was initiated.

The patient’s blood pressure was managed and maintained with intravenous antihypertensive agents and she was given prophylactic anticonvulsant therapy with Magnesium. Due to ongoing hemolytic anemia, she was given multiple transfusion of blood products: four (4) units of red blood cell for four (4) days, three (3) units of fibrinogen and three (3) units of human prothrombin complex. The patient also underwent plasmapheresis with 42 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) for three (3) days. Rhophylac (Anti-D IgG 1500 IE) was also given due to Rhesus incompatibility with her baby.

Renal sonography revealed patent renal vasculature with no blockage. Initial chest X-ray revealed basal pleural effusion which then progressed significantly over the next four days. Thoracocentesis was performed due to progressive dyspnea, yielding 500 mL of serous fluid. Transthoracic echocardiography results revealed normal functions of the left and right ventricle with no valve abnormalities.

Further diagnostics were made for differential diagnostic purposes. Complement tests revealed alternative pathway dysregulation with low plasma level of C3 at 47.1 mg/dL (90–180 mg/dL) and normal level of C4 at 12.5 mg/dL (10–40 mg/dL). Genotyping with Sanger sequencing of CFH and CFI genes showed no abnormality. Autoimmune diagnostic tests revealed negative Antinuclear Antibodies (ANA), c-ANCA, p-ANCA Serum. ADAMTS13 activity was within normal range (53%), which excluded TTP. Stool sample showed a negative test for E. coli and the patient had no previous history of diarrhea, excluding STEC-HUS. HELLP syndrome was doubted due to lack of significant postoperative liver function improvement.

Based on our suspicion of p-AHUS, the patient then received prophylactic antibiotic therapy and vaccinated against meningococcus before a therapy of Eculizumab 900 mg was initiated. The patient’s clinical condition improved significantly after the first dose of Eculizumab, with stabilizing blood pressure and the resolution of dyspnea and hemolysis, as well as a gradual restoration of hematologic parameters, renal, and liver function. After being treated for 14 days in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), the patient‘s condition stabilized and she was transferred to the nephrology department for further management.