A 58-year-old Caucasian male presented with acute kidney injury (AKI) and proteinuria in June 2016. He had originally been diagnosed with melanoma along the right flank in the 1980s that was treated with wide excisional removal. He was followed closely for over three decades with no signs of metastatic disease until he was noted to have a mass near his prior melanoma excisional scar in summer 2014. A biopsy at that time revealed an epithelioid neoplasm with morphology and phenotype highly suggestive of melanoma that was positive for the BRAF V600E mutation. A Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) at that time showed numerous bilateral pulmonary nodules, and a subsequent right upper lobe wedge resection did confirm metastatic melanoma. In May 2015, he was initiated on ipilimumab (3 mg/kg) and nivolumab (1 mg/kg) every 3 weeks for management of his metastatic melanoma. His course was complicated by grade 3 dermatitis, colitis, and hepatitis, which were treated with courses of prednisone. Therapy was ultimately discontinued in October 2015, after receiving a total of three cycles intermittently, as a result of worsening hepatitis confirmed by liver biopsy. Because of persistent bilateral lung metastases and left pleural metastases, the patient was initiated on dabrafenib 150 mg twice daily and trametinib 2 mg twice daily in December 2015, which he remained on until his presentation to nephrology in June of 2016. He had no personal or family history of chronic kidney disease (CKD). He denied exposure to nephrotoxic agents. He was only taking amlodipine 10 mg for hypertension and had been receiving immunotherapy with dabrafenib and trametinib since December 2015. He denied tobacco use, illicit drug use, and toxic environmental exposure. His blood pressure was 172/89 mm/Hg and had 2+ edema bilaterally. The remainder of his physical examination was normal, and laboratory results indicated a creatinine level of 2.4 mg/dL with a urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio of 2 g/g. His urinalysis showed dysmorphic erythrocytes and red blood cell casts. Renal ultrasonography was normal. Serologic testing was negative for Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA), PR-3, Myeloperoxidase (MPO), and Anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) antibody. Complement levels were normal. A renal biopsy was performed in September of 2016 showing focal crescentic (2 of 15 glomeruli with cellular crescents), proliferative, and sclerosing glomerulonephritis with diffuse linear staining of glomerular capillary loops dominant for IgG (3+), IgA (2+), kappa (2+), and lambda (1+) minimal changes . Ultrastructural examination of three glomeruli demonstrated areas with open capillary loops and preserved foot processes. Other areas demonstrated diffuse effacement of foot processes with variable thickening and wrinkling of glomerular basement membranes. No immune complex disease or tubuloreticular structures were identified.
Repeat anti-GBM testing remained negative, and the patient’s creatinine eventually rose to a peak of 3.8’mg/dL. He had no signs or symptoms of lung hemorrhage. Dabrafenib and trametinib were discontinued, and he was subsequently initiated on oral cyclophosphamide (2 mg/kg/day) and pulse intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg daily for 3 consecutive days) followed by 1 mg/kg/day of prednisone. Serum creatinine improved to 2.5 mg/dL, and the active urinary sediment resolved. Immunosuppression with cyclophosphamide was discontinued after 4 months of therapy, and he was weaned off prednisone by 6 months.
The patient was off all immunotherapy for his malignancy, and his renal function remained relatively stable over the ensuing 12 months. By June 2018, a PET/CT of the chest showed evidence of metastatic melanoma to the left upper and medial lobes of the lung. The patient was placed back on nivolumab, which seemed to stabilize his oncologic disease. Unfortunately, 4 weeks after reinitiating nivolumab, his creatinine jumped from 2.8 to 5.8 mg/dL and home hemodialysis was initiated. The patient remains stable on home hemodialysis and was more recently taken off nivolumab and placed back on dabrafenib and trametinib for progressive metastatic pulmonary disease, which has led to significant symptom control.