A 71-year-old man was scheduled to undergo total hip replacement surgery under general anesthesia to fix malunion of the right hip joint. Two months before the scheduled procedure, he had undergone left bipolar hip arthroplasty and right acetabular fracture fixation due to bilateral acetabular cartridge fractures. After the fractures, the patient had been prescribed oral polystyrene sulfonate calcium because of hyperkalemia. He was diagnosed to have PNH at the age of 60, and the oral administration of prednisolone was initiated. The therapy with eculizumab was not initiated.
The preoperative blood examination showed pancytopenia [white blood cells, 2.100/μl; hemoglobin (Hb), 12.7 g/dl; and platelets, 100 × 103/μl]. We suspected a hemolytic reaction due to the presence of a slightly increased aspartate aminotransferase, although bilirubin and lactase dehydrogenase level were within the normal limits. The hyperkalemia improved with the polystyrene sulfonate calcium. The irregular antibody screening was positive. Therefore, 6 units of packed RBCs and a blood salvage device (electa™; Sorin Group Italia, Italy) were prepared. No other abnormal results in the cardiac, liver, or renal functions were observed.
Figure a depicts the intraoperative progress course. The Hb and potassium (K+) levels after the anesthesia induction were 11.5 g/dL and 4.6 mmol/L, respectively. An hour after the operation started, the same levels became 9.6 g/dL and 5.4 mmol/L, respectively, due to unexpected bleeding and presumably intravascular hemolysis. We initiated blood salvage procedures and started transfusion of 2 units of prepared packed RBCs using a potassium adsorption filter. After that, 190 ml of the first salvaged autologous RBCs were re-infused. Blood examination results to check K+ concentration levels in the transfer bag showed a high level of 6.2 mmol/L in the salvaged RBCs. Because the patient’s Hb became 7.6 g/dL due to continuous bleeding, we transfused two more units of packed RBCs and re-infused 90 ml of the second salvaged autologous RBCs using a potassium adsorption filter. The value of K+ in the transfer bag of the second salvaged autologous RBCs batch was also high at 6.0 mmol/L. The patient’s Hb level recovered to 10.5 g/dL after the RBC transfusion. However, the hyperkalemia progressed to 6.8 mmol/L of K+, and we administered 850 mg of calcium gluconate and initiated glucose-insulin therapy. Although the operation was close to being finished, we transfused two more units of packed RBCs anticipating the possibility of intravascular hemolysis after the operation. The surgery was performed without complications. The value of K+ at the end of the operation was 4.9 mmol/L. The amount of bleeding during the operation was 1900 ml, and the infusion volume during the operation was 2400 ml of crystalloids, 6 units of packed RBCs, and 280 ml of salvaged autologous RBCs. The duration of surgery and anesthesia was 140 and 215 min, respectively. Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Figure b indicates the patient’s progress after the operation. Glucose-insulin therapy was continued until the postoperative day (POD) 1. The patient left the ICU and restarted the oral intake of polystyrene sulfonate calcium at POD 3 because the K+ increased again. At POD 18, the patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation.