A 59-year-old woman of sober habits with a 10-year history of poorly controlled Type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and no history of ARF, prior myocarditis, or other known structural heart disease presented with acutely decompensated heart failure. She reported in the past 2 months symptoms of breathlessness, shortness of breath, declining effort tolerance, orthopnoea, bipedal oedema, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. Her performance status declined from a NYHA functional Classes II–IV within 3 months.
Physical examination revealed no fever, no arthritis, no chorea, no erythema magnatum nor subcutaneous nodules. Further examination showed a normal blood pressure of 140/60 mmHg with a wide pulse pressure, a heart rate of 98 bpm, a collapsing pulse, displaced apical impulse, and elevated jugular venous pressure. Cardiac auscultation showed a normal soft S1, a normal S2, and an S3 gallop. A 3/6 pansystolic murmur in the mitral area, loudest on expiration, was heard, in keeping with MR. She also had a 2/4 early diastolic murmur with arterial findings of severe AR and a widened pulse pressure. The 12-lead ECG showed abnormal QRS wave pattern, repolarization changes, and 1st degree atrioventricular (A-V) block (PR 330 ms) . On chest radiography, there was cardiomegaly, bilateral pleural effusions, upper lobe pulmonary venous diversion in keeping with heart failure, and prominent pulmonary arteries . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) with two-dimensional (2D) Doppler imaging showed mildly dilated LV size and normal LV function (LV dimension in diastole (d) 54 mm, and LVEF 60%). The echocardiographic assessment of the right ventricle (RV) and the pulmonary valve showed pulmonary hypertension with normal sized RV with normal RV function and normal pulmonary valve with mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR − TR Vmax 3.66 m/s, TR Pmax 54 mmHg, right atrial (RA) pressure 20 mmHg, RV systolic pressure 74 mmHg, RA area 19.7 cm2). Further, left atrial assessment showed a mildly dilated left atrium (43 mm). Preoperative TTE showed a tri-leaflet AV with calcified lesions on the non-coronary cusps (NCC), and severe AR. Transthoracic echocardiography of MV showed thickened leaflet tips with severe MR ( and ). Coronary angiography showed unobstructed epicardial coronary vessels and confirmed severe AR and MR. Laboratory examination showed elevated CRP 9 mg/dL, and normal white blood cells 7.62 × 109/L. Anti-DNAse B and anti-steptolysin O-titres were not performed. Blood cultures were performed but the bacterial growth had not occurred by the time the patient underwent valve replacement surgery. Microbiology tests for gram-negative bacteria were negative and polymerase chain reaction testing for common bacteria was also negative.
The patient was diagnosed with valvular heart disease of probable rheumatic aetiology and with severe AR and MR complicated by heart failure. She was started on heart failure pharmacotherapy and referred for double valve replacement surgery. On-table, transoesophageal echocardiography was performed and showed a large vegetation on the anterior MV leaflet, and another on the NCC of the AV. In addition, Grade III diastolic dysfunction was noted, a large pleural effusion on the right was also seen. She underwent open-heart surgery and had AV and MV replacement, both with bioprosthetic tissue valves, based on patient’s preference. During the operation, it was evident that below the AV there was small root abscess and vegetation on the AV and MV, confirming chronic infective endocarditis. The patient was treated for culture-negative infective endocarditis. The patient was started on an antibiotic therapy (penicillin G 5 million Unit IV 6 hourly for 4 weeks, gentamycin 80 mg IV three times a day for 2 weeks, doxycycline 100 milligrams orally twice a day for 4 weeks), discharged home well, and has been doing well on follow-up visits. Her post-surgical course was uneventful.
The histopathological assessment showed features of concomitant ARF in a background of chronic RHD. The MV showed evidence of a chronic RHD, with moderate-to-severe fibrosis of the valves, scattered stromal histiocytes, and foci of neovascularization with characteristic thick-walled vessels . The AV showed chronic RHD with stromal neovascularization, fibrosis, and chronic inflammation. Additionally, discrete foci of acute rheumatic valvulitis were evident, with Aschoff bodies containing Anitschkow cells and central fibrinoid necrosis .