The patient was a 73-year-old Japanese man who previously underwent surgery for primary lung cancer and was receiving anticancer drugs. He had a history of right nephrectomy following trauma. Additionally, two years prior, he had bypass surgery connecting the subclavian artery to the bilateral femoral arteries to treat lower limb arteriosclerotic occlusive disease. In this case, he initially presented at another hospital with sudden right lower limb pain and was subsequently referred to our hospital, where he was diagnosed with acute occlusion of the right lower extremity artery. Upon arrival at our hospital, his Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) was 15 points (GCS E4V5M6). The patient’s vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 194/73 mmHg; heart rate, 107 beats/minute; respiratory rate, 21 breaths/minute; SpO2, 98% (room air); and temperature, 36.2℃. In the right lower extremity, blood pressure and SpO2 were unmeasurable, and the skin was pale with spontaneous pain.

Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed an occlusion beyond the right femoral artery. Following emergency endovascular thrombectomy on the first day, hemodiafiltration (HDF) was initiated on the 2nd day due to the development of rhabdomyolysis and hypermyoglobinemia. Blood tests on this day revealed high levels of creatine kinase (CK, 82,951 IU/L) and myoglobin (7,237 ng/mL). A polyester polymer alloy (PEPA) dialyzer was used for HDF. Additionally, the patient developed compartment syndrome due to elevated internal pressure in the lower leg and underwent emergency fasciotomy. Although the myoglobin level temporarily increased to 10,776 ng/mL on the 6th day of admission, the patient was successfully weaned off HDF. Throughout the treatment, the patient’s circulation remained stable, his urine output was maintained, and creatinine levels stayed within the normal range. After receiving negative pressure wound treatment for compartment syndrome, a skin graft was performed, and the wound was closed. The patient was transferred for rehabilitation on the 35th day.