A 43-year-old man with a tumor in his left leg was referred to our institute. The diagnosis was myxoid liposarcoma based upon biopsy findings. Radiation and chemotherapy were administered. Consequent wide resection with the surrounding normal tissue was performed. Two years after the initial surgery, when the patient was 45 years of age, metastasis appeared in the right neck region and the retroperitoneum, and resection of these lesions was performed. Seven years after the initial surgery, when the patient was 50 years of age, lung metastasis was found and resection was performed. Eight years after the initial surgery, when the patient was 51 years of age, recurrence was found in the thigh and involved the major vessels. Amputation at the thigh was carried out. Histological diagnosis of myxoid liposarcoma was confirmed in each of the resected materials. Chemotherapy was performed after every resection of metastatic and recurrent lesions. Ten years after the initial operation, at 53 years of age, the patient experienced back pain. Plain radiographs showed a compression type fracture in the second lumbar vertebra. MRI of all the vertebrae showed abnormally high signal intensity on T2-imaging with fat suppression in eight vertebrae: the fifth cervical vertebra (C5), the seventh, tenth, eleventh and twelfth thoracic vertebrae (T7, T10, T11 and T12), the second and fourth lumbar vertebrae (L2 and L4), and the second sacral vertebra (S2). High signal intensity on the MRI was seen throughout the entire vertebral body in L2 accompanied by deformity, suggestive of a pathological fracture. Extraskeletal extension of the lesion was seen in the T12, L2 and S2 vertebrae (Figure ). Bone scans showed negative findings except for the L2 fracture. FDG-PET was negative for all of the vertebrae, including the fractured L2 vertebra (Figure ). These examinations of bone scans and FDG-PET were performed within one month after the MRI examination. With a diagnosis of vertebral metastasis arising from myxoid liposarcoma, radiation and chemotherapy were administered. The patient was informed that data from his case would be submitted for publication, and his consent was obtained.