A 75 year old Caucasian male with a long history of retinal changes was seen in the clinic. He had initially presented 31 years earlier, in 1985, with pigmentary changes at the macula noted by his optician. At the time his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/9 in the right eye and 6/6 in the left eye. Fundoscopy showed pigmentary changes and drusen which were more easily visible on intravenous fundus fluorescein angiography (IVFA) . There was no evidence of any choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM) on any of the images. The patient underwent multiple further IVFA examinations, each time demonstrating no active leak. His retinal appearance was monitored, with no conclusive diagnosis made, nor treatment available.
Ten years later ongoing review identified that the patient had raised intraocular pressure along with optic disc changes and a diagnosis of glaucoma was made with appropriate treatment initiated. Subsequently, in 2001, the patient was diagnosed with hypertension (186/110 mmHg) which, at the time, was thought to be essential hypertension. Retinal examination demonstrated cotton wool spots and haemorrhages, consistent with hypertensive retinopathy . He was also noted to have elevated serum urea and creatinine levels which were assumed to be related to the diagnosis of hypertension.
Following bilateral cataract surgery in 2003, which was complicated by posterior capsule rupture in the left eye, the patient was only able to achieve a BCVA of 6/36 in each eye. Due to inadequate control of IOP left sided trabeculectomy was performed in 2005.
At the same time, aged 64 years, the patient’s urea and creatinine levels were recorded as 20.5 mmol/L (normal 2.8–7.2 mmol/L) and 474umol/L (normal 60-105umol/L) respectively and he started regular haemo-dialysis for end stage renal failure shortly afterwards. He then underwent dual renal transplant in 2009 and was initiated on systemic immunosuppression (Tacrolimus 3 mg/day) which he continues to this day. The biopsy results from the explanted kidneys are unfortunately not available. Subsequently both transplanted kidneys failed over the coming year, with no identified cause, requiring the patient to undergo bilateral nephrostomies.
In June 2010 the patient was referred back to the Ophthalmology services, aged 69, with a presenting vision of 52 ETDRS (Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study) letters in the right eye and 35 letters in the left eye. He was again noted to have bilateral changes at the maculae which were, at the time, attributed to possible age related macular degeneration, and a small area of possible sub-retinal fluid. Comparison was made between the IVFA in 1985 and the IVFA at re-referral showing a significant increase in the number and distribution of the drusen, but no vascular leakage . The poor vision in the left eye was found to be secondary to advanced glaucoma and significant changes at the macula. No treatment was appropriate and the patient was monitored for 5 years with repeated Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) scans.
In 2015 the OCT demonstrated an increasing sub-foveal space, raising a suspicion of CNVM. A loading phase of intravitreal anti vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) was initiated in the form of Ranibizumab 0.5 mg. As there was no response to six Ranibizumab injections, treatment was subsequently switched to Aflibercept 2 mg with three further monthly doses. Again there was no improvement and treatment was ceased .
Due to an unusual appearance and history when considering age related macular degeneration, a systematic review of his previous notes and images was performed as part of a retinal multi-disciplinary team.
At the most recent visit (October 2016) the patient’s BCVA was recorded in the right eye as 49 ETDRS letters and awareness of hand movements only in the left eye. The fundus examination demonstrated multiple subretinal drusenoid deposits, which were autofluorescent, mainly at the posterior pole. Careful review of the OCT images demonstrated that the deposits were in Bruch’s membrane, with an intact Retinal Pigment Epithelium (RPE) .
Autofluorescence imaging demonstrated large areas of increased and decreased autofluorescence involving the macula and spreading inferiorly . OCT continued to demonstrate subfoveal hyporeflective areas. Pale optic discs were noted bilaterally, consistent with the long standing diagnosis of advanced glaucoma.
Wide angle (102°) infra-red imaging demonstrates the limitation of the retinal disease to the posterior pole, involving the macula, crossing the vascular arcades and including the nasal peri-papillary region .
The young age of presentation with drusen, recurrent kidney failure and increasing subretinal deposits , led to the suspicion of this being a probable case of dense deposit disease. He is currently being tested for serum C3 levels and C3 nephritic factor as well as genetic testing for a variety of mutations in complement associated genes, with the results awaited.