n this case report, we presented an unusual cause of severe anemia in a 65-year-old male Amhara ethnicity patient resulting from oropharyngeal leech infestation. The patient, a farmer from a rural area in North Wollo, Raya Kobbo, Ethiopia, presented with a 2-week history of spitting blood-tinged saliva. The bleeding was intermittent and some time it became bright red. He also described experiencing a persistent foreign body sensation in his throat, which was accompanied by discomfort and a sensation of fullness in the oropharyngeal area, lightheadedness, and difficulty speaking; 1 week prior to the onset of these symptoms, he had consumed water from a nearby spring, primarily used for livestock. Notably, he had no history of other symptoms associated with upper respiratory or gastrointestinal issues, such as a cough, shortness of breath, vomiting, or bleeding from other sites.

On thorough physical examination, the patient was stable. His vital signs included a pulse rate of 104 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 32 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg, and a temperature of 37.2 °C. The elevated pulse and respiratory rates suggested tachycardia and mild tachypnea, possibly due to discomfort or partial respiratory obstruction caused by the foreign body. Eye examination revealed pale conjunctiva and nonicteric sclera. A detailed oropharyngeal examination uncovered a dark brown cylindrical worm attached to the posterior wall of the oropharynx, with clotted blood surrounding the site of attachment.

The patient was thoroughly informed about the entire procedure to ensure his comfort and cooperation. He was positioned in the supine sniffing position (with neck hyperextension). The tongue was retracted outward using sponge forceps, allowing us to grasp and remove the foreign body, which was identified as a 9.6-cm live leech. After removal, the site of attachment was compressed with gauze to control bleeding, and any hematoma was removed. The patient was counseled and sent home with home-based iron supplements for 1 month. The counseling emphasized on using clean water and not drinking river water. In addition, he was informed on seeking healthcare early when experiencing health ill health.