A 66-year-old male with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and osteoarthritis, on no prescribed medications, presented with haemoptysis and chest pain. On examination, the temperature was 36.7°C, the blood pressure 84/69 mmHg, the heart rate 130 b.p.m., the respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation 100% on room air. Cardiopulmonary exam was overall unremarkable. A mass was noted in the right deltoid muscle region.
The ECG at presentation showed sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 117 b.p.m. and marked convex STE in multiple leads including V2–V6, I, and aVL, with reciprocal changes . ST-elevation myocardial infarction code was activated. Emergent coronary angiography showed no significant coronary obstruction . The STE was persistent on subsequent ECGs and blood cardiac troponin I (cTnI) levels were within normal range (<0.3 ng/mL). The complete blood count and basic metabolic panel were unremarkable except for mild hyponatraemia with sodium level of 130 mEq/L (normal sodium level 135–145 mEq/L) and mildly elevated fasting plasma glucose level of 7.1 mmol/L. The chest X-ray showed a right upper lobe wedge-shaped airspace consolidation.
The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed severe focal wall thickening and hypokinesis/akinesis in apical, apical lateral, anteroseptal, and anterior wall. The thickened wall is characterized by heterogenous echogenicity different from that of normal myocardium. Mural mobile echodensities associated with the hypokinetic/akinetic wall were seen in the left ventricle, consistent with mural thrombi . Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a large partially cavitated lung mass within the right upper lobe. Given the haemoptysis and cavitated lung mass, thus bleeding concern, anticoagulation was held. Ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of the right deltoid muscle mass was performed, and the histological analysis showed infiltrating squamous cell carcinoma .
In further delineating the myocardial damage, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed, which showed focal wall thickening with regional hypokinesis/akinesis due to infiltrative masses involving apical, apical lateral, anteroseptal, and anterior wall, consistent with malignant cardiac metastases . An 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET)-CT imaging showed large areas of hypermetabolic activity corresponding to the myocardial metastasis as shown on CMR imaging and a large hypermetabolic mass in the right upper lobe consistent with primary lung malignancy .
The patient was seen by oncology and diagnosed with stage IV lung squamous cell carcinoma. Palliative chemoimmunotherapy was started. The persistent STE was still present on the follow-up ECG obtained 2 months after clinical presentation and the patient remained clinically stable from a cardiac standpoint.