A 51-year-old man inadvertently noticed a cervical mass that had been growing rapidly for 1 month. On May 26, 2020, the patient went to the outpatient department of Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center. He had no dyspnea and was in good clinical condition with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status score of 0. However, he complained of pain on touching the mass. Therefore, cervical ultrasound (US) and thyroid computed tomography (CT) were performed in May 2020. Imaging results showed calcified masses on both the lobes and isthmus of the thyroid, suggesting the possibility of thyroid carcinoma. The trachea was shifted to the right and invasion of the internal jugular vein and common carotid artery was observed . Additionally, thyroid CT revealed multiple enlarged cervical nodes at levels II, III, and IV on the left side, each measuring approximately 20 mm. Core needle biopsy (CNB) of the prevailing thyroid nodule confirmed the diagnosis of ATC . Our center performs either immunohistochemistry and/or next-generation sequencing (88-gene somatic mutation analysis panel) as a standard of care for molecular testing of the tumor. NGS revealed three mutations: NRAS c.182A > T (variant allele frequency [VAF] 4.0%), TP53 c.742C > T (VAF 4.9%), and TERT C228T (VAF 3.5%). It was showed in immunohistochemically stained slides that tumor cells were positive for AE1/AE3, CK19, PAX8, P53 (70%), Ki67 (80%), TTF-1, HBME-1 . The cells were negative for thyroglobulin, desmin, and p63. Physical examination revealed a hard nodule sized 2–3 cm in the thyroid region and the trachea was displaced to the right. Abdominal US, brain CT, and chest CT detected no additional metastases. The patient was diagnosed with ATC (cT4bN1bM0, IVB according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer [AJCC] Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Edition) and the tumor was considered unresectable.
In June 2020, the patient was recruited for a clinical trial that combined multiple-target kinase inhibitors and anti-PD-1 antibodies in patients with advanced thyroid cancer (NCT04521348). He was administered three cycles of famitinib (20 mg/qd) and camrelizumab (200 mg/q3w). The patient exhibited a good clinical status, but suffered from famitinib-induced grade 3 hypertension, which was controlled with nifedipine and valsartan. Famitinib was discontinued for 3 days during the second cycle.
After three cycles of treatment, CT showed partial response (PR) of the lesion according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (version 1.1) . The invaded internal jugular and common carotid arteries were separated. A multidisciplinary team for head and neck cancer offered the patient two main therapeutic options: surgical intervention or medical therapy. After discussion with the patient and his family members, the patient consented to total thyroidectomy and radical neck dissection, followed by radiotherapy.
Total thyroidectomy with removal of lymph node group VI and left radical neck dissection (groups II, III, IV, and V) were performed in July 2020. Postoperative pathological examination identified a 35-mm (maximum diameter) lesion in the left thyroid lobe and some poorly differentiated tumor nests with degeneration. Necrosis, desmoplasia, calcification, chronic inflammatory infiltration, and foamy histiocyte aggregates were found in the surrounding areas. Cholesterol crystals were observed occasionally, which was consistent with the changes observed after treatment . A 12-mm (maximum diameter) lesion in the right thyroid lobe was diagnosed as papillary thyroid cancer. Necrosis, chronic inflammatory cell infiltration, foam cell aggregation, cholesterol crystals, and multinucleated giant cell reaction were observed in the anterior cervical mass, which was consistent with the changes after treatment. No definite residual carcinomas were observed. None of the 33 neck lymph nodes involved in neck dissection showed signs of metastatic carcinoma. Thus, the diagnosis of ATC was confirmed (ypT2N0M0, IVA according to AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 8th Edition).
Postoperative therapy included L-thyroxine (125 μg/d). Positron emission tomography CT showed no masses in the thyroid or neck lymph nodes and no distant metastasis. By August 2020, the patient had recovered well and received intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) with a dose of 60 Gy (in 30 fractions) to the thyroid bed and cervical nodal regions and 54 Gy to the mediastinal nodes . Following radiation therapy, camrelizumab (200 mg/q3w) was administered for maintenance for 11 cycles. CT was performed to assess the response to camrelizumab in January 2021 .
Surveys of patient-reported outcomes were obtained approximately 24 months after the diagnosis. They showed a very good quality of life, including continuation of normal activities such as jogging.