This is a case of a 14-year-old Arab boy, non-smoker, with no known food or drug allergies, known to have congenital single kidney and tuberous sclerosis with cognitive deficits, brain lesions, and dermatological features. Initially, the boy was diagnosed prenatally with heart rate abnormalities (bradycardia) and a single kidney. At the age of two years, the boy started having multiple myoclonic seizures treated with levetiracetam in which EEG was performed by a neurologist along with an MRI study which confirmed the presence of cortical and subcortical hamartomas in the brain and led to the diagnosis of tuberous sclerosis.
During the course of the 14 years, the boy was never admitted to hospital for any serious complication but developed mental retardation and typical skin manifestations which include facial angiofibromas and hypomelanotic macules. Kidney morphological features were assessed in 2010 by Kidney US and confirmed normal left kidney with normal cortical thickness and good corticomedullary differentiation. The seizures were controlled using Sodium Valproate and Levetiracetam, with regular creatinine checkups that never showed a value of creatinine clearance more than one, and annual follow-up brain MRIs were done which confirmed typical findings of subtentorial subcortical and cortical hamartomas in addition to subependymal lesions suggestive of benign giant cell tumour.
On the 15 March 2023, the boy presented to the outpatient clinic with flank pain. Vital signs were within normal range and no significant unusual findings were noticed on the physical exam except for the skin lesions . Creatinine level was tested and was normal at 0.71. Moreover, an abdomino-pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan with IV contrast was done and showed a single left kidney which had several nodular lesions with fat density which are typical for angiolipomatosis, besides, it showed enlarged kidney dimensions with no corticomedullary differentiation . No signs of bleeding were reported and therefore the boy was only planned for surveillance for bleeding risk or malignant transformation.