A 4-year-old male was admitted to the ED of our hospital with generalized urticaria. He had been fishing with his father and, 10 min after lying down on grass, he experienced generalized itchy urticaria and angioedema. Thirty minutes later, on examination in the Emergency Department, urticaria was observed over the entire body and angioedema in his hands.
Benadryl and methylprednisolone were administered. Four hours after treatment, symptoms had stopped, and urticaria and angioedema had disappeared completely.
Two weeks later, he visited a farm. Fifteen minutes after lying down on grass he experienced itching sensations in his hands, arms and trunk, along with generalized erythema. He also complained of congestion/itching in his nose, itchy eyes, and crying. His mother stated that he had slight dyspnea with cough and dizziness. She gave him Benadryl and betamethasone via the oral route based on advice proffered in a previous admission to the ED (which improved the most severe symptoms within 1 h). He was admitted to the ED after 2 h with only erythema, and he received antihistamines for an additional 5 days. The patient had no history of atopy.
By anamnesis, an etiology of insect bites, or intake of food or drugs before these two episodes were excluded. Total Immunoglobulin-E was 123 IU/mL, the blood count and complement (CH50, C3, C4, C1 inhibitor) were normal. Parasitology studies were negative. His mother and maternal grandmother reported a history of allergic rhinitis.
Skin-prick tests (SPTs; Dermaprick®; Alergo Pharma, Buenos Aires, Argentina) were positive to Cynodon dactylis, Phalaris arundinacea and Festuca elatior. Surprisingly these allergens were significantly positive (largest diameter (in mm): 8, 12 and 23, respectively), compared with that of the negative control (1 mm) . These pollen allergens are used by our research team to ascertain the prevalence of skin sensitivity .
SPTs were negative for foods (milk, egg, cocoa, citrus fruits, fish, tomatoes, peanuts, wheat, bananas, strawberries) and airborne allergens (Dermatophagoides farinae, D. pteronyssinus, cat dander, dog dander, Alternaria spp., Aspergillus spp., Mucor spp., Cladosporium spp., Penicillium spp., Rhizopus spp., other grasses, weeds, tree pollens).