A 57-year-old female without past medical history presented to the Emergency Department (ED) at the end of May with altered mental status, nausea, and vomiting. She had felt unwell for the past week with symptoms of mild cough and intermittent fevers peaking at 39.4° Celsius (C). She had been seen by her primary care physician two days prior and was diagnosed with a urinary tract infection based on a positive urine culture for Enterococcus species. She had not started the antibiotics prior to presentation to the ED. In the ED, she appeared acutely ill. She was hypotensive (blood pressure 58/41 mmHg by cuff), tachycardic (heart rate 120 beats/minute), and hypothermic (32.4°C). Physical exam revealed dry mucus membranes, clear lung fields, and cold and mottled extremities. Initial blood work demonstrated an arterial blood gas with pH of 7.0, pCO2 32mmHg, pO2 450 mmHg on supplemental oxygen, and arterial lactate 9.6 mmol/L. Chemistries and hepatic function testing showed creatinine of 1.64 mg/dL, glucose 330 mg/dL, alanine transferase 23 U/L, and total bilirubin <0.2mg/dL. Complete blood count was notable for leukocytosis 16,300/uL with 77.4% neutrophils and 16.9% lymphocytes and hemoglobin of 18.6 g/dL. CRP was normal at 2mg/L. Procalcitonin was 0.89 ng/mL. Troponin T was elevated to 0.20 ng/mL which subsequently rose to 0.97 ng/mL on repeat. Urine toxicology screen was negative. Initial chest X-ray (CXR) showed no acute cardiopulmonary disease . Initial ECG demonstrated sinus tachycardia. Three liters of isotonic intravenous fluids were given as bolus infusion, which resulted in transient increases in blood pressure, but systolic blood pressure remained low (<70 mm Hg) despite fluid resuscitation. A left subclavian triple lumen catheter was inserted, norepinephrine was initiated to maintain mean arterial pressure >60 mmHg, and the patient received cefepime and vancomycin for presumed septic shock.
A bedside cardiac ultrasound was performed which demonstrated a large pericardial effusion with tamponade physiology . The patient was taken to the cardiac catheterization lab for an urgent pericardiocentesis. Prior to the procedure, the patient suffered an asystolic cardiac arrest secondary to pump failure requiring 10 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. She was intubated and started on mechanical ventilation. The patient underwent pericardiocentes with immediate evacuation of 90ml of serous fluid, and a pericardial drain was subsequently placed to manage any ongoing or residual effusion. After successful pericardiocentesis, the patient also underwent coronary angiography, which revealed angiographically normal coronaries, with no evidence of plaque or obstruction.
The patient was admitted to the Medical Intensive Care Unit. Over the following 24 hours her condition deteriorated with hypotension and a marked metabolic acidosis despite IV fluids, high dose vasopressors, broad-spectrum antibiotics, stress dose steroids, and a bicarbonate drip. Arterial lactate continued to trend up to 16.2mmol/L. Repeat transthoracic echocardiogram 12 hours after the pericardiocentesis revealed only a small anterior pericardial effusion, with normal left and right ventricular ejection fractions. Total pericardial drain output was 150mL over this time. During this time, her respiratory viral panel taken by nasal swab on admission returned positive for influenza B by PCR. Repeat CXR showed bilateral infiltrates concerning for acute respiratory distress syndrome. Oxygenation deteriorated despite high Fi02 and PEEP, and the patient was paralyzed and started on low tidal volume ventilation. Despite maximal supportive care, later that day the patient experienced another asystolic cardiac arrest from persistent hypoxia, respiratory failure, and worsening acidosis for which resuscitative efforts were unsuccessful. All blood cultures remained negative. Urine culture from presentation returned positive for 50,000 colonies of Enterococcus species; however, the urinalysis was not compatible with active infection, showing only 12 white blood cells. Repeat urine culture collected later during the admission remained negative.
Autopsy was performed after consent was obtained from family members. On gross evaluation, the myocardium was grossly firm, dense, and mottled in appearance. Lung histology revealed relatively preserved lung architecture with only focal evidence of lung injury in the left lower lobe, but no widespread evidence of pneumonitis or pneumonia. All cultures from the lung were negative for infection. In contrast the heart was markedly abnormal, with multifocal cardiac cell necrosis and subendocardial septal hemorrhage consistent with myocarditis. The pericardium was normal. Immunohistochemistry revealed extensive infiltration of the myocardium with CD3 positive lymphocytes, and hemoxylin and eosin stain demonstrated hemorrhage and myocyte necrosis . The cause of death was felt to be myocarditis secondary to influenza B infection, given the strongly positive viral PCR.