We report a case of a 65-year-old male with a medical history of hepatitis C (Genotype 1b, F0-1) infection treated with Exviera plus Viekirax (DAA) with a sustained virological response (SVR) and porphyria cutanea tarda also successfully treated.
The patient was admitted to the hospital with a 72 h history of abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant, exacerbated by food intake and partially relieved by vomiting; other remarkable symptoms such as acholia, choluria and a body temperature of 38 °C were documented. On inspection, the patient presented skin and conjunctival jaundice, and abdominal examination revealed diffuse pain upon palpation predominantly in the right upper quadrant with positive Murphy’s sign.
Blood analysis data on admission were: leukocytes 6.72×103 mm−3 (neutrophils 83.4%), platelets 184×103 mm−3, total bilirubin 6.17 mg dl−1, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 289 U l–1, glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (GOT)/aspartate transaminase (AST) 148 U l–1 and glutamate pyruvate transaminase (GPT)/alanine transaminase (ALT) 439 U l–1. An ultrasound scan of the patient’s abdomen indicated an acute lithiasic cholecystitis and an intra- and extrahepatic dilatation of bile duct, without the identification of an obstructive cause.
Given the patient’s symptoms and the results of complementary tests, the patient was empirically treated with piperacillin/tazobactam and was admitted to the hospital. During hospitalization, an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed a stenosis at about 20 cm from the distal common bile duct, and a biliary endoprosthesis was inserted. An abdominal computed tomography scanner revealed a lithiasic gallbladder without lesions suspicious of malignancy. The patient was discharged for detailed medical studies but required hospitalization 3 weeks later in the context of acute cholecystitis suspicion. Percutaneous cholecystectomy was performed and piperacillin/tazobactam treatment was initiated (4 g every 8 h for 14 days). Three biliary samples were obtained for microbiological studies. Seven days later, the patient was submitted to a pancreatoduodenectomy and the prosthesis previously implanted was also sent for microbiological procedures.
Cultures were performed following conventional procedures in the media and environment recommended. Identification and susceptibility tests were performed using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) MS (Bruker Daltonics) and MicrosCan Walkay panels (Beckman Coulter), respectively. MICs were interpreted according to EUCAST 2020 criteria , and carbapenemase production was detected by immunochromatography (RESIST-4 OKNV carbapenemase; Coris BioConcept).
The three bile samples yielded the culture of OXA-48 carbapenemase-producing and in two of them was also isolated. OXA-48 carbapanemase-producing and were obtained from the culture of the biliary prosthesis, as well as ( gives a summary of microbiological results of the different samples). After microbiology results, antibiotic treatment was changed to amikacin (300 mg every 8 h) and meropenem (1 g every 8 h), for 6 days. Results of the antibiogram showed carbapenem resistance that revealed the presence of a carbapenemase. Carbapenemase production was confirmed by immunochromatography (RESIST-4 OKNV carbapenemase; Coris BioConcept) being positive for OXA-48 carbapenemase. The strain was sent to the National Center for Clinical Microbiology (Carlos III Research Institute, Madrid) that confirmed OXA-48 production by sequencing. Antimicrobial treatment was changed to ceftazidime/avibactam (2 g every 8 h for 10 days) and tygecicline (50 mg every 12 h for 5 days) due to an increase in procalcitonin and C-reactive protein (CRP); both parameters decreased after administration of the new treatment. Eighteen days after the pancreatoduodenectomy, the patient was discharged and attended at outpatient consultation area.