A 79-year-old female experiencing gait disturbance, cognitive impairment, and urinary incontinence for about a year presented at our hospital. CT head scanning showed enlarged ventricles (Evan’s index 0.31) and no other remarkable signs . A lumbar tap test showed slight improvement of gait and memory function. After a diagnosis of probable normal-pressure hydrocephalus, a ventriculoperitoneal shunt operation was completed without complications. However, symptoms did not greatly improve and the patient demanded a shunt removal. Before removal, gait instability and mild cognitive impairment were present without any paralysis, sensory dysfunction, or cranial nerve palsy.
During the operation, propofol (60 mg), rocuronium (35 mg), and remifentanil (0.7 mg/h) were used as general anesthesia with 5% desflurane and remifentanil (0.6 mg/h) continuously infused for maintenance. We injected 10 ml of 0.5% lidocaine with epinephrine into the chest skin incision site and cut the skin to expose the shunt valve; cranial and rostral shunt tubes were removed without resistance. A clip anchor was left at the scalp so we injected 7 ml of 0.5% lidocaine with epinephrine into the previous skin incision site around the burr hole and removed it. The skin was closed after 10 ml of 0.75% bupivacaine was added into the subcutaneous layer to reduce postoperative pain. The total operation and anesthetic times were 22 and 58 min, respectively.
Anesthesia was reversed by Sugammadex and train of four stimulation showed diminishment of muscle relaxants, but spontaneous respiration was still not observed. At this time, vital signs were blood pressure 90/50 mmHg, pulse 80 bpm, SpO2 98%, and body temperature 35.8°C with a Japan Coma Scale score of 300 even after naloxone administration. Pupils were dilated bilaterally and light, cough, and vestibuloocular reflexes were lost. Emergent head CT showed no abnormal lesions such as hemorrhages, infarctions, or cerebral herniations . Under suspicion of brainstem anesthesia, systemic management in an intensive care unit was conducted and, within an hour, pupil size, respiration, and consciousness gradually recovered to normal and extubation occurred 1.5 h after the operation. The postoperative course was uncomplicated and discharge occurred at postoperative day 9.