A 61-year-old White man, non-smoker, with a diagnosis of long-standing arterial hypertension of difficult control, severe heart failure with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 30% receiving pharmacological treatment with carvedilol, ivabradine and losartan, and history of stage IIIB chronic renal failure without dialysis therapy. A year before the current admission, he consulted for urinary symptoms that rapidly evolved to systemic compromise with fever, diaphoresis, low back pain, hypotension, dyspnea, and increased acute phase reactants. He required hospitalization in the intensive care unit for multidisciplinary treatment with a diagnosis of sepsis of urinary origin. Alterations in calcium behavior were detected, which were associated to the underlying renal disease and to a severe hyperparathyroidism secondary to a functional adenoma in the lower left parathyroid treated with surgery, achieving control of symptoms and levels of calcium and phosphorus. Chest x-ray showed 2 lesions of tumor aspect with internal lytic areas in the fourth right and eighth left costal arches. The first lesion measured 25 × 21 mm with involvement of fourth right costal arch and the second measured 77 × 54 mm in eighth left costal arch showing growth toward the left pleural cavity . Both lesions were suggestive of a tumor of chondral origin, enchondroma, and as it was not possible to rule out malignancy with the images, he was admitted in our institution for excisional biopsy. The physical examination revealed a thin patient with chronic disease and a deformity in the neck with anterior flexion pronounced by severe dorsal kyphoscoliosis and secondary asymmetry of the right ribcage, which was retracted with decreased intercostal spaces. He referred increased dyspnea with the activities of daily life, with NYHA (New York Heart Association) functional class III. Blood pressure 120/70 mm Hg, heart rate 100 beats per minute, breathing frequency 16 breaths per minute, no cyanosis, with jugular engorgement at 90°, no neck masses, tachycardic rhythmic heart with no murmurs or gallop, decreased breath sounds at both lung bases, abdomen without ascites or masses, and extremities with edema grade II. No identifiable lesions in the chest wall other than deformity by kyphoscoliosis were found.
Blood work was unremarkable, except for mild anemia of normal volumes (see ), spirometry showed a moderate restrictive ventilatory pattern and no significant post-bronchodilator changes and diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide, in normal limits (diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide [DLCO]: 109%). The chronic kidney disease was stable. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan showed a heterogeneous rounded lytic lesion with sclerotic edges and growth toward the pulmonary cavity, of expansive type, causing displacement of pulmonary parenchyma, and measuring approximately 77 × 54 mm and depending on the eighth left costal arch . Given the size and characteristics of the mass, it was very difficult to determine if the lung was surrounding the lesion or if the mass was in fact infiltrating the parenchyma. In addition, in the fourth right costal arch, an image of similar characteristics, but smaller in size, is found, measuring 25 × 21 mm. In addition, a severe dorsal kyphoscoliosis was identified. No further studies were implemented; the decision was made to perform a surgical resection of the mass with the possibility of having to do a lobectomy.
The patient was hospitalized in the intensive care unit for pre-surgical conditioning where a left ventricular ejection fraction of 30% was evidenced and a cycle of intravenous levosimendan was initiated. He received red blood cell transfusion and underwent resection of the left costal mass by thoracoscopy. During the surgical procedure, only 1 hard lesion was found that involved the eighth rib and soft tissues of the seventh to ninth left ribs, without infiltration into the lung tissue or pleural cavity. Therefore, only partial resection of these 3 ribs was necessary, without pulmonary lobectomy, the right side was not intervened. In the immediate postsurgical period, the patient presented a difficult evolution, with hemodynamic instability, required vasoactive support with norepinephrine, prolonged mechanical ventilation, and a need for a tracheostomy to assist a long-standing recovery process. Subsequently, it was possible to remove the vasoactive drugs, the invasive ventilatory support, and the tracheostomy with complete physical and respiratory rehabilitation.