A 22-year-old Sri Lankan man presented with acute onset diplopia, progressively worsening over one week. He had noted that his eyelids were drooping, especially towards end of the day. He did not experience dysphagia, dysarthria or limb weakness. He had been diagnosed with end stage renal failure (ESRF) due to obstructive uropathy one year ago. Although his serum creatinine had been 16.4 mg/dl (normal: 0.7 – 1.3) five months ago, he had not consented for renal replacement therapy.
On examination, he had a fatigable bilateral asymmetrical partial ptosis (additional file 1) and a positive curtain sign (manually raising the more ptotic lid causes increased ptosis on the opposite side), but the Cogan’s lid twitch and peek signs were negative. There was a complex external ophthalmoplegia without nystagmus . The pupils were normal. Limb power was 5/5 (modified medical research council score) in all four limbs, no cerebellar signs were noted and the sensation to pin prick and joint position sense was intact. The rest of the examination were normal apart from severe pallor. The blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. The bedside ice-pack test for ocular myasthenia gravis was negative.
The biochemical parameters on admission are given in the Table .
After correcting the hypocalcaemia, haemodialysis was commenced because of the severe acidosis and continued on an alternate day frequency.
In the evaluation for the cause of the patient’s complex ophthalmoplegia and fatigable ptosis, the following investigations were done .
Acetylcholine receptor antibodies were not tested due to resource constraints.
The patient’s ophthalmoplegia improved completely by the end of the first week after initiating haemodialysis and the ptosis resolved by the end of the second week . The MRI of the brain repeated after two weeks demonstrated marked improvement in the previously noted brainstem abnormalities with residual mild T2W/FLAIR hyperintensities in the midbrain. T2W hyperintensities in the internal capsule and cerebellar peduncles had completely resolved .