It was a second pregnancy of 34-year-old women with obesity and primary hypertension. High blood pressure of maximum values 170/100 mmHg was treated with methyldopa in increasing doses, trimetazidinie, dihydrochloride and low dosage acetylic acid. Ultrasound exam at the 13th week of gestation was normal with NT 2,2 mm, and at 20 weeks of gestation there was reported normal fetal biometry and normal heart anatomy. At the age of 34th week of pregnancy, woman was admitted to hospital because of high blood pressure and abnormal Doppler flow in fetus. No echocardiography exam was available. Antenatal corticosteroids were given once three days before birth with magnesium sulfate for fetal neuroprotection and lung development stimulation.
In a district hospital, a male neonate was born at 34 weeks of gestational age by C-section because of increased risk for birth asphyxia, based on abnormal cardiotocography (CTG) tracing .
The preterm boy had birth weight 2600 g and had head circumference and length in normal values range of 50–90 centiles. Due to respiratory distress syndrome, nasal Duo positive airway pressure was performed for the first two days of postnatal life. The chest x-ray excluded pneumonitis, the heart size was in normal values. Laboratory findings show increasing C-reactive protein concentrations in the following days. A third day at the physical exam, his heart rate was 220/bpm. ECG has shown the supraventricular tachycardia with a narrow QRS atrial rate (AR) was equal to ventricular (VR) and was 220/min. Adenosine was administered twice- first dose 0,15 mg/kg, second dose 0,25 mg/kg. But arrhythmia remained resistant to these therapies. However, ECG detected for a short time atrial tachycardia (atrial rate 420/min, ventricular rate 45-65-70/min). Therefore, amiodarone therapy was started- 5 mg/kg. Echocardiography revealed patent foramen ovale, tricuspid valve regurgitation with a 29 mmHg gradient and mild mitral regurgitation. The ejection fraction (EF) was 62%. Because of unsuccessful treatment, the newborn was transferred from the district hospital to hospital with a Paediatric Cardiology Department on day 3. Next ECG demonstrated supraventricular tachycardia with narrow QRS (220/min) . The administration of adenosine (0,1 mg/kg) resulted in the obvious appearance of “sawtooth wave” typical for AFL . After a while, ECG demonstrated supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), exactly 3:1 atrioventricular conduction AFL (atrial rate 500/bpm, ventricular rate 250/bpm). Due to the recurrence of AFL, cardioversion was performed with 1 J/kg and the rhythm converted to normal. Amiodarone therapy with a dosage of 15 mg/kg/day was started as a prophylaxis against recurrent arrhythmia attacks. After 24 h without the AFL attack, intravenous amiodarone therapy was replaced with oral treatment. SVT did not occur and the infant was discharged on the 23rd day of life in a good general state with amiodarone oral therapy. AFL did not repeat in the 1-year follow up and corrected QT (QTc), Holter ECG and echocardiography (ECHO) were all found to be normal. Therefore, therapy was stopped.