A 44-year-old woman with bipolar disorder was referred to our outpatient clinic 2 months after her first manic episode. She developed bipolar disorder with depressive episodes when she was 42 years old. Her first depressive episode was ameliorated with 3 months’ treatment with sertraline. She had no previous episodes of hypomania or mixed states, and no history of thyroid disease. When she presented at our clinic, she had been treated with quetiapine for 1 month, but still had elevated mood, irritability, and mood-congruent delusions. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition, we diagnosed her as having bipolar I disorder, and added 200 mg of valproate on 100 mg of quetiapine. Valproate was later increased to 400 mg, after which, her manic symptoms ameliorated.
Despite her mood being well controlled, she developed severe fatigue 30 days after starting valproate. She had no depression-related symptoms other than fatigue, and no findings suggesting sedation with valproate such as somnolence or impaired attention. Her blood concentration of valproate was 24.2 μg/mL, which was not at the toxic level (normal range 50–100 μg/mL). She had never had a similar reaction to previously used psychotropics. A physical examination and laboratory test found no abnormalities except for low values of free thyroxine 0.50 ng/dL (F-T4; normal range 0.8–1.5 ng/dL) and free triiodothyronine 1.85 pg/mL (F-T3; normal range 2.0–3.8 pg/mL). Although F-T4 was decreased, thyroid-stimulating hormone 2.97 μU/mL (TSH; normal range 0.34–3.8 μU/mL) was within the normal range, suggesting central hypothyroidism. Since other fatigue-causing medical conditions and medications were ruled out by systematic evaluations, we considered that the severe fatigue was associated with hypothyroidism. Thyroid autoantibodies were negative, and gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the pituitary gland showed no evidence of a pituitary lesion. Considering that her F-T4 levels progressively decreased with increasing doses of valproate (F-T4 0.70 ng/dL under 200 mg and F-T4 0.50 ng/dL under 400 mg), we suspected that her hypothyroidism was caused by valproate. Therefore, we stopped valproate 33 days after its introduction. Her severe fatigue then improved, completely disappearing in about 20 days. A laboratory test 35 days after stopping valproate confirmed that her thyroid function had normalized (TSH 2.17 μU/mL, F-T3 2.99 pg/mL, F-T4 1.10 ng/dL). For the next 12 months, she had no recurrence of mood episodes, hypothyroidism, or fatigue under maintenance treatment with risperidone and carbamazepine.