A 72-year-old Japanese woman on medications for hypertension, obesity, and diabetes mellitus, was referred to our hospital with abnormal uterine bleeding. She was previously diagnosed with abnormal endometrial cytology at a previous clinic and visited our hospital for further examination and treatment. Endometrial biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma (G2), while pelvic magnetic resonance imaging revealed a lesion mass of size 60 × 66 × 53 mm in the right side of the uterus , which was suspected to invade the serosal side. An enlarged lymph node measuring 18 mm was also found in the lymph node clusters in the right internal iliac artery and the obturator lymph node. Therefore, hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy, pelvic lymph node dissection, and para-aortic lymph node dissection were performed. A pathological examination using surgical specimen revealed endometrial serous carcinoma . Finally, she was diagnosed with stage III C2 endometrial cancer.
On the 6th postoperative day (POD), the patient developed abdominal bloating and nausea. Abdominal radiography revealed that the stomach and the intestine were markedly dilated with gas and air-fluid levels, indicating paralytic ileus . Thus, the patient was initiated on fasting and fluid replacement therapy, following which she recovered completely within 4 days. On the 27th POD, the patient received the first cycle of combination chemotherapy consisting of paclitaxel (175 mg/m2; 3-h infusion) and carboplatin (at a dose corresponding to an area under the curve [AUC] of 5 mg/mL/min).
On day 5 of chemotherapy, the patient developed a fever (38.6 °C), diarrhea, and fatigue. Her pulse rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure were 120 beats/min, 20 breaths/min, and 88/52 mmHg, respectively. Blood examination revealed a white blood cell count, neutrophil count, and C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 270/μL, 40/μL, and 17.92 mg/dL, respectively, which were suggestive of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome including febrile neutropenia (FN) and sepsis. Therefore, an antibiotic therapy and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor therapy were initiated immediately. However, her condition worsened the next day. The body temperature, pulse rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, white blood cell count, neutrophil count, and CRP level were 40.2 °C, 150 beats/min, 49 breaths/min, 63/42 mmHg, 150/μL, 0/μL, and 41.5 mg/dL, respectively.
Because she suffered from septic shock and DIC, she was shifted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed remarkable intestinal dilation and thickening of the intestinal wall. Therefore, we considered enteritis as the origin of inflammation . Furthermore, we speculated that the patient’s condition was associated with toxicity due to bacterial translocation. However, no bacteria were detected in the blood and intestinal fluid. In addition to the treatment for septic shock and DIC, a long ileus tube was inserted into the stomach through the nasal cavity because she experienced a constant high-pressure feeling in the intestine and because we had to suction the extra air and fluid. Favorable outcomes were achieved, including reduced edema in the intestinal colon, improved circulation in the involved intestine, and correction of the intestinal kinking. Her condition gradually improved, and the neutrophil count and immune function improved from the 4th day of ICU admission. She was discharged alive and well from the ICU after 18 days . The patient’s clinical course is shown in Fig. . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for participating in all procedures, and this work was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Shimane University (IRB No-20200110-1).