Our 47-year-old man previously diagnosed with right renal AML presented for intermittent right flank pain and gross hematuria. He had no signs or symptoms of tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). His only relevant past medical history was old peritonitis following an appendectomy.
The abdominal US showed a hyperechogenic lesion in the right renal sinus with a thrombus in the right renal vein and IVC. Abdominal computed axial tomography (CAT) scan revealed a 3 cm lobulated low-density lesion in the renal sinus, middle and upper lobes of the right kidney . On abdominal angioscan, the low-density lesion extended from the right kidney into the right renal vein and IVC, reaching above the diaphragm superiorly, 3 cm below the right atrium .
Considering the risk of pulmonary embolism due to IVC thrombus, the decision of right radical nephrectomy and thrombectomy was taken with the patient.
The surgery was done under general anesthesia after central and arterial lines insertion, the patient was in dorsal decubitus position. Right subcostal approach with median sternotomy was used . After isolation of the right kidney by dissection and ligation of the ureter, renal lobar arteries, and collateral veins, leaving intact and minimally mobilizing the right renal vein, cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was initiated. A single-stage venous cannula was inserted through the right atrium into the superior vena cava, and ascending aortic cannulation was used for arterial return. Using Satinsky clamps the vena cava was clamped right beneath the right atrium and beneath the renal veins. A 5 cm cavotomy revealed a free-floating pedunculated tumor extending from the right renal vein into the IVC, around 10 cm upwards towards the supradiaphragmatic IVC. The tumor was taken in one piece with the right nephrectomy (, , , ). After repair of the cavotomy with running 4–0 Prolene sutures, CPB was interrupted after 28 min of initiation. The right adrenal gland was spared. A drain was put in the peritoneum at the end of the surgery, the operative time was 200 min, the blood loss was 550 cc and no transfusion was needed. The drain was removed at the second post-operative day and the patient was discharged uneventfully on the seventh day after surgery
Pathological analysis of the nephrectomy piece revealed a 5 × 4 × 3 cm tumor with intratumoral hemorrhage extending through the hilum by an 8 cm chaplet like structure with diameters varying between 0.8 and 2 cm. Microscopic examination revealed a stroma composed of mixed layers of mature adipocytes and smooth muscle cells and multiple vascular structures with thick walls and hemorrhagic foci. These characteristics were compatible with that of a benign AML, which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry: positive staining with anti-SMA antibodies and anti-HMB45 and , and negative staining with anti-CD34 and anti-CKAE1/AE3 antibodies .