A 38-year-old Caucasian man presented with worsening central vision OS of 1-week duration. His medical history was significant for recurrent tonsillitis but otherwise negative. He had been diagnosed as having “strep throat” twice in the last 3 months and prescribed amoxicillin 500 mg twice per day for 10 days both times without formal rapid strep testing. He recovered from each instance of tonsillitis within 5–7 days. He had no history of ophthalmic conditions or prior surgery. He denied taking any daily medications or using eye drops. He grew up in Kansas City, Missouri, United States of America, and owned a dog but denied recent travel or exposure to ticks. He and his wife have lived in Austin, Texas, USA, for several years. He works as an information technology specialist. He is a former cigarette smoker who quit 8 years ago, he drinks alcohol socially, and he denied any history of illicit drug use. His family history is significant for maternal diabetes and paternal hypertension.
His uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 in his right eye (OD) and 20/50 OS. His pupils were equally round and reactive, and intraocular pressures were normal. The ocular adnexa were normal on external examination. The anterior chamber and vitreous were quiet bilaterally. A dilated fundus examination OD was unremarkable. A dilated fundus examination OS showed a normal optic nerve, scant hyperpigmentation at the inferotemporal border of the disc, and a whitish sub-retinal lesion temporal to the fovea with a small associated hemorrhage. Ultra-widefield fundus photography is shown in Fig. . A general medical examination was unremarkable. He was afebrile with a temperature of 36.7 °C (98.0 °F), heart rate of 73 beats per minute, right arm cuff blood pressure of 113/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and 98% oxygen saturation on room air. His oropharynx was clear without exudates, his lungs were clear to auscultation, his heart was without murmur or arrhythmia, he had no rashes, and all cranial nerves II–XII were intact with no gross motor or sensory deficits, and he had normal gait.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a hyperreflective sub-retinal elevation with an associated small pocket of fluid. Fluorescein angiography showed a focal area of hyperfluorescence temporal to the fovea in late phase. Indocyanine green (ICG) angiography showed early blockage with mild late leakage and isolated focal hypocyanescent areas. OCT angiography showed a coralliform vascular complex in the outer retina that originated from within the choroid and traversed the RPE and Bruch’s membrane into the sub-retinal space. His examination and ocular imaging were consistent with inflammatory CNVM OS with associated fluid collection, so he was initially treated with an intravitreal bevacizumab 1.25 mg/0.05 mL injection OS. Regarding his laboratory findings, his white blood cell count was 8.4 × 103 per mm3, hemoglobin 12.5 g/dL, platelets 222 × 103 per mm3, prothrombin time 14.5 seconds, international normalized ratio 1.26, blood urea nitrogen 9 mg/dL, creatinine 0.8 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 22 u/L, alanine aminotransferase 27 u/L, and total bilirubin 0.5 mg/dL. Rapid plasma reagin, QuantiFERON-TB Gold, antinuclear antibody profile, and toxoplasmosis titers were non-reactive or unremarkable. His chest X-ray showed a calcified nodule in the upper lung field of his right lung, later confirmed with chest computed tomography.
One week after initial presentation and treatment with bevacizumab, his visual acuity improved to 20/25 OS, and OCT showed improvement of the sub-retinal fluid . A 2-week taper of orally administered prednisone starting at 60 mg per day and ending at 5 mg per day was prescribed to treat the inflammatory component of the CNVM. He was referred to pulmonology, and an additional workup revealed elevated serum IgG4 levels at 248 mg/dL (reference 4–86). He was also referred to otolaryngology for his history of recurrent tonsillitis, for which he underwent bilateral tonsillectomy. The specimen showed significant staining for IgG4 on histopathology. After completion of the first orally administered prednisone course, he developed left upper eyelid blepharitis, which did not resolve after initial treatment with antibiotic ointment and warm compresses. During the next 4 months, he received two more intravitreal bevacizumab 1.25 mg/0.05 mL injections for recurrence of sub-retinal fluid associated with inflammatory CNVM in the setting of biopsy-proven IgG4-RD, as well as a 1-month taper of orally administered prednisone starting at 60 mg per day and ending at 5 mg per day, after which the blepharitis resolved. He experienced improvement in his visual acuity with each injection. Six months after initial presentation, he was started on rituximab infusions 1000 mg every 2 weeks in order to decrease circulating IgG4 levels. The CNVM had decreased in size by this point . He is seen by his retina subspecialist (CJ) every 2 months for examination and anti-VEGF therapy as needed.