A 24-year-old para 1 woman of African descent gave birth to a normal 3100 g female baby at 40 weeks’ gestation in a district hospital. Five months later, the patient, who was self-referred, presented to the outpatient gynaecology clinic of a regional hospital with a painful growth at the site of the left mediolateral episiotomy. She had no obvious puerperal sepsis. The patient had tertiary education, but no history of allergy, nor personal/family history of poor wound healing. The pain made it difficult for her to attempt coitus after birth. She used topical povidone-iodine ointment with no success. Physical examination revealed an exuberant tissue on the episiotomy scar at the 5 o’clock position of the introitus that extended superiorly into the lower third of the vagina and inferiorly into the upper part of the thigh. The lesion was also present in the fourchette from the 5 to 7 o’clock position. No obvious risk factor for exuberant granulation was identified, except for being an African.

The differential diagnoses were exuberant granulation tissue, granulomatous disorder (such as foreign body granulomas), pyogenic granuloma (lobular capillary hemangioma) that develops due to irritation, chronic graft-versus-host disease (cGVHD), keloid, and malignant lesions such as aggressive fibromatoses. cGVHD was excluded because there was no history of tissue grafting. The lack of epithelization excluded keloid. She was counseled, consented to, and underwent a cold knife excision biopsy aided by local bupivacaine hydrochloride (Marcaine) infiltration to minimize bleeding, and the surgical sites were sutured using polyglactin 2–0. During suturing, the vaginal epithelium in the vicinity of the lesion was thin and friable, as the stitches easily cut through the vaginal mucosa. There were no other features of hypoestrogenism. The lesions were discrete and sessile in attachment with a maximum diameter of 1.5 cm. Postoperatively and after discussion with a multidisciplinary team that included a urogynecologist, to treat the atrophic vaginal mucosa, she was prescribed topical conjugated equine estrogen vaginal cream 0.625 mg per 1 g, using 0.5 g per intravaginal application. This was the most appropriate available medication to assist with rejuvenation of the friable vaginal tissue. The patient applied the cream intravaginally twice a week for two weeks and then once a week for one week. This was an intermediate dose (which ranges from 0.3 to 0.5 mg of conjugated equine estrogen). The therapy was intermittent and of a short duration to minimize the effects of any systemic absorption. There is no specific dose recommended for premenopausal women,9 making its use controversial. Despite the controversy, data from a recent Danish study show a reassuring safety profile. Therefore, conjugated equine estrogen remains a recommended treatment option for vulvovaginal atrophy in women.

The histological report confirmed exuberant granulation tissue. No foreign body or residual surgical suture was identified in the specimen. A follow-up review at 12 weeks and 6 months confirmed normal wound healing and genitalia function.