Our patient was a 79-year-old retired African American woman with advanced angle-closure glaucoma in both eyes (OU). Her past medical history was significant for diabetes, hypertension, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. Past ocular history was significant for laser iridotomies OU, bilateral upper lid ptosis repair, cataract extraction with intraocular lenses OU, mini-shunt OS, selective laser trabeculoplasty (SLT) OS, bilateral lower lid punctal cautery, laser capsulotomies OU, and Baerveldt glaucoma tube implants OU. Her medications for diabetes included insulin glargine 100 U/mL injection every night at bedtime, humalog injection for blood glucose over 150 mg/dL, metformin 500 mg tablet twice daily, gabapentin 600 mg every night at bedtime, and Kenalog cream twice daily for diabetic neuropathy. Her medications for hypertension and cholesterol were lisinopril 40 mg tablet once daily, Lipitor 20 mg tablet every night at bedtime, and clonidine tablet twice daily. She was taking omeprazole for her acid reflux. She occasionally took aspirin 81 mg and Tylenol 325 mg tablets for her arthritis pain. Her social history was significant for one cigarette per day. She did not drink alcohol. She had worked as a machine operator but was currently retired.
On routine follow-up examination, she was in good general health. There were no neurologic findings. VA in the right eye (OD) was 20/25 and OS 20/40. Her IOP values were 12 and 17 mmHg on latanoprostene bunod (Vyzulta) OU every night at bedtime. She was also taking Restasis OU twice a day for her dry eyes. Slit lamp examination revealed clear corneas, well-placed glaucoma tube implants OU in the anterior chambers, intraocular lenses, and enlarged optic nerve cupping of 0.9 OU, with normal vessels, maculae, and periphery. Her central corneal thickness (CCT) values were 562 microns (µm) and 557 µm. Visual field testing revealed worsening visual field defects OU (with an inferior arcuate defect OD and superior arcuate and inferior Bjerrum defects OS). Rhopressa was then added to OS every night at bedtime.
After 5 days, the patient complained of blurry vision OS and slight pain over the past 2 days. Her VA was 20/20 OD and 20/200 OS. IOPs were 12 and 7 mmHg. Slit lamp examination revealed 2+ conjunctival injection OS and 2+ corneal edema with Descemet folds OS . Her anterior chamber was deep and quiet. Optic nerve cupping was 0.9 OU. Her fundus examination was otherwise normal. CCT values were 549 µm OD and thick at 808 µm OS . Rhopressa OS was discontinued. Sodium chloride drops and ointment OS were prescribed. Vyzulta OU every night at bedtime and Restasis OU twice a day were continued.
The patient returned the following week with improved vision OS. She reported persistent mild blurred vision OS but had significant improvement in pain. Her VA was 20/20 OD and 20/40 OS. Her IOP values were 15 and 17 mmHg. CCT OS was significantly improved to 589 µm.
Follow-up visits with our patient showed controlled IOP; however, she had mild increases in CCT. Over a 2-month period, the CCT values OS increased 30 µm. By month 3, her VA had worsened to 20/70, and her CCT increased to 633 µm. Topical loteprednol drops were prescribed OS every 2 hours. After 2 weeks, she improved significantly. The topical steroids were tapered. The patient had significant improvement and fortunately made a complete recovery by month 4 of discontinuation of Rhopressa .