A 14-year-old Caucasian girl presented with a right-sided nasal obstruction and severe headache, which was most pronounced in the right forehead region. Our patient reported a headache persisting for three years, however, in the past three months, its intensity prevented her from attending school. In addition to difficult breathing on the right turbinate, she reported anosmia and occasional epistaxis on the same nostril. On several occasions, our patient was seen by a pediatrician, who considered her headaches to be related to puberty. When her headache turned so severe to prevent her attending school, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her brain was recommended to reveal a tumor of the right middle turbinate. A multislice computed tomography (MSCT) scan of her paranasal sinuses, taken for better visualization of the bone structure, showed a clearly delineated, heterogeneous (hyperechoic) tumor growth, which corresponded to the finding of a bone tumor with a inhomogeneous central portion and marginal mineralization . The tumor involved the right middle turbinate, complete anterior and incomplete posterior ethmoidal cells, and the frontal sinus ostium. Cribriform lamina was, in the most part, consumed by the tumor growth, while the skull base was mostly of normal bone structure. Lamina papyracea was free and clearly demarcated from the tumor. There was septum shift to the left, without septum perforation. The tumor was removed in toto by endoscopic technique and pathohistological analysis showed the osteoblastoma . As it was a bone tumor, it could not be excised en bloc, instead, the tumor was first cut by a bur in the region of the middle turbinate base, then the rest of the tumor was removed by diamond bur abrasion of the bone with removal of the most part of the cribriform lamina. On endoscopy, there was a clear margin between the healthy bone, which was white and compact, and osteoblastoma, which was of a honeycomb structure, reddish and more vascularized. Postoperatively, our patient denied headache, breathed normally through her nose and attended school regularly. But the six-month follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan showed a recurrence and we had to do an en bloc resection of the tumor. The CT scan one year later showed normal findings without recurrence and our patient did not have her headache any more .