A 58-year-old woman with metastatic HR+, HER2- breast cancer presented to the ED with a 3-day history of nausea and vomiting, dyspnea, rash, and blood glucose of 319 mg/dL. Her medical history included type 2 diabetes for which she took empagliflozin, metformin/sitagliptin, and gliclazide. A few weeks prior, molecular profiling revealed the presence of a PIK3CA gene mutation, and she started fulvestrant and alpelisib. Her metastatic breast cancer had already progressed on endocrine and chemotherapy treatment. At that time, self-recorded fasting blood glucose readings were 180–216 mg/dL, and HbA1c was 7.7% (61 mmol/mol). The patient was instructed to monitor blood glucose levels frequently. If glucose levels persistently increased, we would refer her to endocrinology for further management. A follow-up assessment occurred one week after alpelisib initiation, in which the patient reported weight loss of 2–3 kg, decreased appetite, and blood glucose readings ranging from 190 to 306 mg/dL. Before she could return for another follow-up, she began to vomit and presented to the ED three days later.
On presentation to the ED, the patient demonstrated dyspnea, nausea and vomiting, and a generalized maculopapular rash on her torso. Labs reported anion gap: 36 mEq/L, pH: 6.99, total CO2: 6 mEq/L, glucose: 402 mg/dL, ketonemia and ketonuria. The patient was admitted to the hospital and started on an insulin sliding scale. Empagliflozin was thought to be a possible cause of the DKA by the ED team and was discontinued. Because alpelisib was recently started and implicated for the rash, it was also held during admission. The patient’s condition worsened overnight, and she was transferred to the ICU. She received bicarbonate infusion and intravenous insulin as per the institutional DKA protocol. Upon resolution of the DKA, she was discharged six days after presentation to the ER. At that time, her gliclazide dose was increased to compensate for the discontinuation of empagliflozin.
Two weeks later, the patient returned to the oncology clinic to restart alpelisib. At the time of restarting alpelisib, her blood glucose levels had returned to baseline (180–216 mg/dL). To circumvent the rash development, she was instructed to take desloratadine 10 mg once daily starting two days before the first dose of alpelisib. Four hours after her first alpelisib dose, she returned to the ED. She described feeling unwell one hour after taking alpelisib and experienced emesis, dysphagia, and a pruritic rash on her abdomen, back, and thighs. Her self-monitored blood glucose readings indicated a rapid rise from 198 mg/dL to 306 mg/dL shortly after alpelisib administration. The patient was also febrile. Labs in the ED revealed anion gap: 20 mEq/L, CO2: 21 mEq/L, glucose: 397 mg/dL with ketonemia and ketonuria. She was diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis, rash secondary to alpelisib, and possible pneumonia. She was started on DKA insulin protocol and antibiotics empirically. The next morning, the patient was transitioned to subcutaneous insulin and maintained on her diabetic medications as per admission. She defervesced quickly, and blood and urine cultures remained negative for infection. Her rash improved within days of alpelisib discontinuation. Endocrinology was consulted, and they started basal insulin with supplemental mealtime insulin. Alpelisib and gliclazide were discontinued. She was discharged six days after admission. Following her discharge, she did not have any further hyperglycemic complications.