Six years after an uncomplicated cesarean delivery of a first child and one year after being diagnosed with CML, a 37-year-old woman presented to our institution at 36 weeks of gestation with worsening fatigue associated with abdominal discomfort.
The couple had rejected the option for medical-assisted abortion during the first trimester and, due to her low risk of CML progression determined by an European Treatment and Outcome Study (EUTOS) score of 86 , her hematologist opted for imatinib cessation, which was given initially at a dose of 400 mg per day, during the first and second trimester. She received interferon-α in the later half of pregnancy. Response to treatment was assessed regularly and at the end of 35 weeks she was found to have a palpable spleen (increased from 4 cm to 8 cm below the lower left costal margin) and leukocytosis at 245,000WBC/mm3 including 32% blast cells. Platelet count and hemoglobin concentration were within normal ranges. Bone marrow aspiration was performed and the patient was diagnosed with CML in acute phase. Cytogenetic analysis of the bone marrow cells by using the Giemsa Banding technique revealed the karyotype 46,XX,t(9,22)(q34;q11.2) in 100% of the analyzed cells without any additional abnormality. FISH analysis was not performed.
Due to the significant deterioration and urgent need for chemotherapy initiation, cesarean delivery was planned for the end of 36 weeks, which was uneventful under general anesthesia. The rate of circulating blasts made the choice of general anesthesia mandatory and judicious rather than a risky perimedullary anesthetic technique. The newborn was healthy and did not require any medical interventions. Postoperatively, she received a multimodal analgesia and an effective thromboprophylaxis. Afterwards, she was started on treatment with imatinib, 800 mg daily, without any satisfactory response. Because of disease progression, the patient received hydroxyurea as palliative treatment with partial response.