Timeline: The timeline of diagnosis and treatment after admission is shown in Table .
An 81-year-old Japanese woman had been diagnosed with a branch-duct disease IPMN lesion in the pancreas by abdominal computed tomography (CT) in 2015. In March 2017, an abdominal CT examination had showed no significant change in IPMN, but in November 2017, blood examinations found elevated CA19-9 (87 U/mL).
In March 2018, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further examination. CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) found the known branch-duct disease IPMN lesion (12 mm) and confirmed localized pancreatitis in the tail of the pancreas and mild pancreatic duct dilatation (2.2 mm). In April 2018, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) (UE260 Ultrasonic gastrovideoscope; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) revealed a hypoechoic tumor (approximately 7 mm) and local atrophy in the tail of the pancreas. There were no changes in the lesions or other suspicious lesions on CT and MRI scans performed in May 2018.
After admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.4 °C, heart rate was 72 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 112/60 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. The physical examination did not reveal any abnormal findings.
The patient was admitted to our hospital for EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) for the pancreatic tail tumor. Gastroscopy revealed a suspicious 10 mm lesion in the greater curvature of the gastric antrum, which was confirmed as early gastric cancer (Tub1, 10 mm, M, UL-) by magnifying endoscopy with narrow band imaging and EUS, and as group V adenocarcinoma by pathological biopsy [negative for Helicobacter pylori (HP) antibody]. Thus, it met the indications of endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). Colonoscopy revealed no positive findings. Although pancreatic EUS confirmed a 7 mm pancreatic tail tumor, FNA could not be performed despite contrast-enhanced EUS because of its small size and poor reproducibility. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed, and the pancreatic juice was collected four times for cytological examination.
The patient was diagnosed with class III cellular atypia. CA19-9 levels continued to increase. Based on the American College of Gastroenterology clinical guidelines, we suggested surgical treatment, and her family supported the decision. The patient refused pancreatic surgery but agreed to gastric ESD. In February 2019, we attempted EUS-FNA again, as the lesion had enlarged (15 mm). We were able to successfully obtain a pathological diagnosis following puncture, from which the subsequent ex vivo examinations indicated adenocarcinoma class V.
Blood test data on admission are shown in Table . The CA19-9 levels before and after treatment are shown in Figure .
The imaging comparison, pathology, and immunostaining of pancreatic cancer and IPMN are shown in Figure . The endoscopic images, pathological examination, and immunostaining of early gastric cancer are shown in Figure .