An 84-year-old Japanese man was bitten by a Mamushi on the right fifth finger and presented to our emergency department. He had a history of benign prostatic hyperplasia and an overactive bladder. He was taking mirabegron at a dosage of 50 mg/day and had an oxybutynin patch that delivered a dose of 73.5 mg/day. The patient was treated on surgical admission. On the second day of hospitalization, the bite reached Grade 4 (redness and swelling of the whole extremity) . Creatine kinase (CK) level was maximal at 1770 U/L on the fourth day of admission. Cephalantin (10 mg/day), acetate ringer (1000 mL/day), and maintenance fluid (sodium 35 mEq/L, potassium 20 mEq/L, and glucose 4.3% isotonic solution [1000 mL/day]) had been administered since the second day of admission. The total in–out balance had roughly passed zero.
On the eighth day of hospitalization, vomiting occurred. In the early hours of the ninth day of hospitalization, the patient experienced restlessness, and blood tests revealed hyponatremia. The patient was transferred to the department of internal medicine.
At the time of transfer to the department of internal medicine, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: consciousness level of 13 points (E3V4M6) on the Glasgow Coma Scale, blood pressure of 142/79 mmHg, pulse rate of 59 beats/min, respiratory rate of 24 breaths/min, SpO2 of 97% (room air), and body temperature of 37.2 °C in the axilla. Physical examination revealed no rigidity of the neck, no enlarged cervical lymph nodes, and clear respiratory sounds and no heart murmur on chest auscultation. The abdomen was flat and soft with no tenderness. No edema of the lower legs was observed, and tenderness, swelling, and heat were present from the right upper arm to the dorsum of the right hand. The findings in the right upper extremity remained unchanged from those on the previous day.
Table shows the laboratory findings at the time of transfer to the department of internal medicine. Blood tests showed that the CK level was elevated again to 2267 U/L. The serum Na level was 114 mE/L, and serum osmolality was 237 mOsm/L. Urinalysis revealed a urine specific gravity of 1.020, urinary Na level of 195 mEq/L, and urine osmolality of 613 mOsm/L. Despite the hyponatremia, the urine was hypertonic.
Figure shows the clinical course of the patient after admission. We determined that the CK re-elevation was due to hyponatremia. Severe symptomatic hyponatremia was corrected with administration of 3% sodium chloride solution. On the 10th day of admission, the serum Na level improved to 120 mEq/L, and the level of consciousness improved as the serum Na level improved. Since the blood cortisol level was low at 4.0 µg/dL (reference value 4.5–21.11 µg/dL), adrenal insufficiency was suspected, and administration of corticosteroids (dexamethasone 6.6 mg/day, then hydrocortisone 100 mg/day) was initiated on the 10th day of admission. On the 11th day of admission, the 3% sodium chloride solution was discontinued, and on the 15th day of admission, the corticosteroids were discontinued; however, the serum Na level did not decrease. An adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) loading test was performed on the 16th day of admission. Pituitary contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and a corticotropin-releasing hormone / growth hormone-releasing factor / thyrotropin-releasing hormone / luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (CRH/GRF/TRH/LHRH) stimulation test was performed on the 19th and 23rd day of admission, respectively. The results of the ACTH loading test and CRH/GRF/TRH/LHRH stimulation test are shown in Table . The peak blood cortisol levels after the ACTH loading and CRH/GRF/TRH/LHRH stimulation tests were below 18 µg/dL, and the peak ACTH level after the CRH/GRF/TRH/LHRH stimulation test was less than two-folds the basal value; thus, a diagnosis of pituitary adrenal insufficiency was made .
Contrast-enhanced MRI of the pituitary gland is shown in Fig. . The sella turcica was markedly enlarged and filled with cerebrospinal fluid.
After discontinuation of corticosteroids, the hyponatremia did not recur, and the swelling in the right upper extremity improved. The patient was discharged on the 24th day of admission. He visited the outpatient clinic 9 and 16 days after discharge, and there was no hyponatremia relapse. The patient has not experienced hyponatremia in the three years since the Mamushi bite.