A 51-year-old man with a history of atrial fibrillation (AF) presented to the emergency department with acute onset of the left-sided weakness 45 min after his last known well (LNW). Further, anamnesis revealed that in the past 6th month, he did not take oral anticoagulation for his AF. The baseline National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 14, with left hemiplegia, right conjugate eye deviation, dysarthria, and facial paralysis. On initial examination, the patient was afebrile and alert with a Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) of 15, blood pressure was 140/67 mmHg, and his respiratory rate was 20 breaths/ min. In addition to that, his pulse was low, around 36 beats/ min. The electrocardiogram revealed a junctional rhythm. Sulfas atropine and dopamine were administered to treat the bradycardia since the pulse decreased to 20 beats/min and GCS dropped to 11 (E3V3M5). After hemodynamic stabilization, a head non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) was performed (i.e., 2 h after LNW). A head NCCT revealed a hyperdense right middle cerebral artery (MCA) sign, suggesting a hyperacute thrombotic stroke . All the laboratory studies were within a normal limit.
At 4 h after LNW, the patient received IVT using recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (alteplase) (r-tPA). Under General anesthesia, he was taken for temporary pacemaker (TPM) insertion by cardiologist, followed by EVT by our endovascular surgeon. An angiogram of the right internal carotid artery at hour 6 confirmed occlusion of the M1 branch of the right MCA with no collaterals in the territory of the occluded vessel . The first attempt of manual aspiration thrombectomy successfully achieved modified thrombolysis in cerebral infarction 3 revascularization in 6 h 20 min . The occlusive thrombus was all removed using the direct aspiration first pass technique with a catheter aspiration system.
Post-thrombectomy, the patient was still intubated and sedated. During observation in the intensive care unit, he developed an occasional premature ventricular contraction and upside-down blood pressure. Follow-up NCCT within 24 h following thrombectomy revealed petechial hemorrhage on the infarcted area and massive focal brain edema on the right frontotemporoparietal, resulting in a 13-mm midline shift (MLS).
The patient was treated conservatively initially for his brain edema. After being given conservative treatment for 2 days, the patient was not on sedation but still unconscious with GCS of E2V × M5. He developed anisocoria pupils with diameters of 2 mm and 1 mm, on the right and left pupils, respectively. The diagnosis of MBE was made, and the patient was taken for emergent decompressive craniectomy (DC) to release the intracranial pressure.
Two days following DC, the patient was allowed to awaken to the point where a limited neurologic examination was possible and subsequently extubated. He could move all four extremities on command but still had left hemiparesis, and his pupils were isochor. His NIHSS score was 6 for left hemiparesis and dysarthria. Follow-up NCCT was performed 4 days after DC and revealed decreased mass effect to 6 mm MLS. The TPM was changed into permanent pace maker after 7 days of its insertion . The patient was discharged home on hospitalization day 15. The Modified Rankin scale score was four in 1- and 3-month’s follow-up.