A 21-year-old Iranian man presented to the emergency ward of our hospital with 5 days of illness and a history of right upper quadrant abdominal pain, fatigue, fever, icterus, vomiting, and no appetite. He was examined physically, and abdominal tenderness was detected in all four quadrants, and scleral icterus. His blood pressure was normal at 110.70 mmHg and oxygen saturation rate was of 95% on ambient air. Axillary temperature was 38.8 °C. His medical history showed that was being treated with albendasol 800 mg daily for months because of two hydatid cysts in the liver. One of the cysts was located on the dome of liver segment III and the second was on segment VII just over the right kidney . On the CT scan of the liver, two cysts were observed in segment II and VII with septation, of which one was intact and the other one had ruptured. After 2 weeks on albendazole, fatigue, fever, icterus, and vomiting were present, which was the complication of albendazole since the values for all liver function tests had increased.
Laboratory findings revealed increased white blood count (WBC; 17,000 K/uL, reference value 4–10.8 K/uL) and elevated liver enzymes (aspartate transaminase [AST] 120 U/L [reference value 11–72 U/L]; alanine transaminase [ALT] 83 IU/L [reference value < 40 IU/L]; alkaline phosphatase [ALP] 1250 IU/L; total bilirubin 9 mg/dL [reference value < 1.2 mg/dL]). The direct and indirect bilirubin measurements were 4 and 5 mg/dL, respectively, C-reactive protein concentration was 11 U/mL (reference value 0–0.5 mg/dL, amylase 320), and lipase was 180 IU/L. A prothrombin time of 42 s (reference value 9.6–14.2 s), activated partial thromboplastin time of 48 s (reference value, 20–38 s), and international normalized ratio of 5 (reference value 0.85–1.2) were also detected in the tests. The remaining laboratory test results were within normal limits. These test results show hepatitis due to albendazole toxicity.
In addition to considering these test findings and the patient’s ailments, we also used abdominal U/S to arrive at the diagnosis. Abdominal U/S revealed intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile duct dilation; the gallbladder was dilated but had normal wall thickening. Large intact hepatic cysts were observed in segment IV and another one were in segment II with detached laminated membranes, possibly indicative of a ruptured or complicated liver cyst. An intravenous contrast CT scan was performed for more evaluation and revealed unilocular hepatic cysts with segregated laminated membranes that corresponded to hepatic hydatid cysts on segment II and other unilocular intact hepatic cysts on segment IV . Further observations indicated intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary duct dilation .
The reason for bile duct dilatation was investigated by MRCP, which showed the rupture of cysts of segment II into the intrahepatic ducts, common hepatic duct, and common biliary duct (CBD). In addition, laminated membranes of the hydatid cyst and daughter cysts were found in the CBD, causing the obstruction .
The patient underwent laparotomy due peritonitis resulting from the rupture of the liver hydatid cyst in the abdominal cavity with a right extensive subcostal incision. During exploration, 500 cc bile fluid was aspirated from the abdominal cavity and sent for analysis. The pancreas was inflamed, and its appearance showed pancreatitis. The liver was carefully inspected; one collapsed infected cystic lesion with a small perforation was present in segment II just over the right kidney.
Our approach for surgical treatment began with the aspiration and evacuation of the cyst contents. To explore for any purulent or bile contents, cystostomy and irrigation were performed. Also, fibrotic tissue around the cyst was resected and the site of bile leakage ligated with a non-absorbable suture. Capitonnage, omentoplasty, and insertion of a Foley catheter inside the incision were performed to remove the residual cyst and prevent recurrence. The gall bladder was highly dilated and was full of a white mucous fluid with obstruction of the cystic duct; choledocotomy and drainage of the common bile duct were performed with saline irrigation. Moreover, daughter cysts were removed from the common bile duct and intrabiliary ducts. At the end of the surgery, a T-tube was inserted in the site of choledocotomy and a corrugated drain was fixed. During exploration, another intact cyst was found in segment VII; this cyst was aspirated and the laminated membrane removed; the cavity was then irrigated with betadine 10%. Pricystectomy was performed, and a Foley catheter 18 was put into the remnant cavity and fixed to the abdominal wall. Finally, the CBD (diameter 30 mm) was examined; it was full of laminated membrane, daughter cysts, and debrides of the hydrated cyst. After extraction of all materials from the CBD and subsequent irrigation, a T-tube was placed in the CBD and fixed into place. A Penrose drain was placed in the abdominal cavity, and then the abdomen was closed.
Three days after surgery, the levels of bilirubin, amylase, lipase, AST, ALT, WBC, and ALP had decreased. The patient’s general condition (fever and appetite) was good, and he was discharged 10-day post-operation with good condition. Trans-T-tube cholangiography was performed 20 days after the operation with good results and was then removed