54-year-old male who presented with acute coronary syndrome, requiring advanced airway management on arrival in the emergency department with tenecteplase 0.5 mg/kg given with an ischaemic time of 1 hour 40 minutes, without reperfusion.

The patient had two episodes of pulseless tachyarrhythmias that required three defibrillation events of 200 J, advanced cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and intravenous amiodarone 300 mg for return of spontaneous circulation. The total time of cardiac arrest was approximately 11 minutes. In the rescue coronary angiography, a medicated stent was placed in the anterior descending artery and an unmedicated stent in the first diagonal artery, final flow TIMI 3, Blush 3. The patient was admitted to the coronary care unit (CCU) with deep sedation, mechanical ventilation, cardiogenic shock, and a SOFA score of 7 points.

The patient was extubated 6 days after admission, but developed post-extubation delirium, stridor and iatrogenic pneumothorax, which required endotracheal tube placement and reintubation 48 hours later. During this period, he received drugs associated with myositis, such as haloperidol 5 mg intravenous in intermittent doses (accumulated 30 mg), olanzapine (accumulated 20 mg) and hydrocortisone (200 mg). After reintubation, the patient developed septic shock, so he was given supportive treatment and started with vancomycin and meropenem at full doses (with subsequent adjustment to renal function) for six days as treatment for nosocomial pneumonia. Atorvastatin was continued enterally at a dose of 80 mg every 24 hours and an elevation of the serum level of creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was detected that exceeded 10 times its upper normal limit two days after reintubation (10 days after admission to the CCU), reaching its maximum peak five days later (at which time atorvastatin was discontinued) and having a plateau for three more days. The total time of use of atorvastatin (80 mg every 24 hours) was 15 days.

The oliguric LRA KDIGO 3 reached its maximum level of azoates eight days after re-intubation.

A catheter for haemodialysis was placed, two intermittent sessions were given and extubation was successful six days after the start of renal replacement therapy. A biopsy of the right deltoid muscle was performed at the peak of the elevation of muscle enzymes and, finally, the patient was discharged three days later to the general hospital room.
