A 68-year-old Caucasian man with glaucoma who was receiving chronic therapy was referred to our institution with a diagnosis of post-operative endophthalmitis in the left eye. The patient had inflammation in the left eye that had started a few days earlier and was associated with impaired vision. Two weeks before presentation he had undergone cataract surgery combined with a glaucoma shunt implant at another eye clinic.
Upon presentation, he had a corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) of 20/80 in the right eye, a cortical and nuclear cataract and filtering bleb that had developed after previous glaucoma surgery. Upon presentation, he had a corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) of 20/80 in the right eye, a filtering bleb and a cortical and nuclear cataract developed after the previous glaucoma surgery performed two years earlier.
A glaucomatous optic disc excavation was present and the visual field was significantly narrowed in the inferior nasal area. He was receiving therapy with bimatoprost eyedrops in this eye.
His CDVA in the left eye was 1/200, and he showed marked conjunctival injection, corneal edema, inflammatory aqueous cells (Tyndall 3+) and fibrin on the front face of the intra-ocular lens (IOL). The glaucoma shunt implant (EX-PRESS® Glaucoma Filtration Device; Alcon Laboratories, Fort Worth, TX, USA) was in site with a non-inflamed filtering bleb. There was dense vitritis, and it was impossible to visualize the retina and the optic disc. A 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) was performed using a CONSTELLATION® vitrectomy system (Alcon Surgical, Tokyo, Japan), and infusion fluid (BSS PLUS®; Alcon Surgical) was devoid of any antibiotics. At a site 4.0mm from and parallel to the limbus, three trocars were inserted at a 30° angle (one in the inferonasal area for the infusion), creating tunnel sclerotomies. Initially, a vitreous sample (with the infusion channel closed) was collected using the vitrectome, then the remaining vitrectomy with hyaloid removal was completed. The vitreous cavity was filled with silicone oil, and ceftazidime and vancomycin were injected intravitreally. All the sclerotomies were sutured because of the risk of leakage.
During surgery, the retina appeared to be covered by an abundant fibrinous exudation. After surgery, the patient’s CDVA was 1/30, and therapy with topical vancomycin (50mg/ml) and ceftazidime (50mg/ml) eyedrops six times per day was started. The IOL and the glaucoma valve were left in place because the patient strongly expressed this desire, given the low visual acuity of the other eye. Cultures taken from the aqueous and vitreous were negative, and his early post-operative course was uneventful and without signs of significant inflammation, except for a thin layer of fibrin on the front face of the IOL. He was discharged some five days after surgery, and he continued the therapy at home and returned for scheduled checks. During these checks, his CDVA was 1/20 and there were no signs of inflammation in the anterior chamber; however, the retina could not be easily evaluated, owing to fibrin plaque on the surface of the IOL.Forty-five days after this surgery, he experienced acute, increasing pain in the left eye with severe inflammation, corneal edema, anterior chamber inflammation (Tyndall 4+) and hypopyon occupying three-fourths of the anterior chamber . He underwent a new anterior chamber washout with aqueous sample and a vitrectomy with silicone oil tamponade.
Two days after his second surgery, an increase of intra-ocular pressure was observed (treated with topical and systemic therapy) associated with the formation of a thick white plaque on the anterior surface of the IOL that prevented observation of the retina and the optic disc. His CDVA at this time was 1/200. Systemic therapy with fluconazole (400mg/day) and amphotericin B 0.15% eyedrops (six times per day) was started, which led to progressive reduction of the exudation in the anterior chamber. One week later, Acremonium falciforme species were identified in cultures obtained from samples, and the systemic therapy was switched to intravenous voriconazole 6mg/kg every 12 hours for the first day, then 4mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours for 10 days, followed by 200mg orally every 12 hours. This therapy led to a further reduction of the exudation in the anterior chamber. After seven days, it was possible to evaluate the red reflex of the retina, which revealed a slight improvement of CDVA to 1/60.Ten days later, the patient presented with liver function test impairment and sharp pain in the left orbital region that radiated to the same side of the head due to extension of the inflammatory process to the orbit and peri-orbital tissue. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed that there was evidence of left orbital inflammation with inhomogeneous appearance of the eyeball and peri-bulbar inflammation, which was more evident at the lacrimal gland . A faint hyperintensity of the optic nerve in T2 and slight signs of inflammation at the apex of the left orbital cavity were reported . At this time, therapy with systemic diclofenac and oral prednisone (25mg twice daily for two weeks) was started, which led to significant pain reduction. The condition of the left eye showed a gradual further improvement, but it was necessary to stop the systemic antifungal therapy after 22 days because of liver toxicity. The topical drugs were continued unchanged. One month later, unremitting pain in the orbital region reappeared; therefore, systemic antifungal therapy (voriconazole 6mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours for the first day, then 4mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours for 10 days, followed by 200mg orally every 12 hours) combined with pain therapy (acetaminophen 500mg/, codeine 30mg/day and gabapentin 300mg/day) was restarted, which led to progressive reduction of the patient’s ocular and peri-orbital pain.Immediately after this therapy, the patient showed significant ingravescent neurologic symptoms with visual hallucinations, postural instability, slight ideomotor slowdown, retropulsion and dynamic ataxia. Brain MRI excluded vascular lesions, but this examination highlighted enhancement of the left temporal muscle associated with ectasia of contiguous vessels, it was an evident index of inflammation . His electroencephalography results were normal, and lumbar puncture was performed to exclude infectious processes of the brain. Cerebrospinal fluid was clear, but showed albumin cytological dissociation. Once infectious or inflammatory processes were excluded, the cause of neurological symptoms was attributed to a toxic effect induced by the recently introduced analgesic therapy. After one week, we observed an improvement in neurologic symptomatology, but it was indispensable to maintain therapy with paracetamol, codeine and gabapentin. During this period, while the patient’s left eye began to show signs of phthisis, CDVA in his right eye decreased to 20/100 due to worsening of the cataract that was associated with progressive impairment of the optic nerve.After three months, voriconazole was suspended because of an increase in the cholestasis and hepatic cytolysis indices, but topical therapy was maintained for nine months. During this period, the patient was observed with close follow-up. He had no more signs of ocular inflammation; however, the white plaque on the anterior surface of the IOL did not disappear , and his pain was controlled with decreasing doses of analgesic oral therapy. The left eye’s condition deteriorated slowly into phthisis.