A 54-year-old male presented with numbness and edema in bilateral lower limbs in 2018 and then underwent positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) at a hospital, indicating intense metabolic activity in multiple bones throughout the body. However, a definitive diagnosis wasn’t made. Subsequently, he experienced progressive numbness and edema as well as developed weakness in bilateral lower limbs for which he intermittently received Chinese medicine. Unfortunately, symptoms didn’t improve. In Sep 2022, he underwent a chest CT at another hospital, showing bilateral mild pleural effusion. For further diagnosis and treatment, he was admitted to the Rheumatology and Immunology Department of our hospital in Oct 2022. Since the disease’s onset, he has been frustrated and lethargic and has a normal diet and sleep, regular voiding, and no significant weight changes. Meanwhile, he denied a history of chronic diseases, tobacco and alcohol use, food and drug allergies, and genetic disorders.
The patient’s vital signs were stable. He had no signs of jaundice, anemia, or cyanosis. His bilateral breasts were significantly protruded . Besides, fresh red hemangiomas were scattered throughout the anterior portion of his chest and back, with a maximum size of about 0.40 cm×0.50 cm . There were no apparent abnormalities in the cardiopulmonary and abdominal examination. However, pitting edema was noted in bilateral lower limbs . Neurological examination revealed normal cranial nerves and no cerebellar signs. However, there was diminished power in the bilateral lower limbs (4/5) by the Manual Muscle Test (MMT). Physiological reflexes were present and pathological reflexes were negative. Deep and shallow sensations were weakened below the bilateral ankle joints. The upper limb examination was unremarkable.
His complete blood count, clotting test, and blood glucose were generally normal. IgA, IgG, IgM, and IgE were also within the normal range. His serum/urine PEP and IFE showed negative M-protein. The levels of serum-free light chains κ and λ were increased, while the ratio of κ/λ in serum was normal . The levels of serum VEGF were elevated. FT3 and FT4 were decreased, and TSH was increased. Sex hormone measurement revealed increased prolactin (PRL), follicular estrogen (FSH), estradiol (E2), and progestational hormone (P) but normal testosterone (T). ACTH was increased and cortisol (COR) at 8:00 AM was decreased. Rheumatism-related indicators, hepatitis B and C, syphilis, and AIDS serology tests were all negative. The detailed results are shown in Table .
The thyroid ultrasound showed two small hypoechoic nodes in the lower pole of the right lobe of the thyroid gland, the larger being 0.47 cm×0.29 cm. Echocardiography revealed bilateral atrial enlargement and pericardial effusion (small amount). Abdominal ultrasound displayed splenomegaly with an intercostal thickness of about 5.70 cm and a length of 16.30 cm. Chest and abdominal CT revealed enlarged lymph nodes in the bilateral axilla and mediastinum (the largest with a diameter of approximately 1.10 cm), as well as small amounts of pleural effusion and pericardial effusion. Bone scintigraphy with [99mTc]-methylene-diphosphonate (MDP) single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography (SPECT/CT) exhibited a symmetrical bilateral skeleton and mixed sclerotic and lytic bone lesions in bilateral ilium, vertebral bodies, and ribs. .
BM smears revealed that the proportion and morphology of red blood cells, granulocytes, and megakaryocytes were generally normal, and mature PCs constituted 2% of cells. Flow cytometry of BM specimens showed no significant evidence of monoclonal PCs and other abnormal cells (immunophenotypic abnormalities). Besides, the karyotype revealed normal male chromosomes. BM biopsy of the posterior superior iliac spine displayed no increase in the abundance of immature cells, lymphocytes, and PCs .
He experienced a CT-guided coarse needle puncture of the posterior superior iliac spine. Pathological assessments indicated no increase in the number of PCs and lymphocytes. The results of immunohistochemistry indicated CK (-), LCA (+), langerin (-), CD68 (+), CD163 (+), CD1α (-), S100 (-), Ki-67 (80% +), CD138 (-), and CD56 (-) .
The classic symptoms of MM are elevated calcium level, renal insufficiency, anemia, and lytic bone lesions, which were not found in our case. MM doesn’t generally present with peripheral neuropathy, organ enlargement, multiple endocrine gland abnormalities, skin-specific changes, sclerotic bone lesions, and increased VEGF levels, which all were present in our patient. In addition, the proportion of monoclonal PCs in the BM of MM should be at least 10%, while monoclonal PCs in the BM of our patient were not present.
The CD is clinically divided into focal and multicenter types. The former is more common in young people. Multicentric Castleman disease (MCD) also presents with lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, rash, and cavity effusion. However, it is usually not accompanied by peripheral neuropathy, sclerotic bone lesions, endocrinopathy, and increased VEGF levels, which were present in our patient. Patients with MCD are prone to infection and lymphoma. MCD usually has an aggressive course and poor overall survival (OS). However, the onset of this patient is insidious, and the course is chronic and stable, just like POEMS syndrome.
Both GBS and POEMS syndrome can lead to motor neuron paralysis, but GBS is not accompanied by visceral enlargement, endocrinopathy, skin changes, bone lesions, and increased VEGF, which all were present in our patient.
POEMS syndrome and CIDP affect the motor and sensory nerves, slowing nerve conduction. However, CIDP doesn’t present with organ enlargement, endocrinopathy, M-protein deposition, skin changes, bone lesions, or increased VEGF levels, most of which were present in our patient.
Although the M-protein of the patient was undetectable, he had peripheral neuropathies in bilateral lower limbs. Additionally, he showed signs of male breast development and characteristic hemangiomas in the anterior chest and back. Hormonal tests revealed hypothyroidism, hyperprolactinemia, hypoadrenalism, and feminization. More importantly, he had an increased VEGF level, and SPECT/CT revealed sclerotic bone lesions. Ultrasound and CT showed enlargement of lymph nodes, splenomegaly, and extravascular volume overload. After excluding the disorders that are easily confused with POEMS syndrome, we proposed the diagnosis of POEMS syndrome with undetectable M-protein.
Then the patient was treated with the RD regimen (25 mg/d of lenalidomide capsules on days 1–21, 20 mg/d of dexamethasone tablets on days 1–4 and 8–11, each cycle is 28 days). At the same time, he received levothyroxine sodium tablets (25 µg/d) to improve hypothyroidism and aspirin to prevent coagulation. Nearly 6 months after receiving the treatment, the numbness and edema of bilateral lower limbs significantly improved, and the color of skin hemangiomas altered from fresh red to dark red. Elevate serum VEGF and free light chains have returned to normal. All indicators were within the normal range on the thyroid, adrenal gland, and sex hormone tests. Imaging examinations exhibited normal volume of lymph nodes, normal size and morphology of the liver and spleen, and no signs of extravascular volume overload. Bone X-rays still indicated high-density shadows in multiple bone areas throughout the body. Thus, we will continue the follow-up.