A 47-year-old obese Caucasian woman with a history of thyroid cancer, hypothyroidism, depression, and tobacco abuse presented to the hospital with acute chest discomfort. She described a substernal, diffuse, nonradiating heavy sensation over her chest that was a 7 out of 10 in severity. She was diaphoretic and nauseous, and reported no prior similar episodes.
Her social history was significant for a 20-pack-year smoking history and occasional alcohol use. She works as a real estate agent, does not exercise, and is relatively sedentary most of the day. Our patient denied any history of toxic exposure or recent travel. Her family history was significant for cardiovascular disease in her grandfather, who died in his 70s from a heart attack. Home medications included oral levothyroxine (137 mcg once daily) for hypothyroidism and oral bupropion (150 mg once daily) for depression. She denied any symptoms of claudication and her review of systems was noncontributory.
Her vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 102/59 mm Hg, a heart rate of 49 beats/minute, temperature of 98.6 °F, and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. Her body mass index (BMI) was 37 kg/m2. Our patient appeared to be in moderate distress. A neck examination showed no lymphadenopathy, jugular venous distension, or carotid bruits. On cardiac examination, she had a slow heart rate, regular rhythm, normal S1 and S2, and no murmurs, rubs, or gallops were appreciated. Her breath sounds were clear and symmetric bilaterally without any crackles, wheezes, or rhonchi. Her abdomen was soft, nondistended, and nontender with normal bowel sounds and no organomegaly. Extremities showed no lesions, rashes, or lower extremity edema. Radial pulses were 2+ bilaterally, femoral pulses 2+ bilaterally, posterior tibial pulses 1+ bilaterally, and dorsalis pedis pulses absent bilaterally. On neurological examination, our patient was awake, alert, and oriented to person, place, and time. Her cranial nerves 2–12 were grossly intact, motor strength was 5 out of 5 throughout, sensation was intact to soft touch and pinprick throughout, and her gait was not assessed.
An electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia with ST-elevation in inferior leads II, III, and aVF, as well as reciprocal ST depression in leads I and aVL – suggestive of an acute inferior STEMI. Our patient was given intravenous heparin (5000 mg), oral aspirin (325 mg), and oral ticagrelor (180 mg), and immediately taken to the catheterization laboratory.
Laboratory workup revealed a white blood cell count of 12,300/mm3, hemoglobin of 14.4 g/dL, and platelet count of 262,000/mm3. A chemistry panel showed a sodium of 139 mmol/L, potassium of 4.4 mmol/L, carbon dioxide of 15 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 13 mg/dL, creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL, international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.18, and troponin of < 0.012 ng/mL. Liver function tests were within normal limits.
Left heart catheterization and coronary angiography were performed via the right femoral artery. There was difficulty obtaining the vascular sheaths by the right femoral artery, which was likely from preexisting peripheral vascular disease. Left ventriculography showed inferior hypokinesis with an ejection fraction of approximately 55%. Coronary arteriography revealed a 60% proximal diagonal branch lesion. The right coronary artery was subtotally occluded in its mid-portion . A 3.0 × 28 mm Promus Premier stent was deployed with significant improvement in blood flow . Our patient suddenly became uncomfortable and reported severe bilateral lower extremity pain. Her femoral pulses were diminished and could not be palpated in either leg – even with Doppler. Both lower extremities were pale and cool to touch. An aortography showed no dye flow below L1–L2. The vascular surgeon was called and our patient was immediately taken to the operating room.
A distal aortogram revealed 95% stenosis with an apple core-like lesion in the mid-abdominal aorta . An Epic self-expanding stent was deployed, resulting in significant improvement of blood flow through the distal aortic segment . The iliac artery was small but patent. After stent placement, our patient’s pain resolved and distal pulses became palpable. The rest of the hospital course was unremarkable and our patient was discharged 48 hours after the procedure. Our patient remained asymptomatic on follow-up 6 months later. Computed tomography (CT) angiography with aortic runoff showed the stented segment of the abdominal aorta remained widely patent without evidence of significant stenosis or occlusion .