A 26-year-old Chinese man with a chief complaint of a mass in the right submandibular region for the past 1 year was admitted to Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Hunan, China. He had no significant past medical or family history. Routine physical and laboratory examinations were performed. Ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic mass measuring approximately 28 mm × 18 mm in the right submandibular region, with an irregular shape and clear boundary . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no other lesion. There was no evidence of metastasis to the local or distant organs. Hence, lumpectomy was performed under general anesthesia.
Histological examination showed sheets, cords, and nests of small round cells separated focally by desmoplastic stroma . Under higher magnification, tumor cells showed round to oval hyperchromatic nuclei with an increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and inconspicuous nucleoli. The cytoplasm of the tumor cells was scanty with indistinct cytoplasmic borders . Mitotic activity and individual cell necrosis were common. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed using formalin-fixed paraffin embedded sections from representative tumor blocks and the antibodies listed in Table . Immunohistochemical results indicated the multi-directional differentiation of tumor cells. The immunohistochemistry results were as follows: desmin (+) , FLI-1 (+), CD99 (+), E-cadherinD (+), chromogranin-A (+), neuron-specific enolase (+), vimentin (+) , pan-cytokeratin (+), epithelial membrane antigen (+), CD56 (+), synaptophysin (weakly positive [+/−]), NKX2.2 (−), WT1 (−), myogenin (−), and S-100 (−). Moreover, the Ki-67 proliferation index was estimated as 50%. The tumor cells were negative for Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNA on fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The FISH analysis with a break-apart probe proved that there was EWSR1 gene spilt in the neoplastic cells . However, EWSR1-WT1 fusion detection by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was not performed owing to certain limitations. Based on the above findings, primary lesions in the abdominal cavity and pelvic cavity were excluded, and a final diagnosis of primary DSRCT in the submandibular gland was made.
Comprehensive anti-tumor therapy mainly based on chemotherapy and radiotherapy was first proposed. However, synchronous chemotherapy was not performed owing to the risk of bone marrow suppression. Therefore, cyclophosphamide combined with doxorubicin and vincristine chemotherapy was used for maintenance treatment. The patient is currently alive and well with no evidence of tumor recurrence.