A 28-year-old woman was transported to the emergency unit of Ayatollah Rouhani Hospital in Babol in January 2013 due to generalized muscle paralysis and respiratory failure. The patient underwent intubation and was transferred to the medical intensive care unit.
The patient had a history of severe headache and fever was reported a week ago. She was reported to have had dysphagia, dyspnea, ptosis, diplopia, dry mouth and weakness of extremities 12 hours before respiratory failure. Weakness of muscle initially occurred in the upper extremities and then in the lower extremities. Vital signs include: blood pressure: 130/80 mmHg, heart rate: 120/min, respiratory rate: 12 (on ventilator without any trigger and assist), temperature: 38.2 oC and saturation of peripheral oxygen: 100%.
On examination, the patient was alert; pupils were bilaterally midriatic but with absent corneal reflux absent. There was no papilledema seen using an ophthalmoscope. Swallowing reflex was absent.
The patient’s extremities were quadriplegic and are areflexic in all four limbs. There was not any movement on the eyelids, cheeks, chin, head and neck. Facial and frontal folds were completely omitted . She had mild abdominal distension.
On respiratory system, the patient had apnea and on ventilator with ACMV, TV=550 ml, RR: 12 / min, PEEP = 3 Cm / H2O, Fio2= 50% did not need any assistance (, ). Initial tests: WBC: 13500 μL, PLT: 23600 μL , Hb: 11.7 gr/dl, HCT: 34.8%, Bun: 13 mg/dl, Cr: 0.6 mg/dl, BS: 127 mg/dl, Ferritin: 196 ng/mL, Na: 131 mEq/L, K: 3.7 mEq/L, CL: 97 mEq/L, Mg: 1.8 mEq/L, SGOT: 17 U/L, SGPT: 10 U/L, ALP: 176 U/L, PT: 13.2, PTT: 35, INR: 1.3, urine analysis and urine culture were normal.
Biochemical analysis of CSF was normal. In addition, the culture was negative; PCR was negative for mycobacterium tuberculosis. Qualitive test for HSV-I and HSV -2 are negative. Chest x-ray and brain CT scan was normal .
There were pansinusitis in the paranasal sinus scan .
Parameters of arterial blood gases in the first hour after the start of mechanical ventilation were, PH: 7.33, PCo2: 47 mmHg, PO2: 119 mmHg, HCO3: 23.7 mmol/L. Arterial blood gas was checked at least once daily during hospitalization and if necessary, was corrected. Due to the complete relaxation, Botulinum antitoxin was administered. Other treatments include antibiotics for acute sinusitis (amikacin 1 g IV daily, vancomycin 1 g intravenously twice daily, meropenem (IV) 1 g every 8 hours) pantoprazole 40 mg IV twice daily, subcutaneous enoxaparin 40 mg daily. Neurology consultation revealed bilateral exophthalmos, chemosis, proptosis, and lack of vertical and horizontal movement of both eyes. The neurologist diagnosed venous thrombosis based on clinical examination and then started subcutaneous enoxaparin 40 mg twice per day, dexamethasone 8 mg IV every 8 hours and antibiotics. Na, K, Mg, Ca, P were checked in the the ICU, and if necessary, were corrected.
On the seventh day of hospitalization, functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) was carried out and purulent sinus drainage was evacuated .
On the ninth day, the first signs of spontaneous respiration of the brain stem (MIP=-2 cm / H20) was observed. Then, the patient's spontaneous breathing was assisted by ventilator. A tracheostomy was performed on the thirteenth day. Then, gradually the movement of the upper limbs (15th day), chest wall (20th day), abdomen (25th day) and the lower extremities (32nd day) were restored.
On the 37th day of admission, the patient tolerated the mode of pressure support ventilation (PSV=14 cm/ H2o). The pressure level gradually decreased based on the patient’s respiratory rate and tidal volume (6, 7). On the 41st day, the patient was completely disconnected from the ventilator and better tolerated T-tube with 5 liters oxygen per minute. Then after 72 hours (44th day), tracheostomy tube was removed. Arterial blood gases were normal during mechanical ventilation. Joint movement and muscular strength gradually were restored after two months of therapy and became relatively normal. After 6 months, muscle strength was completely normal. For now, the patient’s activity and function of other organs are normal.