A 64-year old female presented to the emergency department with sharp retrosternal pain and progressive dyspnea. She had a medical history of coronary artery disease, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, rheumatic mitral valve (MV) disease and stroke with residual left-sided hemiplegia. Transesophageal Echocardiography (TEE) revealed severe MV stenosis (MV area 0.9 cm2 [normal >1cm2]), mild mitral regurgitation (MR), no vegetations, minimal leaflet motion with pronounced thickening, extensive valvular calcification and minimal thickening of the sub-valvular apparatus (Wilkins score 14), no thrombus in the left atrial appendage and preserved left ventricular systolic function.
Left heart catheterization revealed a non-obstructive coronary artery disease. Right heart catheterization (RHC) revealed a mean PAP of 71 mmHg and a PCWP of 15 mmHg (Transpulmonary Pressure Gradient [TPG] of 51 mmHg). Given the degree of her PH and rest of her co-morbidities (Society of Thoracic Surgeons’ Surgical mortality risk 31%), a multidisciplinary team approach consisting on advanced heart failure, cardiac surgery, intensive care and cardiac anesthesia team reached the consensus that the patient was not an appropriate candidate for surgical mitral valve replacement, therefore the decision was to perform a percutaneous mitral balloon valvuloplasty (PMBV) in the cardiac catheterization under general anesthesia.
The patient was brought to the cardiac catheterization suite, underwent uneventful pre-procedure invasive lines placement (radial arterial line and right internal jugular vein introducer) and induction of general anesthesia with endotracheal tube placement. RHC demonstrated a mean PAP of 61 mmHg and a left atrial pressure of 30 mmHg. TEE revealed a severely dilated right ventricle and MV area of 0.9cm2. Cardiac index by Fick method was 1.97 L/min. Balloon dilation of the MV was performed, improving the effective orifice area to 1.3 cm2, however complicated by severe MR, secondary to a ruptured MV chordae tendineae . The cardiothoracic team was emergently consulted. Once again, the decision was that the patient would not tolerate undergo an emergent mitral valve replacement given her severe PH and other co-morbidities, therefore medical management would be the preferred approach in her case.
After discussion with the cardiology team, the patient was extubated and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with stable hemodynamics (mean systemic arterial pressure 72 mmHg), unchanged PAP, and no signs of pulmonary edema. A pulmonary artery catheter was placed through the existing right internal jugular introducer.
Overnight, she developed systemic hypotension, requiring vasopressors (vasopressin), with the goal to increase the systemic pressures above the PAP, and inodilators (milrinone), with the goal to decrease the PAP. Cardiac output was borderline low at 3.8 l/minute. Mechanical support in the form of an intra-aortic balloon pump was placed to attempt decrease the MR severity and improve the cardiac output. The new severe MR further exacerbated her PH, which converted into a supra-systemic PH .
Right ventricular support was initiated in the form of pulmonary vasodilators (intravenous epoprostenol − 2 ng/kg/min- and inhaled nitric oxide − 40 parts per minute- via high flow nasal cannula) and endothelin receptor antagonists (macitentan 10 mg orally, once a day). Remarkably, the patient’s pulmonary mechanics and oxygenation were preserved. At this point, the patient was managed mostly medically. Aggressive diuresis was added to the above-mentioned treatment. Eventually, given a recalcitrant response to maximal medical therapy, the patient and her family opted for hospice care and comfort measures.