A 72-year-old man was admitted with shortness of breath for more than 1 year after the activity and then had hemoptysis for 1 week. The patient has a history of dermatophytosis for 4 years and never-treated, smoking more than 20 years cigarettes 3 per day and quitting smoking for 6 months, drinking for more than 10 years. On physical examination, her bilateral zygomatic and lips had cyanosis, hepatic jugular venous reflux sign was positive. Mild systolic murmur of grade 2/6 could be heard in the auscultation area of pulmonary valve and peripheral oxygen saturation was 97% while breathing ambient air. Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography showed a solid mass was detected at the pulmonary valve orifice, showing moderate-to-strong echo. Its outline was clear, and the internal echo was uniform, with the size of about 57mm × 36mm. It was attached to the pulmonary valve orifice, part of which was located in the right ventricular outflow tract, and part in the main pulmonary artery. There was no obvious motion, causing obvious stenosis of the pulmonary valve orifice . The right atrium and right ventricle were enlarged, and the interventricular septum shifted to the left ventricle, showing “D” sign . Color Doppler flow imaging showed moderate regurgitation in tricuspid valve with regurgitation area of 8.8cm2 , regurgitation velocity of 420 cm/s and PG of 70 mmHg . Computed tomography angiography (CTA) findings of superior vena cava: right ventricular and the root of pulmonary artery has low-density imaging, considering that it is thrombosis, neoplastic lesions are not excluded . The patient underwent surgery, which showed pulmonary valve has solid occupying lesions, pale yellow, soft, nonenveloped, wrapping of the pulmonary valve leaflet, adhesion of the posterior wall of pulmonary valve, clipping the mass along the posterior wall of the pulmonary valve, the size of the mass is about 6.0cm × 4.5 cm . Cardiac surgeons explored that the posterior wall is very thin, fresh autologous pericardium to reconstruct the pulmonary valve. Continuous observation intraoperative by transoesophageal echocardiography. Postoperative transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated no obvious abnormalities in the pulmonary arteries. Doppler examination showed a maximum flow velocity of 110 cm/s; color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) displayed there was no stenosis in the pulmonary arteries. The final pathological diagnosis is Pulmonary artery endometrial sarcoma . The lesions presented three regions under the microscope: including necrotic regions, sparse region and intensive areas. Tumor cells grow in solid neoplasm, invade from pulmonary artery intima to adventitia, most of the tumor cells are spindle cells, it is very obvious in heteromorphism. Collagen presents predominantly in the interstitial matrix, also bone matrix visible, nuclear compartmentalization and necroptosis is frequent. An immunohistochemical analysis showed that CD vimentin-positive and α-smooth muscle actin-positive, desmin-negative, CD34-negative, CD31-negative, F8-negative, Stat6-negative, Ki67(+ 10%), S100-negative, SOX10-negative, TLE1-negative, CK-negative, EMA-negative. A further treatment for this patient after cardiac surgery was carried on in the cardiac intensive care. Persistent hypoxemia could not correct after giving various intravenous drugs. The patient died in the fifth day after cardiac surgery.