A 35-year-old woman diagnosed to have echocardiographic-proven chronic rheumatic heart disease (severe mitral stenosis with pulmonary hypertension) for the past 25 years. She had undergone percutaneous balloon mitral valvotomy (PBMV) 6 weeks previously.The left atrial thrombus was detected after the procedure and she started warfarin 5 mg, po, daily for 4 weeks and escalated to 7.5mg po daily to meet desired INR.
On her day of presentation to Emergency Medical OPD, she had a severe headache and repeated episodes of vomiting of ingested matter of 1 day duration. She gave recent history of nasal bleeding, and stopped warfarin by herself 3 days ago. She gave history of fever, malaise and generalized weakness of 1 week duration.
On initial clinical evaluation, vital signs were within normal limits and stable. She had no pallor of conjunctivae and had wet buccal mucosa. On cardiovascular examination, she had accentuated P2, mid-diastolic and pan-systolic murmur at mitral area, but no summation gallop. No cranial nerve palsy, no motor or sensory deficit, and meningeal irritation signs were negative. Findings in other systems were unremarkable. Diagnoses of chronic rheumatic heart disease (mitral valve disease with pulmonary hypertension), PBMV, left atrial thrombus, pyogenic meningitis R/o subarachnoid hemorrhage were made.
Laboratory values revealed white blood cell count (wbc) =25,000/µL (neutrophil count=85%, lymphocyte count=10%), hemoglobin (hgb)=12gm/dl, Platelets=350,000/µL. Liver function tests (LFTs) and renal function tests (RFTs) were within normal values. Blood culture was taken, but no growth at first, second or seventh day of incubation. Coagulation profiles showed prothrombin time (PT)=35 sec (normal value=11–13 sec), partial thromboplastin time (PTT)=53 sec (normal value=22–35 sec) and international normalized ratio (INR)=2.5 (normal value=0.8–1.4) . A lumbar puncture was deferred due to higher INR value. Electrocardiography (ECG) tracing showed P-mitrale, right bundle branch block (RBBB), and ST depression and inverted T wave at V1-V3, suggestive of left atrial enlargement and right ventricular strain. Trans-thoracic echocardiography revealed moderate mitral stenosis, mild mitral regurgitation, and severe pulmonary hypertension. No vegetation or thrombus was seen. She was initiated with Ceftriaxone 2gm, IV, twice daily and Vancomycin 1 gm, IV, twice daily, and warfarin was already discontinued.
On the third day of admission, she developed sudden onset, frequent tonic-clonic convulsive episodes with subsequent loss of consciousness. On physical examination, blood pressure (BP)=130/90 mmhg, pulse rate (PR)=116 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate (RR)=32 breaths per minute (bpm), temperature (T0)=38.6 0c. There was transmitted sound all over the chest. A neurological examination revealed Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) of 8/15 (E2, M4, V2). Both eyes deviated to the left side. Pupils were mid-sized, but poorly reactive to light. She withdrew to painful stimuli. Meningeal irritation signs were negative. Diagnosis of status epilepticus secondary to intracranial hemorrhage due to warfarin toxicity was made after non-contrast brain CT scan revealed left-sided acute subdural hematoma and ventricular bleeds ( and ). Then, patient was initiated on diazepam, 10mg IV, and Phenytoin 1gm IV bolus followed by 100mg IV 3 times a day to arrest the seizure. She was given O2 via face mask, NG-tube was inserted, and urinary catheter was put in situ.
She was transferred to ICU after a diagnosis of status epilepticus, was intubated and put on a mechanical ventilator. Vital signs and Spo2 were monitored by cardiac telemetry. Fresh frozen plasma 4 units, and vitamin k, 10 mg IV once daily for 3 days were given. IV ceftriaxone and vancomycin were continued. Mannitol (20%), 50gm IV bolus and 25gm IV 3 times daily was provided to decrease increased intracranial pressure (ICP). Valproic acid, 400mg po 3 times daily was added as the seizure was poorly controlled. A craniotomy was done by neurosurgeon on the same day of neuroimaging and evacuated clots of blood.
Repeat laboratory values revealed WBC=34,000/µL (neutrophil count=85%, lymphocyte count=10%), hgb=9gm/dl, platelets=550,000/µL. Coagulation profiles showed PT= 49.8 sec (>3.5x ULN), PTT=63.2 sec (>1.5x ULN) and INR=4.38 (>3x ULN). Serum LFTs, RFTs and electrolytes were with in normal limits .
Paroxysms of increase in pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, temperature, sweating, and decerebrate posturing became typical after 7 days of neurological insult. It occurred while suctioning, body turning, and physical examination. It occurred at least 2–4 times a day, each persisting for between 5 and 40 minutes. PSH was considered by neurologist after repeated recordings of normal inter-ictal EEG tracing during episodes of autonomic surge. CSF score was 11 (heart rate >140 beats per minute, respiratory rate=24-29 breaths per minute, systolic blood pressure=140-159 mmhg, temperature=38-38.9 0c, mild sweating, and moderate posturing during episodes). DLT score was 11 (antecedent acquired brain injury, sympathetic surges were paroxysmal, simultaneous, episodic and episodes occurred >2 times daily and persisted for > 2 weeks post-brain injury, provoked by non-painful stimuli (allodynia), and medications reduced sympathetic features)., “Probable” diagnosis of PSH was made after patient scored 21 using PSH-AM score (sum of CFS score and DLT score). Then, she was adequately rehydrated with isotonic fluids; and started on morphine 2 mg, IV, as required (prn); paracetamol 1 gm, po as required (prn); propranolol, 40 mg po 3 times a day; diazepam 5 mg, IV 3 times a day; and gabapentin 150–300 mg po 3 times a day. Her GCS started to improve on second week of ICU admission, and frequency and severity of sympathetic storm declined. IV antibiotics were discontinued after 2 weeks of therapy. On the third week of admission, her clinical condition deteriorated all of a sudden, developed asystole, and died of cardiac arrest despite cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).