A 22-year-old woman presented with severe allergic conjunctivitis for one and a half years prior to her visit. Her symptoms included itching, foreign body sensation, tearing, and photophobia. Ocular examination revealed thickened lid margins, conjunctival hyperemia with moderate thick ropy discharge, cobblestone-like papillary reaction at the palpebral conjunctiva, and dense punctate corneal epithelial erosion in both eyes . Visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. Apart from the eyes, she also had erythematous keratotic plaque at flexor areas, which was compatible with atopic dermatitis, and clinical symptoms of allergic rhinitis. She was diagnosed with AKC and was treated with 0.2% olopatadine hydrochloride once a day, 1% preservative-free methylprednisolone 4 times per day, and frequent preservative-free artificial tears. After 1 month of treatment, her condition had not improves; therefore, 20 mg of oral prednisone per day and 1% cyclosporine A twice daily were added. However, we were unable to stop oral and topical steroids due to wax and wane exacerbations for over a year. Her visual acuity varied from 20/25 to 20/70 depending on disease activity, which extremely disturbed her daily living activities. Other allergic conditions, including rhinitis and dermatitis, were well controlled by using oral antihistamine and topical steroids.
Due to refractory AKC, we referred her to an allergy clinic for considering the role of SCIT. Allergology investigations showed positive skin prick tests to Dermatophagoides farinae (Der f), Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Der p), cat hair, and cockroach. The levels of IgE in peripheral blood were 1,636 kUA/L of total IgE, 58.2 kUA/L of specific IgE for Der p (class 5, strongly positive), 45.2 kUA/L of specific IgE for Der f (class 4, strongly positive), 0.51 kUA/L of specific IgE for German cockroach (class 1, weakly positive), and <0.35 kUA/L of specific IgE for cat (negative).
According to the positive results of skin prick tests and serum-specific IgE in this patient, conventional SCIT for Der f and Der p was performed by using standardized Der f and Der p commercial extracts (ALK Laboratories, Port Washington, NY, USA). The conventional protocol for SCIT started with 0.1 mL of 10 AU/mL of each allergen extract, then the treatment dose was adjusted weekly until it reached the monthly maintenance dose at 0.5 mL of 1,000 AU/mL of each allergen extract within 12 weeks. The ocular symptoms and signs were significantly improved in terms of lid inflammation, conjunctival reactions, and punctate epithelial erosion on the corneas 2 months after initiation of SCIT, as shown in Figure . We were able to taper the patient off oral and topical steroids within 3 months and maintained with topical mast cell stabilizers and preservative-free tears, without any episodes of exacerbation. Her vision was maintained at 20/40 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. Moreover, her skin and nasal conditions gradually improved. No adverse effects were noted during SCIT.