A 26-year-old Caucasian woman, gravida 2, para 1, with a spontaneous normal vaginal delivery 2 years ago was referred to our institution at 20.3 weeks of gestation after a sonographic finding of a sacrococcygeal mass of 26 × 24 mm in a male fetus.
The patient had no family history of birth defects or genetic disorders. She did not have any medical or surgical history, and she had no alcohol or smoking habit. She had no relationship with the father of her fetus and received no drug therapy while pregnant.
She had a normal gestational course with low risk of aneuploidies in the first-trimester screening and a normal first trimester scan at 13 weeks. Her sonographic examination revealed a single intrauterine pregnancy with an estimated gestational age of 20 weeks. The study revealed an exophytic, mixed echogenic mass arising from the sacrococcygeal region with high vascularization seen on Doppler flow . The examination showed adequate amniotic fluid, and no other abnormalities were detected.
Magnetic resonance imaging was performed, which confirmed the diagnosis. There was no evidence of possible invasion of the fetal pelvis or abdomen. The spine appeared intact. The lower extremities, fetal kidneys, and bladder appeared normal. On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis of external variety, type I in the Altman classification, was confirmed .
Amniocentesis guided by ultrasound scanning was done with normal karyotype and microarray results. The result of a fetal echocardiographic scan was normal.
The patient was scheduled for follow-up by ultrasound weekly . These scans showed an increase in the size of the mass up to 190 × 150 mm with high Doppler flow and severe polyhydramnios (amniotic fluid index 37) . The patient developed gestational diabetes, which required insulin treatment.
At 33.6 weeks of gestation, the patient was admitted to the obstetric ward for preterm labor. Her vital signs were normal (body temperature 36 °C, pulse rate 90 beats/minute, and blood pressure 135/82 mmHg), as was her physical examination. Treatment with a corticosteroid (12 mg intramuscularly, twice) and atosiban was started. The tocolysis was effective, and an elective cesarean section was scheduled at 35 weeks of gestation in conjunction with the neonatal service and the pediatric surgeon. However, 1 day before the scheduled cesarean section, the patient had premature rupture of membranes. Fetal heart rate monitoring revealed recurrent late decelerations at that moment, and an emergency lower segment cesarean section was performed.
A male infant was born at 35.1 weeks with an SCT of 200 mm. The combined weight of the baby and teratoma was 4030 g . His Apgar score was 9-10-10.
Excision of the teratoma was performed at 36 hours of life, after embolization of the middle sacral artery. Surgery was done without incident, with an operative time of 3 hours. The reconstruction was done without any excess skin . Pathological findings revealed an immature teratoma and no evidence of yolk sac tumor or other malignant elements. The postoperative alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels decreased quickly, being 150,000 before surgery and 64,500 afterward. The neonatal AFP values were followed during the first months with values of 14,915 at the 14th day after birth, 4136 at 6 months after birth, and 1.3 at 12 months of life. Other blood test parameters (including liver function, blood cell count, and hemostasis) were normal in both mother and infant samples.
The baby was discharged at 25 days after birth with normal results of abdominal, cerebral, and kidney ultrasound scans. Neonatal follow-up was performed during the first 16 months, and no long-term neurological deficits have appeared.