Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the presentation and publication of this case report.
A 40-year-old, 56-kg Korean woman (gravida 4, para 2) was scheduled for an emergency cesarean section at 35 weeks and 3 days of gestation for preterm labor. Her medical history included one abortion and two prior cesarean sections for placenta previa.
In the preoperative laboratory tests, her hemoglobin (Hb) was 11.4 g/dl and platelet count was 247,000/μl. Other laboratory findings, including coagulation tests, were within the normal range. On her ultrasound examination, the placenta was suggestive of placenta previa totalis, with possible placenta accreta .
In the operating room, spinal anesthesia was performed at the L3–4 intervertebral space of the patient. After confirming the spontaneous flow of cerebrospinal fluid, 10 mg of 0.5% heavy bupivacaine and 10 μg of fentanyl were intrathecally injected using a 27-gauge (G) needle. The maximum sensory blockade level of anesthesia was T4. To prepare for arterial blood pressure monitoring, a 22 G angiocatheter was inserted into the right radial artery. Two 18 G intravenous lines were secured in both arms.
Three minutes after starting the operation, a female baby (2,590 g) was delivered with Apgar scores of 7 and 8 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. After the baby was delivered, the patient’s blood pressure suddenly decreased to about 60/40 mmHg and her heart rate was 70 beats/min. Massive bleeding was found in the surgical field. Her Hb level was 6.8 mg/dl at that time. The surgeon diagnosed the degree of placental adhesion as percreta, which had invaded the bladder and surrounding tissues. The bleeding was so extensive that the surgeon decided to perform a hysterectomy. Because of profound hypotension with a reduction in consciousness, the anesthetic method was changed to general anesthesia. Tracheal intubation was performed to secure the airway with rapid sequence intubation. An additional intravenous line was secured at the right external jugular vein, and rapid volume infusions and transfusions were performed using a rapid blood infuser (FMS 2000® fluid management system, Belmont Instrument Corp., USA). Despite attempts to ligate the uterine arteries, bleeding obscured the surgical field and resulted in further hemodynamic instability. The surgeon wished to perform a uterine artery embolization for bleeding control but it was difficult to maintain stability of the vital signs while transferring the patient to the intervention room. We, therefore, decided to implement a REBOA in the operation room to prevent hypovolemic shock. The acute care surgeon accessed the left femoral artery for the REBOA using a 7-French sheath (standard kit, Terumo, Vietnam) and inserted a balloon catheter (occlusion balloon catheter, Tokai Medical Products, Inc., Japan). After measuring the distance to the navel, 25 cm in this patient, they slid the balloon tip up to 25 cm from the punctured site and placed the balloon approximately between the infrarenal aorta and the bifurcation of the aorta. It was difficult to obtain radiologic confirmation of the balloon position because of the patient’s unstable vital signs. After balloon occlusion was accomplished, the systolic blood pressure immediately improved from 65 mmHg to 100 mmHg and the surgical field also improved . REBOA was intermittently performed during the surgery and the balloon was sometimes partially deflated to identify the focus of the bleeding. During complete and partial inflation, ligation of both the uterine artery and internal iliac artery were performed. And the bleeding control was in progress by removing surrounding tissues where the placenta was invaded. The total duration of the occlusion was 75 min (divided over several occlusion times). The total operative time was 263 min and the total anesthesia time was 290 min. The estimated amount of blood volume lost was over 20,000 ml. Massive transfusions, including 36 units of packed red blood cells, 26 units of fresh-frozen plasma, and 10 units of platelets were administered.
Upon admission to the intensive care unit after embolization of the branch of the internal iliac artery, the patient was hemodynamically stable without any inotropes or vasopressors. No further transfusions were performed after surgery. The patient’s Hb was 12.2 g/dl, platelets were 89,000/μl, and prothrombin time (PT, international normalized ratio) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) were 13.9 s (1.23) and 39.1 s, respectively. The patient was extubated the same day and the femoral artery sheath was removed the next day. At postoperative day two, she was transferred to the ward and subsequently discharged on day 15 without complications. Neither the mother nor the baby experienced any complications after discharge.