a) Clinical Presentation:
A seven year old girl presented with pain in left distal third forearm for 8 months which was gradual in onset, non-progressive, mild in nature and non-activity related. Pain was associated with swelling which was initially small & gradually progressed over a period of eight months. There was no history of trauma/fever/weight loss or involvement of other bones. The general examination was unremarkable. Local examination of left forearm revealed a fusiform swelling in diaphyseal area measuring approximately 5cms by 2cms. Skin over swelling was normal, no engorged veins were present over the swelling. There was no local rise of temperature but local tenderness was present. Swelling was hard in consistency with well-defined margins, continuous with the radius. Forearm pronation and supination was painfully restricted; finger movements were normal and pain free. There was no associated distal neurovascular deficit.
Fig 1-Pre-operative X-ray
Fig 2-Pre-operative MRI
b)Surgical Management:
Initially, true cut biopsy was done in operation theater under strict asepsis under image guidance to confirm the diagnosis. Tissue histopathology revealed – sheets of polyhedral to oval cells with vesicular nuclei, some showing nuclear grooves and admixed with multinucleated giant cells. The sheets of cells being interrupted by islands of cartilage. No foci of calcification seen. Areas of hemorrhage are seen scattered throughout the tumor. Impression was benign cartilaginous tumor – Chondroblastoma/Chondromyxoid fibroma of radius.
The patient was scheduled for surgery after ten days. With a standard volar approach (Henry's approach) – tumor bearing portion of radius along with the healthy bone was excised measuring to a length of 5cm. Tumor mass was firm, brownish red in color. An autologous avascular ipsilateral fibular autograft was taken and secured proximally to the diaphysis with a dynamic compression plate and distally to the metaphysis with two crossed k wires. Wound was closed in layers after ensuring hemostasis.
Histopathologically, the findings were consistent with trucut biopsy findings as mentioned before. Grossly, the tumor mass was seen to press on the cortical bone which showed thinning. However no extension into soft tissue was seen. The distal margin of excision was found to be free c)Post-operative period and follow up:
Immediate postoperative period was uneventful. Patient was discharged on second postoperative day two after drain removal. . The patient was immobilized in below elbow cast for ten weeks. K wires were removed at the end of eight weeks. At twelfth week of follow up patient had developed stress fracture of the graft distal to the Dynamic compression plate. This was treated with a below elbow cast for a period of twelve weeks. The patient was immobilized with a below elbow splint for a period of three months. At two years of follow up there is full functional recovery and radiograph shows incorporation and hypertrophy of fibular graft (,)