A 60-year-old male with an unremarkable prior medical history presented to our institution with progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea for a duration of 20 days. The physical examination was within normal limits, apart from a finding of bilateral crackles of the lung bases. His complete blood count at presentation showed a normal white blood cell count (7280/mL), with 30% neutrophils, 13% lymphocytes, and 5% eosinophils, but demonstrated hypereosinophilia (absolute eosinophil counts 3610/mL, normal 20–520/mL), and severely elevated pro-B-type natriuretic peptides of 3710 pg/mL. Echocardiography revealed an apical left ventricular infiltration with a 14 × 7 mm thrombus that was associated with leaflet restriction and moderate mitral and tricuspid valve regurgitation. Both atriums were enlarged and a restrictive left ventricle (LV) filling pattern was noted. Both ventricles displayed normal dimensions in the absence of regional wall motion abnormalities, and both ventricular systolic functions were preserved (left ventricular ejection fraction 64%). The estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 71 mm Hg. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed a right axis deviation and T waves changes. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to aid in the diagnosis. The cardiac MRI showed intense, linear, delayed gadolinium enhancement of the endocardium of the lateral wall of the LV, and obliteration of the LV apex. A bone marrow smear and biopsy revealed a markedly elevated eosinophil count (>36%), but was absent dysplasia and a number of blasts, and there was no evidence of myeloproliferative disorder. The FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene was positive in 82% of segmented nucleated cells, based on fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis. An additional, extensive workup of secondary causes of eosinophilia proved negative and excluded other causes, leading to the final diagnosis of idiopathic HES with heart involvement. Treatment was started immediately with warfarin and a high dose of prednisone (1 mg/kg/d). Over the next few months, the patient began to feel much better, demonstrating marked improvement in his symptoms, with no complaints of shortness of breath or dyspnea on exertion. Eosinophil counts also normalized.