A 66-year-old female patient with a history of dilated cardiomyopathy, first diagnosed 4 years ago, who had undergone surgical tricuspid valve repair with an incomplete three-dimensional-shaped rigid AR due to severe secondary TR 3 years ago presented with pronounced right heart decompensation including ascites, pitting pretibial oedema, bilateral pleural effusion, chronic kidney disease but without signs of liver dysfunction.
The transthoracic echocardiogram performed after 5 days of intensive diuretic therapy showed a severely impaired systolic left ventricular ejection fraction of 30% with dilation of all heart chambers and a resulting moderate secondary mitral regurgitation and severe TR. The basal diameter of the right heart was 50 mm and right heart function was severely impaired . A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) confirmed severe TR as a consequence of severe leaflet tethering but showed no signs of dehiscence of the AR. Right heart catheterization revealed moderate post-capillary pulmonary hypertension filling pressures of the right heart were significantly elevated. Right ventricular stroke work index was 1.0 g/m2/beat and central venous pressure-to-pulmonary capillary wedge pressure-ratio 0.9.
Based on the severity of right ventricular disease a right ventricular assist device (RVAD) was considered but this option was eventually discarded as it was declined by the patient at least as primary treatment option. Redo tricuspid surgery was—in line with the literature—felt to be associated with a too high perioperative risk because of renal insufficiency and poor clinical condition of the patient., Due to massive tethering with restrictive motion of the anterior leaflet and complete lack of coaptation particularly in the antero-septal area of the valve percutaneous edge-to-edge repair was also regarded as unfavourable. Our Heart Team finally decided to perform a percutaneous valve-in-ring-implantation with the option of RVAD implantation as a bail-out strategy in case of acute rHF following elimination of TR.
The procedure was performed in general anaesthesia under angiographic and TOE-guidance. A soft-tip Amplatz extra-stiff wire was placed from the femoral vein in the right pulmonary artery via a 7-Fr balloon-tipped pulmonary artery catheter. SP3 was inserted via a 16-Fr eSheath, with the company label facing towards the patient to allow for flexing of the catheter towards the tricuspid valve. Subsequently, the balloon was retracted under the valve, the valve was advanced to the tricuspid annular plane, the pusher was pulled back a couple of centimetres beyond the designated markers to allow flexible alignment of the valve and the position of the prosthesis was optimized aiming at a 15/85 right atrium to right ventricle position. The balloon was then inflated slowly, while carefully checking for correct positioning without pacing of the heart. The prosthesis could be implanted in an optimal position under an intentional overinflation of the balloon of 2 mL .
Echocardiographic control, also after complete removal of the wire revealed a massive transvalvular regurgitation, which was found to be caused by complete immobility of the cusp adjacent to the ventricular septum resulting in a large coaptation gap , most likely caused by an asymmetric bulging of the valve stent in the area of the opening of AR . As there was only mild paravalvular leakage (PVL) , the decision was taken to implant a second SP3, which could be implanted uneventfully and lead to complete elimination of TR with only minimal septal PVL . Haemodynamics remained stable throughout the whole course of the procedure. The patient was extubated in the hybrid operating room and transferred to the general ward after one night in the intensive care unit. Her creatinine levels dropped from 1.8 mg/dL prior to the procedure to 1.3 g/dL on the first post-interventional day. After mobilization, the patient was discharged in good general condition to a follow-up treatment in a rehabilitation centre.
At follow-up after 2 months, the patient showed slightly improved right and left heart function and an improved general condition without signs for right heart and liver failure, ascites or oedemas .