A 69-year-old woman presented to the emergency department due to worsening dyspnea and subsequent loss of consciousness. She had a 2-year history of progressively worsening wheezing and stridor, and had been diagnosed with asthma. However, treatment with bronchodilators and steroid inhalers failed to resolve the symptoms. An arterial blood gas sample on 15 L/min of oxygen demonstrated type II respiratory failure (pH 6.87, PaO2 63.6 Torr, and PaCO2 181.0 Torr). The patient was immediately intubated with a single-lumen endotracheal tube, but arterial carbon dioxide levels remained elevated (pH 6.81, PaO2 345.0 Torr, and PaCO2 194.0 Torr). Chest roentgenography indicated a round mass shadow at the lower tracheal level above the carina . An emergent chest computed tomography scan revealed a tumor in the trachea, which almost completely obstructed the lower tracheal lumen and located just above the carina. Bilateral pneumonia was also observed (A-B). Bronchoscopy revealed a large vascular neoplasm with a smooth yellowish-white surface in the lower region of the trachea, causing almost complete airway obstruction .
Because complete excision of the tracheal tumor was considered possible, surgery was performed for complete excision of the tumor to relieve airway constriction. The patient was initially placed in a supine position, and venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was performed. The inflow cannula was directed into the right internal jugular vein and the outflow cannula was directed into the right common femoral vein. Ventilation was stopped, and gas exchange was performed via VV ECMO. After positioning the patient in the left decubitus position, a right posterolateral thoracotomy was performed through the fourth intercostal space. We performed carinal resection coupled with reconstruction. Anastomosis was performed as a modified montage-type carinal reconstruction (A-D). A latissimus dorsi flap was used for anastomotic reinforcement. The VV ECMO was dislodged following closure of the thoracotomy, and the patient was extubated for 3 h in the intensive care unit after surgery.
There were no postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged 11 days later. Postoperative CT performed 2 months after surgery demonstrated no evidence of stenosis at the site of the anastomosis .
Macroscopic findings showed a 15 mm-sized, well-demarcated heterogeneous tumor (A). Histologically, the tumor showed biphasic proliferation of the epithelial component and chondromyxoid stroma with cartilage formation (B-C). Necrosis and mitotic figure were absent. Immunohistochemically, the epithelial tumor cells were diffusely positive for AE1/AE3, CK7, S100, and SMA in various proportions. The Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 1 %. Histological analysis confirmed that the tumor was a pleomorphic adenoma of the trachea, and that the surgical margins were disease-free. She was doing well without local or distant recurrence at her follow-up visit 12 months after surgery, and is currently being followed up as an outpatient.