A 52-year-old patient was admitted to the Cardiology Department for the diagnosis of arrhythmia in the course of the Holt-Oram syndrome. Having a hereditary burden of Holt-Oram syndrome on his father’s side, the patient was diagnosed with the syndrome in early childhood.
At the time of admission to the hospital, the main problem of the patient was symptomatic bradycardia. So far, he has not been treated for chronic diseases. In childhood, he underwent atrial septal defect (ASD) closure. Despite symptomatic cardiac conduction disturbances, a pacemaker was not implanted in the past due to the patient’s refusal of informed consent for the procedure. The patient was explaining the lack of consent with the fear of worsening heart function caused by ventricular pacing and his father’s history (multiple hospitalizations and device replacements).
At the time of admission to the hospital, the patient was in good general condition. His blood pressure was 144/83 mmHg. Temperature and oxygen saturation were normal. The heart rate was 41 beats/min. Moreover, a physical examination revealed distortions of the upper limbs and a chest– typical for Holt-Oram syndrome. Abnormal laboratory results included a slightly elevated level of N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP), a slightly decreased level of platelets (PLT), and an ab- normal lipid profile. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed atrial flutter (AFI) and third-degree atrio- ventricular block (complete heart block) with a heart rate of about 40 beats/min. In echocardiography (ECHO), normal systolic left ventricle function with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) about 60%, enlargement of a left ventricle and enlargement of both atria [left ventricular end-diastolic dimension (LVEDd) about 6.1 cm, left atrial dimension (LAD) about 4.9 cm, left atrial area (LAAr) about 53 cm 2 , right atrial area (RAAr) about 54 cm 2] were stated. In the Cardiology Department, Holter’s EKG confirmed AFI and complete heart block. The patient was qualified for the implantation of a pacemaker.
The computed tomography angiography (CTA) did not reveal new heart malformations, but the radiologist suggested the presence of an abnormal structure in the auricle of the left atrium. Trans- esophageal echocardiography (TEE) did not confirm the presence of a thrombus in the left auricle.
Based on the CHA 2 DS2 -VASc score, the patient did not get any points, so he was not qualified for anticoagulation therapy.
During the next hospitalization, it was decided to implant the His-bundle pacemaker (HBP), giving the patient a chance for electrotherapy using the physiological conduction pathway. The implantation was successful, and the patient left the Cardiology Department in good condition. Accurate presentation of the indications for the procedure, as well as its course allowed to obtain informed consent from the patient for implantation of the pacemaker.
After one year, the man remains in good condition. The pacing was over 90%, and a LVEF was stable (60%).