A 76-year-old woman who had a past medical history of hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and right thalamic hemorrhage was admitted to the hospital because of fever and impaired balance. She suffered neck pain and dysarthria two days after admission and became somnolent. CSF examination showed pleocytosis (130 cells/mm3 [mononuclear cell: 130 cells/mm3], normal < 5 cells/mm3) and increased protein levels (113 mg/dL, normal < 50 mg/dL). She was treated with intravenous acyclovir on suspicion of viral meningoencephalitis. Her symptoms did not improve, and she was referred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment 22 days after onset. On admission, she was afebrile, and her consciousness level was E3V3M5 on the Glasgow Coma Scale. Her speech was slurred and barely comprehensible. She had left hemiparesis because of a past thalamic hemorrhage and flaccid muscle weakness in her right lower extremity. Tendon reflexes were hyperreflexia in both upper limbs and areflexia in both lower limbs. She had nuchal rigidity, but Kernig’s sign and Brudzinski’s sign were not observed.
Peripheral blood cell counts showed mild thrombocytopenia (141 × 103 /µL, normal range: 158–348 × 103/µL). Biochemical examinations showed hypoalbuminemia (2.8 g/dL, normal range: 4.1–5.1 g/dL) and an elevated urea-nitrogen creatinine ratio suggestive of dehydration. C-reactive protein was within the normal limit. Serum thyroid stimulating hormone and free thyroxine levels were within normal limits. A mild elevated carbohydrate antigen 19 − 9 level was observed (39.2 U/mL, normal ≤ 37.0 U/mL). Serum anti-nuclear antibody and anti-aquaporin 4 antibody were negative. Anti-neuronal antibodies including anti-amphiphysin, CV2, Ma2, Ri, Yo, Hu, recoverin, SRY-related HMG-box gene 1, titin, zinc-finger protein of the cerebellum 4, Tr, and glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 antibodies were all negative results (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany). Mycobacterium tuberculosis specific interferon-gamma release assay and serum Candida, Aspergillus, and Cryptococcus antigens were negative.
CSF examination showed normal opening pressure (105 mmH2O), pleocytosis (42 cells/mm3 [mononuclear cell: 41 cells/mm3]), increased protein levels (95 mg/dL), and mildly decreased glucose levels (40 mg/dL). Bacterial culture had a negative result. Herpes simplex virus and Mycobacterium tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction tests also gave negative results. CSF cytology showed no malignant cells. Later, CSF GFAP-IgG was detected by transfected cell-based assay and tissue-based immunofluorescence assay according to previous reports [, ] .
Brain MRI scans showed abnormal signal changes caused by a past right thalamic hemorrhage and extended white matter hyperintensity lesions in the deep and periventricular white matter in the right frontal and parietal lobes on T2-weighted and FLAIR images . Gadolinium contrast-enhanced brain MRI scans showed heterogeneous thickening of the dura mater . Spinal MRI showed no abnormal signal changes in the spinal cord. Whole body computed tomography (CT) showed no findings of neoplasia. However, early-stage breast cancer was found in the left breast on mammography.
Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with GFAP-A. She was treated with an intravenous infusion of 1 gram per day methylprednisolone for 3 days starting on day 8 after admission. Her nuchal rigidity disappeared on day 10. Her consciousness level gradually improved starting on day 11 and became completely clear on day 32. She was also treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 gram per kilogram body weight for 5 days) on day 36 and again on day 60. She was temporarily transferred to the local hospital on day 91 for rehabilitation.
A month later, the patient was re-admitted to our hospital and underwent a simple mastectomy for breast cancer. The pathological findings were invasive ductal carcinoma, tubule forming type . Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the restricted tumor expressed GFAP . The infiltration of CD3 + T cells were observed in the peritumoral and intratumoral areas . The most common infiltrating lymphocytes were CD8 + T cells . CD4 + T cells and CD20 + B cells were also observed in the predominant peritumoral area . Her condition did not deteriorate, and no relapse occurred thereafter.