A 37-year-old Thai woman presented with a 1-year history of painless proptosis of the left eye and complaints of diplopia during up gaze. She denied any previous history of trauma, underlying disease, or genetic disease in the family. Physical examination showed mild swelling of the left eyelid and a yellowish subconjunctival mass in the superior bulbar region, which had a soft consistency, was non-reducible, and had no apparent posterior limit. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 bilaterally. The intraocular pressures were 14 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. Extraocular movements were full for the right eye and limited in elevation for the left eye. The globe was displaced inferiorly by 5 mm, and proptosis of 5 mm was observed in the left eye. Hertel exophthalmometry of 10 right eye and 15 left eye with a base of 107 mm. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and orbits demonstrated a soft tissue mass with dimensions of 1.1×1.6 x 1.7 cm involving the superior rectus muscle belly and tendon. The lesion showed hyperintensity on T1- and T2-weighted images. The mass was saturated on fat-saturated sequences and suppressible on sequences with fat suppression. It was responsible for the left eye proptosis and inferior globe displacement.

The superior bulbar mass gradually enlarged and prolapsed in the palpebral fissure over 4 months. A debulking procedure via a transconjunctival and vertical lid split was performed. An ovoid well-circumscribed yellowish mass was found at the superior rectus muscle in the sub-tenon and intraorbital spaces. A pathological study revealed mature adipose tissue, with minimal connective tissue stroma, enclosed in a thin fibrous capsule. The tenon capsule showed multiple foci of small lymphoid cells and plasma cell aggregates. The immunostaining results for CD3, CD5, CD10, CD20, CD23, cyclin D1, BCL2, kappa, lambda, immunoglobulin (Ig) G (IgG), IgG4, IgA, and IgM were consistent with chronic non-specific inflammation. Systemic steroid treatment (prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day) was initiated and maintained for 1 month. The BCVA last follow-up was 20/20. The proptosis and diplopia improved 3 months after treatment.