A 4-year-old white girl from Greece was attacked by a dog owned by her neighbour while playing unsupervised in front of her yard. The child was transported to the emergency department by the dog owner.
On admission, she was confused and lethargic, presenting findings compatible with hypovolemic shock (heart rate 130 beats per minute and hemoglobin level of 7.8 g/dl) secondary to traumatic blood volume loss. Hemodynamic compromise required an aggressive intravenous fluid administration and blood transfusion. Physical examination revealed multiple deep scalp lacerations. After rigorous disinfection, surgical repair was performed in the hospital's operating unit. Due to the extensive nature of the traumatic lesions and the subsequent high risk of infection, the healing process required two weeks of intravenous antibiotic therapy. Rabies prophylaxis was not administered due to the documented rabies vaccination status of the dog.
On the second day of hospitalization, the child was in a depressed mood and displayed mild withdrawal from contact with others. A psychiatric evaluation was performed. During consultation, the child was apparently agitated and refused to participate in any conversation. Non-verbal communication was used instead, including gestures and shaking of the head. The behaviour had not been present before the dog attack. On the sixth day of hospitalization, the child talked for the first time to her mother and asked her: "Where were you when the dog attacked me?".
After a complete suture removal 15 days after the injury, she was discharged. Psychiatric monitoring was arranged after two months. During this interval, the child refused to speak to physicians and other children in the neighbourhood, and used only gestures to communicate while engaging in normal conversation in the home setting. Her memories of the dog attack remained remarkably clear. For six weeks as an outpatient, the child had recurrent traumatic memories when questioned about dogs. After this interval, the girl manifested a persistent avoidance of thoughts and conversations associated with the event. Remarkably, the parents reported that the child was avoiding the dog owner as well as the place where the dog attack occurred. Feelings of estrangement from her neighbours were also present. Hyperarousal occurred in the form of outbursts of anger and anxiety when left alone. She also had difficulty concentrating.
A limited expression of emotions and a reluctance to play with toy dogs were observed during psychiatric consultation. This case fulfilled all diagnostic criteria for selective mutism and PTSD according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, (4th edition) . Psychological treatment consisted of supportive psychotherapy for the child and consecutive sessions of counseling for her parents. On her six-month follow-up appointment a symptomatic improvement was evident, with decreased levels of anxiety and normal rates of social and verbal interaction. During consultation, the girl was clearly less anxious and able to communicate her needs verbally. According to her parents, she had become more comfortable speaking in environments out of the home setting and playing with other children in the place where the dog attack occurred.