S.F., A 47-year-old nonsmoker woman transferred to the hospital via ambulance and was afterwards admitted for the assessment of chronic and persistent pain in the right foot for a three-months duration associated with significant numbness on the same side. after that, the patient started to complain of acute-onset sever lower back and pelvic pain. She asserted never suffering pain similar to this before. The patient reported no personal and/or family history of cancer, any acute, repeat, or discontinued medications, any allergies, any genetic or psychosocial issues, and had a free past surgical history. physical examination was unremarkable except for lower back tenderness radiated to both lower limbs and marked lower limb weakness with estimated power tone of 2/5 on the right foot. Neurovascular assessment was insignificant. The patient initially underwent spinal computed tomography (CT) without contrast which revealed multiple enhancing metastatic lesions throughout the spine, the most significant lesions are in the thoracic area, particularly at the level of T8-T10 vertebral bodies and mild pathological compression fractures of T4, T5, T9, T10, T11 and L5 associated with a large anterior paraspinal soft tissue component at the same level ( A, B & C). Whole body computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast was performed and showed several mixed lytic and sclerotic lesions in the spinal, sternal, and pelvic bones associated with soft tissue component, the largest one seen at the level of T10. CT scan also detected a nodule measuring about 8 mm in right lower lung lobe ( A, B & C). MRI of right foot demonstrated heterogenous, ill defined, lobulated intra muscular mass measuring approximately 3 x 1.7 × 1.3 cm at the planter aspect of the right foot with irregular peripheral post-contrast enhancement ( A, B, C & D). These findings were suggestive of extraskeletal Ewing Sarcoma and to confirm the diagnosis, Excisional biopsy of right foot lesion was taken and showed marked tumor necrosis with numerous mitotic and apoptotic figures. The tumor cells were arranged in an unusual trabecular pattern with rare pseudorosettes (neuroectodermal differentiation) and immunopositivity for CD99 (diffuse-membranous), FLI-1 (nuclear-strong), anti NKx-2.2, Synaptophysin (weak), CD56 (weak), and CKAE1/AE3 (weak-focal) ( A, B, C & D). The diagnosis of extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma of right foot was established. Intravenous oxycodone was administrated to relive patient's sever pain. The patient initially underwent thoraco-lumber pathological fractures fixation with fusion from T2-L1 level, total surgical resection of the foot mass. The procedure was performed by a consultant at spine surgery and spinal deformities department at a private hospital. The patient was started a chemotherapy regimen consisting of carboplatin and paclitaxel weekly. The patient was followed up for 2 months and She adhered to and tolerated the provided advices; avoiding vigorous exercise and heavy lifting. The patient also had a good tolerance of chemotherapy and pharmacological agents without any reported complications or adverse events.