A 46-year-old Brahmin woman with a history of a hormone receptor-negative invasive ductal type of adenocarcinoma of her left breast (stage pT3N3aM0) presented with pain and blurring of vision of her right eye.
Diagnosis of left-sided stage IIIc breast carcinoma was made 2 years ago when she developed pain in her left arm. She subsequently underwent a left-sided modified radical mastectomy. Postoperatively she started treatment with docetaxel 80 mg, adriamycin 60 mg, and cyclophosphamide 600 mg. After completion of six cycles of chemotherapy, external beam radiation of her thoracic wall was performed once a week for 8 weeks.
Two years after initial diagnosis, she presented with temporal headache and pain on temporal aspect of her right eye. Visual acuity in her right eye was “counting fingers” close to face and 6/9 in her left eye. A slit lamp examination revealed a tender subconjunctival swelling with localized congestion in superotemporal aspect of her right eye underneath the upper eyelid . With this finding alone, an initial clinical diagnosis of anterior scleritis was made until posterior segment was examined. Her pupil was sluggishly reactive with no relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD).
Fundus evaluation under mydriasis revealed a shallow retinal detachment with underlying amelanotic subretinal mass, superotemporal to macula, causing retinal folds in macular area. A shallow serous inferior retinal detachment could be appreciated inferior to inferotemporal arcade . Intraocular pressures were normal in both her eyes (10 mm of Hg in right eye and 16 mm of Hg in left eye).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) orbit revealed a 2 × 1 cm subretinal mass in superior and temporal aspect of her right eye with enhancement after injection of contrast . The lesion was of high intensity in T2-weighted images. Brain imaging was normal.
Following this, computed tomography (CT) of her chest was done which showed metastasis in both lungs, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and right-sided pleural effusion .