A 49-year-old man with a 2-year history of neck pain and weakness in both lower extremities was referred to our ward.
The patient was treated conservatively at the outpatient clinic of Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, over the previous four months. After 4 mo of strict conservative treatment, including nutritional support, pain relief, and herbal medicine interventions, the patient's symptoms were not relieved, and the weakness in both lower limbs progressed even more.
The patient had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis in both upper lungs for 4 years and was not on regular anti-tuberculosis medication.
The patient had no specific personal or family history.
The patient had decreased muscle strength (grade 3) in both lower extremities, significant sensory loss in the left thumb and index finger, active bilateral tendon reflexes, no Hoffmann's sign, and no significant abnormalities in the remaining extremities on physical examination.
The tuberculosis infection T-cell spotting test was positive, but sputum smears on three consecutive days were negative for acid-fast bacilli. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was increased, at 48 mm/h (normal range < 15 mm/h), and the results of other routine laboratory tests were normal.
Plain X-ray radiography of the cervical spine showed destructive lesions in the appendage area of the C4-5 vertebrae . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the cervical spine showed bone destruction and a soft tissue mass in the appendage area of the C4-5 vertebrae . Spiral CT three-dimensional reconstruction showed the outline of bone destruction in the appendage area of C4-5 . The nature of the mass was to be determined, considering the possibility of a benign bone tumor. A contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a neoplastic lesion extending from the left epidural space to the paravertebral muscles at C4-5. The lesion was isointense on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and heterogeneously hypointense on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and showed heterogeneous enhancement . There were no obvious abnormalities in the signals of the remaining cervical vertebrae, and no obvious abnormally enhanced foci were observed after enhancement, suggesting that osteoblastoma was likely. A total bone single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) scan showed a slight increase in bone metabolism in the upper cervical vertebrae and the 9th thoracic vertebra, suggesting that positive changes were likely.