A 51-year-old, gravida 1, para 1, Japanese female complained of abnormal genital bleeding for two months and presented to a clinic. An ovarian tumor was found during abdominal computed tomography (CT), and so the patient was referred to our hospital. The abnormal genital bleeding had stopped when she visited our hospital. An ultrasound scan of her right ovary revealed a swollen region of 7 cm in diameter, which contained multiple cysts, and the uterine endometrium was 9-mm-thick. Cervical cytology and an endometrial biopsy produced normal findings.
On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), an ovarian tumor, which measured 7 cm in diameter and contained multiple cysts, was detected, and a large part of the tumor exhibited high signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging and low signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging. No solid components were detected . We decided to perform a laparoscopic right salpingo-oophorectomy. The patient’s medical history included endometriosis from the age of 25 without specific therapy and subarachnoid hemorrhaging due to the rupturing of an aneurysm at the age of 43. The patient was diagnosed with hydrocephalus after she underwent surgery for the subarachnoid hemorrhaging, and an LP shunt was inserted. Her medical history also included kidney stones, schizophrenia, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus at the age of 50. We confirmed the route of the LP shunt on a CT scan, which had been conducted at another clinic. It revealed that the LP shunt had been placed from her left flank to Douglas’ pouch . Under general anesthesia, laparoscopic right adnexectomy was performed. A 12-mm trocar was inserted at the umbilicus, and three 5-mm trocars were inserted 3 cm inside the right and left upper anterior iliac crests and on the midline of the lower abdomen. The abdominal pressure was set at 8 mmHg. The ovarian tumor was located in Douglas’ pouch and had adhered to the back of the uterus. Also, the head of the shunt tube was located in Douglas’ pouch and was an obstacle to the operation. We temporarily shifted the head of the shunt tube from Douglas’ pouch to the vesicouterine pouch to prevent damage to the shunt and ensure that the operation could be conducted smoothly . The operation time was 2 h and 11 min, and the total volume of intraoperative blood loss was 50 ml. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on postoperative day 3. The histological diagnosis was an endometriotic cyst. The patient was examined at 1 month after the surgery at our hospital’s outpatient clinic, and no adverse events were observed. She was followed-up at the outpatient clinic of a general practitioner.