A 69-year-old man presented with upper abdominal pain that radiated to his back and was accompanied by nausea and vomiting. The patient had no history of underlying diseases and did not smoke or drink alcohol. He reported using no medications within one month of the onset of pain. Upon presentation, the patient’s blood amylase and lipase concentrations were 916 U/L and 53 U/L, respectively. The patient’s myocardial enzyme concentrations and electrocardiographic results were normal. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed mild swelling and thickening of the pancreas, blurring of the lipid spaces around the pancreas, and no gallbladder or extrahepatic bile duct expansion . A diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was considered. The patient fasted and was administered symptomatic and supportive therapies, including analgesics, hydration, and antibiotic treatment with levofloxacin (500 mg qd) intravenously. However, his abdominal pain did not subside, and the patient was admitted to the gastroenterology department for further diagnosis and treatment.
Upon admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.9°C, heart rate was 82 beats/min, respiratory rate was 26 breaths/min, blood pressure was 113/70 mmHg, and oxygen saturation was 94%. The patient was fully conscious and had no enlarged superficial lymph nodes. Upon auscultation, he had mild shortness of breath, bilateral coarse breath sounds, and no dry or wet rales, and his heart rhythm was normal, with no pathological murmurs. The patient’s abdomen was soft, with tenderness below the xiphoid process and in the left upper quadrant, with no rebound tenderness. He did not exhibit oedema in his lower extremities.
Once admitted, the patient was administered octreotide to inhibit pancreatic enzyme secretion and an esomeprazole injection to suppress gastric acid secretion, upon which his abdominal pain was slightly alleviated. However, on hospital day 2, he developed pyrexia (39.5°C) with chills, fatigue, headache, and muscle aches. The patient experienced dyspnea upon physical exertion, and a chest CT revealed patchy consolidation in the superior lobe of the left lung . A blood gas analysis revealed a fraction of inspired oxygen of 33%, pH of 7.49, partial pressure of oxygen of 65.0 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 26.4 mmHg, and bicarbonate concentration of 18.7 mmol/L. The patient’s total blood cholesterol concentration was 4.21 mmol/L, triglyceride concentration was 1.72 mmol/L, and serum calcium concentration was 2.15 mmol/L. Other laboratory test results are summarized in . The patient was diagnosed with severe community-acquired pneumonia complicated by acute pancreatitis.
On hospital day 2, the patient was transferred to the Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine. He was administered meropenem (1.0 q8h) intravenously and moxifloxacin (400 mg qd) intravenously as anti-infective therapy, umifenovir (200 mg tid) as antiviral therapy, and nasal high-flow oxygen therapy for acute pancreatitis. However, the patient continued to have severe pyrexia and his abdominal pain did not considerably resolve. CT pulmonary angiography revealed increased consolidation in the left lung and a small degree of bilateral pleural effusion . The patient’s blood amylase concentration was 1,150 U/L, blood lipase concentration was 324 U/L, urinary amylase concentration was 1,742 U/L, white blood cell count was 6.7 × 109/L, lymphocyte count was 0.28 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage was 97.6%, C-reactive protein concentration was 280 mg/L, and procalcitonin concentration was 11.3 ng/mL. As the patient did not respond to conventional antibiotic treatment, the possibility of infection with a special pathogen was suspected. On hospital day 4, fibreoptic bronchoscopic examination revealed no obvious abnormalities. Alveolar lavage fluid (10 mL) was obtained for microbe identification via mNGS. The patient’s serum antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil antibody, and immunoglobulin (Ig) concentrations were within the normal ranges. The patient was negative for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 nucleic acid, influenza virus nucleic acid, serum 1,3-β-D-glucan, galactomannan, and IgM antibodies against respiratory pathogens (Legionella pneumophila, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Rickettsia spp., Chlamydia pneumoniae, adenoviruses, respiratory syncytial virus, influenza A virus, influenza B virus, and parainfluenza viruses). His blood and sputum cultures were also negative.
On hospital day 6, the mNGS results indicated the presence of C. psittaci (number of sequences: 512, relative abundance: 90.3%, coverage: 91%) and Candida albicans (number of sequences: 698, relative abundance: 57.8%, coverage: 98%). At that time, the patient divulged that he had found and buried several dead chickens in his vegetable field 10 days prior to the onset of symptoms. Therefore, he was diagnosed with severe C. psittaci pneumonia, and his treatment regimen was changed to a combination of moxifloxacin (400 mg qd) intravenously and doxycycline (100 mg q12h) on hospital day 6. On hospital day 9, the patient’s body temperature returned to normal, and his abdominal pain and dyspnea were substantially resolved. His oxygenation index and markers of inflammation and organ functions were also improved . Abdominal CT revealed a reduction in the pancreatic swelling and in the patchy, blurred, low-density shadows around the pancreas . On hospital day 11, the patient’s abdominal pain was relieved, and his blood amylase concentration was normal. The patient was started on a bland liquid food diet, which was tolerated. On hospital day 14, chest CT revealed marked resorption of the consolidation in the left lung and a slight bilateral increase in pleural effusion . The nasal high-flow oxygen therapy was replaced with oxygen inhalation via a nasal cannula. On hospital day 26, chest CT revealed no exudative lesion of the left lung and no pleural effusion . Markers of inflammation and various organ functions had generally returned to normal . The patient was discharged on hospital day 27. Doxycycline (100 mg q12h) was continued for one week. At a one-month follow-up visit, the patient was in a generally good condition with an occasional cough without dyspnea, abdominal pain, or diarrhea.