A 22-year-old Caucasian female with a remote history of transverse myelitis presented with 3 years of worsening midline low back pain. The episode of transverse myelitis occurred 8 years prior to presentation . At that time, she suffered paraplegia, bowel and bladder incontinence, complete sensory loss localized to the T8 level, diffuse pains and paresthesia in the upper extremities, and low back pain below the sensory level. One and a half years after the initial episode of TM, the patient reported a pain burden score (PBS) in her low back below the sensory level of 22/28. She also reported loss of function and inability to do transfers, indicating worsening quality of life.
Due to worsening lower back pain, loss of function, and development of neuromuscular scoliosis secondary to TM, the patient decided to undergo posterior spinal fusion T3 through pelvis. Preoperatively, in addition to low back PBS score of 22/28, her lower extremity physical exam was notable for complete paraplegia with wheelchair bound status and inability to ambulate, atrophy and edema in all muscles in the lower extremities, a sensory level of T10 on the right and T8 on the left, with only some patchy sensation to pressure evident over her left thigh but otherwise no neuropathic pain or other sensation in the lower extremities bilaterally, and absence of lower extremity reflexes. She underwent surgery of posterior spinal fusion T3 through pelvis which was complicated by wound infection and subsequent incision and debridement. She was discharged following a 60-day hospital stay, and 6 months postoperative the patient reported improved low back pain with PBS 13/28 and unchanged motor and sensory exams in the lower extremities. At this time, she also reported improved mood and ability to conduct activities of daily living, indicating improved quality of life compared with prior to surgery. Unfortunately, at 1.5 years post spinal fusion T3-pelvis, the patient presented to clinic with worsening lumbar back pain and PBS increased to 22/28, worsened with prolonged sitting. Bilateral loosening of the pelvic fixation screws were demonstrated on imaging and deemed to be the cause of the patient’s pain as a result of increased load at the L4–S1 levels. She underwent revision of the pelvic fixation, which improved her PBS to 18/28. The postoperative course was complicated by a new MRSA infection at the incision site and recurrent wound dehiscence, leading to seven incision and drainage treatments over a 6-month duration. The patient then underwent removal of segmental instrumentation T3-pelvis, which initially improved back pain to PBS score 12/28. The patient’s quality of life had clearly increased, as she reported doing remarkably well with increased mobility. Additionally, her mother reported the patient was more functionally active than she had been in a year. Unfortunately, her low back pain continued to progressively worsen over the next 3 years, with lower back pain increasing to PBS score 15/28, at which point she approached our team to consider redo L4–S1 decompression and fusion.
Magnetic resonance imagaing (MRI) of the lumbar spine demonstrated severe central spinal stenosis at L4–5 and L5–S1 due to facet and ligamentum flavum hypertrophy . Flexion–extension X-ray of the lumbar spine demonstrated axial distraction of the posterior edges of the vertebral bodies at L4–5 and L5–S1 on flexion with alignment improving on extension .
Given her worsening pain with evidence of lumbar spinal stenosis and instability, she underwent redo L4–S1 decompression and fusion. She underwent L4 and L5 laminectomies with bilateral L4–L5 medial facetectomies and foraminotomies and posterior lateral lumbosacral fusion with bilateral pedicle screws at L4, L5, and S1. She tolerated the procedure well and endorsed improved pain compared with prior to surgery. She was discharged to home on postoperative day 3.
On postoperative day 16, she presented with fever, chills, tachycardia, and return of her midline low back pain. MRI demonstrated a surgical site infection with severe compression of the lower lumbar thecal sac . Of note, the patient reported severe midline low back pain similar to what she experienced prior to surgery, identifying this as a separate pain from her postoperative soreness.
The patient underwent lumbar wound washout with significant improvement in low back pain. During her convalescence, she experienced incisional pain but reported significant improvement in her deeper, chronic pain, with an increased ability to perform transfers.
At 1 year postoperative, the patient’s chronic low back pain remained improved compared with preoperative baseline. The pain was described as “moderate” and “not as severe as preoperative back pain”. The patient reported doing well, with improved ability to bend and overall mobility. Follow-up MRI demonstrated decompression at L4–L5. Imaging also demonstrated increased spondylosis at L5–S1 . Repeat decompression at L5–S1 with revised fusion at this level was offered, but the patient ultimately decided not to proceed with surgery as her back pain was no longer severe.