A 67-year-old man identified an enlarging heterogeneous mass in the posterior segment of his right up lobe. The patient had symptoms of shortness of breath after activity and physical examination revealed a grade 3–4 of 6 holosystolic murmur. Echography of the abdomen, Computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain, bone scintigraphy and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) were performed to define the pulmonary malignancy and excluded distal metastases , tumor was classified and staged T2N0M0. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed examination demonstrated severe prolapse of the posterior mitral leaflet with flail of the middle scallop (P2, P3 segment) , the left atrial (LA) and left ventricle (LV) was extensive (LA 46 mm, LV 55 mm), the patient was severe mitral regurgitation with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II. Lung function tests and coronary angiography were unremarkable. The patient denied family history of related diseases. Patient elected the option of a one-stage ipsilateral VATS and minimally invasive cardiac surgery as definitive diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.
After general anesthesia, double-lumen tube intubation, and insertion of routine monitoring catheters, the patient was positioned supine with the right chest slightly elevated first for MIS of mitral valve (MV) . Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was instituted via femoral arterial and venous cannulation. Anterior axillary ports were inserted in the third, fifth intercostal spaces for assist port and camera port. A right lateral, fourth intercostal space, < 1 cm below and posterior to the nipple, 5 cm mini-thoracotomy was performed . An additional venous cannula was inserted in the superior vena cava from the assist port and the aorta was cross clamped with a Chitwood clamp from the same port. Myocardial protection was achieved with mild hypothermia and antegrade delivery of hyperkalemic cold sanguinous cardioplegia (1 L), then the cardioplegia was reinfused every 20 min (500 ml). The left atrium was then opened posterior to the interatrial groove, and a left atrial retractor was used to expose the MV.
Gore-Tex loops were attached to felt pledgets. The correct loop length was estimated by measuring the distance from the papillary muscle to the level of the mitral annulus. The anteroposterior diameter of the anterior MV leaflet and the distance of the commissures for appropriate ring sizing (Edward 28 mm).Valve competency was tested by injecting saline into the left ventricle . Heparin reversed with protamine.
The patient was then placed in the left decubitus position. The same intercostal space ports were used for working port. A wedge resection was performed and the frozen biopsy result came back as lung adenocarcinoma. We performed right upper lobectomy . Upper lobe vein was dissected. Stapler Echelon 60 2.5 mm was used for cutting the vein. After the upper lobe bronchus was fully freed by right angle clamp, the bronchus was exposed and identified. The stapler pin was locked into position and the residual lung expansion test was examined, then the stapler was fired and removed. The fissures were completed by means of blunt dissection, cautery and stapler Echelon 60 3.5 mm. The diseased lobe was carefully maneuvered into an endobag. Systematic nodal dissection of stations R2 to R10 was performed by ultrasonic scalpel Harmonicc Ace and lymph node biopsy clamp . The inferior lung ligament was freed so that the residual lung could get a well reexpansion.
The patient recovered smoothly after operation, who was free from infusing blood during hospitalization and discharged from hospital on the tenth day after operation. This patient have not complications during follow-up.