A 41-year-old Hispanic male (BMI: 44.6) presented to the emergency department after seven days of severe, novel, left-sided rectal pain. The patient denied fever, nausea, vomiting, bowel changes, or signs of blood in his stool. Though a proper rectal exam could not be performed due to pain, a 6 mm mass with surrounding erythema was noticed adjacent to the rectum in the 4 o'clock position. A diagnosis of perirectal abscess was made and incision and drainage were performed. One week after the procedure, the patient described a “ripping” sensation during a large bowel movement that led to worsening of his rectal pain. He was referred to a colorectal surgeon for presumed anal fissure, but confirmatory rectal exam was not possible due to physical discomfort. A subsequently scheduled rectal exam under general anesthesia was cancelled by the patient, and he was lost to follow-up.
During an unrelated consult for weight-loss surgery three months later, the bariatric surgeon discovered that the patient had new onset pruritus ani for nearly one month. Evidence of anorectal pain, hemorrhoids, fissures, or fistulas were absent at this time. Patient was prescribed lidocaine 5% topical ointment for two weeks PRN. Four months later, at the patient's request, the bariatric surgeon rechecked for the possibility of an anal fissure. Between these office visits, patient continued to have rectal pain (though of diminishing severity), bright red blood on toilet paper, pruritus ani, blood in his semen, loose stools, and the onset of outright FI. Patient attempted self-treatment of his FI with stool-bulking agents, fiber, psyllium, lidocaine cream, and Sween Cream, but with no relief. As these conservative measures failed, it was determined that anorectal manometry was warranted, but this test showed no abnormalities. Both the physician and patient decided that DxHA injections were the next best option. One week later, 4 X 1 mL injections of DxHA were administered approximately 5 mm above the dentate line at the posterior, anterior, left lateral, and right lateral positions without complications.
One month following DxHA injections, the patient underwent a previously scheduled screening colonoscopy because of a significant family history of colon cancer in his mother (diagnosed at 58 years; died at 62 years). A 5 mm sessile serrated polyp in the ascending colon and a 3 mm hyperplastic polyp in the sigmoid colon were removed during this procedure, but it was also noted by the gastroenterologist that a 15 mm benign-appearing submucosal lesion was present in the distal rectum (~5 cm from the anus). Unsure of what this lesion could be, a flexible sigmoidoscopy and endoscopic ultrasound were ordered to be performed two weeks later. On flexible sigmoidoscopy, the bulging submucosal lesion was again noted ~6-7 cm from the anal verge and endoscopic ultrasound showed this mass to be a homogenous, hypoechoic lesion (0.79 cm X 2.98 cm) that was contiguous with the muscularis propria. Fine-needle aspiration of the rectal lesion was performed and sent to pathology.
Under microscopy, the hospital pathologist described the rectal FNA samples as having clusters of reactive macrophages, acute inflammation, giant cells, mucin, and multiple, spherically shaped dark microparticles . Though noted as clearly foreign by the pathologist, the presence and etiology of these particles were perplexing. After calling the gastroenterologist to describe these findings, additional history attained by the gastroenterologist from the patient revealed the recent history of DxHA injections. Thus, it was surmised that the rectal lesion and corresponding histopathology were both a result of the patient's FI treatment.
Unfortunately, though there was initial improvement with the DxHA injections, at the two-month follow-up appointment the patient described worsened FI (several episodes daily, especially after bowel movements). As of this report, supportive measures, biofeedback training, and topical ointments were being used to treat the patient's incontinence.