A 95-year-old woman was admitted to our emergency department for an episode of vomiting followed by loss of consciousness. During initial clinical examination, she presented with hypotension with a blood pressure of 70/40 mmHg and severe abdominal pain.
She had a medical history of pancreatic microcystic serous cystadenoma, stage III chronic renal failure secondary to renal artery stenosis and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation on Eliquis® (apixaban). A pancreatic MRI performed 13 years earlier showed a 3.1 cm mass in the tail of the pancreas with a microcystic high T2 signal intensity, with enhancing septa, that didn’t communicate with the main pancreatic duct or its branches, typical of pancreatic SC , with no follow-up needed. The initial blood test revealed a hemoglobin level of 10.8 g/dL and a platelet count of 231,000/mL. Prothrombin time was slightly lowered, at 88%, and activated partial thromboplastin time ratio was normal at 0.76. Computed tomography (CT) (Definition AS+ 128, Siemens) revealed a large hemoperitoneum, an hematoma next to the previously known mass which had doubled in size in 13 years (6.6 cm), and enhancing septations with small peripheral contrast blush . No peritoneal arterial bleeding was visible on the CT. Due to the significant operative risks in this elderly patient, surgery was not proposed. However, to avoid further potential bleeding which could become quickly life-threatening in this very elderly patient, and to be able to restart the anticoagulant treatment, a hemostatic embolization of the tumor was decided and performed immediately.
Selective catheterization of the tumor-feeding vessel arising from the splenic artery was performed by a microcatheter (Progreat 2.4, Terumo) and a hydrophilic guidewire (GT45, Terumo) , demonstrated the hypervascular nature of the lesion, and didn’t find any arterial bleeding. Embolization of the pancreatic tumor was performed using 500-700 μm microspheres (Embogold, Meritmedical). Microspheres were chosen due to the high vessel tortuosity, as the patient was very atherosclerotic, and had a surgical history of supra-celiac aorto-celiac graft with reimplantation of both renal arteries.
Endpoint of embolization was near stasis of blood flow in the abnormal vessels and disappearance of the tumor blush.
After embolization procedure, the hemoglobin level was stable at 8 g/dL. Follow-up CT-scan at 2 days showed no signs of further bleeding. Anticoagulation could be resumed 48 hours after the procedure. No complications such as pancreatitis occurred during follow up, and 1 week after embolization, the patient was discharged home. No event or further bleeding occurred and follow-up CT-scan at 2 months showed no tumor growth. The patient presented no complication or recurrence at 6 months after the procedure.