A 66-year-old man with hypertension and coronary artery disease as underlying diseases had pain in both lower extremities. His symptoms occurred after walking for approximately 100 m. He received acupuncture at an oriental clinic. However, his symptoms did not improve. According to the patient's description, his symptoms rose from the feet to the top. On a physical examination, the straight leg raise test was negative and the motor grade for both lower extremities was grade V. He also complained of a tingling sensation in the L5 dermatome of the right leg and L4 dermatome of the left leg. Conservative treatment was performed using non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
One month later, his pain in the left leg was improved, but the pain in the right leg had worsened. Therefore, lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which showed central stenosis at the L4–5 and L5–S1 levels, and lateral recess stenosis at the L5–S1 level was observed . The patient’s symptoms were ambiguous with mixed neurological claudication and vascular claudication. We performed a Doppler test for both lower extremities. No pulsations in the right dorsalis pedis or posterior tibialis artery were detected. Under the suspicion of a problem in a vessel, computed tomography (CT) scans for the lower extremity arteries were taken. CT scans showed complete occlusion in the right external iliac artery . The patient was referred to the General Surgery Department. The ankle–brachial pressure index (ABI) was 0.1 to 0.2 (normal range: 1.0–1.4). Conservative treatment with 75 mg of clopidogrel/day and 20 mcg of beraprost sodium every 8 hours was initially performed for external iliac artery occlusion in the right leg. We obtained consent for this treatment from the patient. After the treatment, his symptoms were improved by 30% to 35% at 1 month after the diagnosis, 60% to 70% after 3 months, and 80% to 85% after 6 months. The patient refused further surgery for the spinal stenosis because he was satisfied with the clinical results.
Clopidogrel and beraprost sodium were continued for 4 years. The ABI was continuously measured during the follow-up period, and it continued to rise to 0.56 after 1 year, 0.69 after 2 years, and 0.73 after 4 years. A follow-up CT scan performed 4 years later showed recanalization of the right external iliac artery occlusion .
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images. All consent procedures and details of this study were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Catholic University of Korea (approval number: SC16ZISE0080). The reporting of this study conforms to the CARE guidelines.