The patient a 52-year-old premenopausal woman, was selected from the mammography screening program for breast cancer, and then was requested to do an ultrasonography and a biopsy of the lesion. A written informed consent was provided by the patient to have the case details published. She had a family history of carcinoma, with her father having non-small cell lung cancer and a brother and a sister having colon adenocarcinoma, and a personal history of mucinous borderline ovarian tumor treated in 2013 with laparoscopic-assisted hysterectomy, adnexectomy, and pelvic lymphadenectomy. The patient had also undergone surgery for colon hyperplastic polyps. At that time, the patient was experiencing a perimenopausal syndrome.
Physical examination showed a nodule of 1×1 cm at the left breast, which was hard and mobile, not adherent to deep layers, in the retroareolar region, at the union of lower quadrants. Only one adenopathy was palpable in the axilla and it had a noninfiltrative but a reactive aspect. The right breast and axilla were both normal, without showing signs of disease. Mammography of the screening program for breast cancer showed a nodule in the left breast the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System, category 3. Ultrasonography confirmed it as a retroareolar solid nodule with a maximum diameter of 11.6 mm .
Initially, the mass was considered breast carcinoma and a biopsy was requested to confirm whether it was breast carcinoma or a benign tumor. A biopsy was carried out and a histologic examination of the biopsy suggested GCT, and deferred immunohistochemi-cal examination showed the typical receptors of this tumor . In our case, GCT showed positive immunoreaction to PAS, PAS diastase and S-100, and calretinin and negative immunoreactivity against cytokeratin, estrogen, progesterone receptors, and also to HER2/Neu receptors; also, negative receptors for cytokeratin confirmed the diagnosis of GCT.,
Finally, a biopsy of a lymph node in the left axilla, followed by a histologic examination showed no signs of malignant cells.