The present case is a 12-year-old boy who was admitted to the orthopedic department of our medical center due to chronic and severe pain in his left knee. He was not a professional athlete, and his activity level was typical for an adolescent. The parents stated a blunt traumatic injury to the affected knee about two years ago that triggered the knee pain in the patient. He had undergone conservative treatments, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for the past six months and also a single dose of lidocaine and corticosteroid intra-articular injection three months ago that did not result in significant persistent improvements but temporarily relieved the pain.
During the physical examination of the lower limbs at the time of admission, normal skin was observed without signs of injuries. There was a regional pain in the supra-lateral site of the patella in the 90° flexion position during ROM examination that was relieved with more flexion or extension. Moreover, point tenderness was felt in the lateral side of the patella directly on the condyle in the knee 90° flexion position. The patient's pain was not related to the activities. During the knee range of motion (ROM) examination, a mild click was also found when going from full extension to flexion at 100°. Knee ROM was 0–130°.
The hyperflexion and hyperextension of the knee were associated with no pain. Knee stability was preserved in the valgus stress test and varus stress test. The extensor mechanism was normal, no mal-alignment was observed, and the patient's gait was intact. Other examinations, including pivot, McMurray, and Lachman tests, were normal. Neuromuscular examinations of lower limbs were normal. The patient's knee clinical appearance is shown in .
The X-ray of the affected knee indicated no pathologies , but the left knee MRI showed significant hypertrophy of the synovial membrane .
The patient underwent knee arthroscopy with suspicion of hypertrophic plica. A hypertrophic synovial plica in the lateral side of the left knee was observed. A complete resection of hypertrophic plica was performed. The surgery details are as follows: A systematic examination of the knee joint was performed. The patellofemoral, medial, and lateral compartments were evaluated for any signs of pathology. Cartilage surfaces, menisci, ligaments, and synovium were inspected thoroughly. Attention was directed towards the lateral compartment, specifically the lateral plica. The lateral plica was identified and assessed for any abnormalities, including thickening, fraying, or impingement. Subsequently, arthroscopic shavers and scissors were used carefully to resect the affected portion of the plica. Great care was taken to preserve surrounding structures and minimize trauma to the synovium. After resection, the knee joint was thoroughly irrigated with saline solution to remove debris. The arthroscope was used to confirm the successful resection of the lateral plica and to ensure the absence of any residual pathology.
Moreover, an accidental finding of the knee arthroscopy was angiogenesis in the femoral condyle beneath the hypertrophic plica . Angiogenesis is commonly found in pathologic plica, caused by inflammation due to friction, with increased inflammatory cells and hyalinization .
The patient's follow-up immediately and after six months showed complete remission without further knee pain. No ROM restrictions or complications are reported during flexion from 0° to 140°. Moreover, in the recent follow-up visit of this patient, 1.5 years after surgical resection, he did not suffer from any pain in the rest and physical activity. He also had a full knee range of motion without any limitation or lag. shows the follow-up MRI.