A 74-year-old non-smoking woman was diagnosed with the right lung shadow following a chest computed tomography (CT) scan . She was admitted to the hospital because of coma after misusing hypnotics. Primary lung adenocarcinoma was diagnosed through radiological examinations and a lung biopsy in the right lower lobe. Immunohistochemically, it showed TTF-1 (+), Napsin A (+), CK5/6 (−), P40 (−), Ki-67 (<5%+), and AE1/AE3 (+). Surgery was not pursued due to concerns regarding age and tolerability. Enhanced CT scan revealed a 35 mm * 25 mm mass in the dorsal segment of the lower lobe in the right lung, accompanied by obstructive inflammation. Multiple slightly enlarged lymph nodes were observed in the mediastinum and hilum of the right lung (cT2N2Mx). At that time, the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue was examined using an NGS-based assay (Covance CLS China) and the METex14 splice region mutation was identified as c.3028G>T with the abundance of 18.81%. The woman began orally administering tepotinib (Merck-0.5g, once daily). After 1 month, a CT scan revealed that the mass on the right lung lesion had decreased in size to 14 mm * 13 mm. After nearly 5 months since the discontinuation of tepotinib, a chest CT revealed that the mass had reduced to 13 mm * 11 mm, marking the best response. However, the lesion in the right lung increased to 18 mm * 12 mm after 7.6 months of tepotinib treatment, indicating disease progression. Afterward, tepotinib treatment was discontinued.
Additionally, at this time, radiological examinations confirmed the diagnosis of NSCLC, with enlarged mediastinal, right hilar, and bilateral inguinal lymph nodes (cT2N3M1a, stage IVA). In addition, a fine-needle aspiration re-biopsy of the lung was performed for the NGS-based assay (OncoScreen® Focus panel, Burning Rock Dx), which revealed the same METex14 splice region mutations as previously identified, NM_000245.3(MET): c.3028G>T(p. Asp1010Tyr), without any newly identified resistant mutations. The patient was then enrolled in cohort 4 of a clinical trial (KUNPENG, NCT04258033) and initiated on vebreltinib (200 mg twice daily) as a second-line therapy. The patient had stable disease for 6.8 months.
The woman achieved her first PR after 6.8 months from vebreltinib treatment, and further reduction was observed in the size of the mass in the right lung (10.5 mm). The most recent chest CT shows an overall decrease (10.3 mm) in the size of the mass in the right lower lobe, and the treatment was ongoing for over 20 months. The DoR and PFS exceeded 13 months and 20 months, respectively. As of the latest visit, she maintained the response without any Grade 3 or above adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events. No treatment-emergent adverse events led to permanent treatment discontinuation or dose reduction.
The woman developed Grade 2 bilateral lower-extremity edema, which was managed with spironolactone tablets. The patient had mild peripheral edema before starting vebreltinib treatment. A grade 2 AE of anemia was observed twice and recovered after intervention with traditional Chinese medicine. Grade 1 AEs of hyponatremia, amylase increase, and lipase increase were also observed once each, and they recovered without any intervention. A Grade 2 AE of ankle pain was still ongoing but was not considered related to the treatment.