A previously healthy 36-year-old Chinese man presented to the emergency department with a 1-month history of fever. He had consulted a nearby doctor before arriving at our hospital. Symptomatic treatment was given but did not work. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed diffused bilateral infiltration . Abdominal CT showed multiple focal lesions in the liver , without hepatosplenomegaly. Because of rapidly clinical deterioration with onset of acute respiratory failure, he was transferred to the medical intensive care unit.
On admission, his vital signs were: temperature, 37.2 °C; heart rate, 119 beats/min; blood pressure (BP), 90/48 mmHg; and respiration rate, 38 breaths/min with oxygen saturation of 88%. The patient appeared to be acutely ill. A pulmonary examination revealed rales in both lungs. His abdomen was soft, with no hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Routine laboratory tests results were: white blood cell (WBC) count, 5.32 × 109 cells/L; hemoglobin, 94 g/L; platelet count, 70 × 109/L; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 121 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 47 U/L; total bilirubin (TB), 48.4 μmol/L; direct bilirubin (DB), 40.9 μmol/L; blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 11.35 mmol/L; creatinine, 106.0 μmol/L; lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) 508 U/L; serum ferritin, 17,208.98 ng/ml. Even with continuous high-flow oxygen inhalation, arterial blood gas analysis showed pH 7.45, PO2 57 mmHg, PCO2 35 mmHg and lactate 2.0 mmol/L. Coagulation tests demonstrated prothrombin time (PT) 16.9 s, prothrombin activity (PTA) 62%, and fibrinogen level 1.74 g/L. Autoimmune antibody blood tests were negative. Microbiological and serological work-up for HIV, hepatitis A, B, C and E viruses, EBV, cytomegalovirus, dengue virus, malaria, Leptospira, and scrub typhus was negative. Bacteriological assays as well as serology for respiratory viruses (adenovirus, and influenza A and B, parainfluenza and respiratory syncytial viruses), Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae and Legionella were also negative. Repeated sputum smear samples were negative for acid-fast bacilli. The patient had no significant past medical history, specifically no prior TB infections, chronic illnesses, liver or kidney disease, transfusions, malignancy, or immune diseases. He was not taking any regular prescription and he had not travelled abroad.
After admission, the patient was initially diagnosed with fever of unknown origin, pulmonary infection. According to chest and abdominal CT findings, pulmonary TB and hepatic abscess were highly suspected. Malignancy was excluded by positron emission tomography. Considering possible multisite infections due to hypervirulent Klebsiella pneumoniae, we started an antibiotic regimen with meropenem and amikacin. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation was applied for respiratory support. However, the patient continued to present with recurrent high-grade fever. Peripheral blood TB ELISPOT assay was positive, which suggested TB. Anti-TB therapy with rifapentine (0.6 g once a week), isoniazid (0.3 g daily), ethambutol (0.75 g daily) and moxifloxacin (0.4 g daily) was administered.
The patient’s clinical course was notable for obvious dyspnea, intermittent fever, worsening pancytopenia, and hyperferritinemia during observation . On day 4, examination of bone marrow aspiration was undertaken, which revealed increased macrophage activity with hemophagocytosis . Additional blood tests showed low NK cell activity (11.9%, normal value: ≥15.1%) and high-soluble CD25 levels (> 44,000 pg/ml, normal value: < 2400 pg/ml). Accordingly, a diagnosis of HLH was made. However, the patient refused to undergo genetic testing. Following consultation with a hematologist, intravenous etoposide was started on day 7 (0.1 g twice a week for 2 weeks, 0.1 g once a week for the following 6 weeks). The patient responded well to the therapeutic strategy, with marked improvement of fever and cytopenia. On day 17, he was successfully withdrawn from the ventilator.
Once the patient was stable and free of symptoms of respiratory failure, he was transferred to the respiratory department on day 19. Anti-TB therapy with isoniazid, rifapentine, ethambutol and pyrazinamide was administered. After platelet recovery, ultrasound-guided percutaneous lung biopsy was performed on day 22. The pathological result was positive for acid-fast bacilli , which suggested differentiating between Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) and non-tuberculosis mycobacteria (NTM). Re-examination of bone marrow aspiration showed no hemophagocytosis. After discharge in good condition on day 67, he was followed up for 3 months in our hospital and treated with a course of four standard anti-TB drugs. The patient has stayed systemically well. Six months later, the repeated chest CT findings in another tertiary hospital revealed fibrous proliferation, calcification and pleural thickening, which still indicated tuberculosis .