47-year-old female patient, housewife, no financial resources and no medical services. The patient presented with pain, functional limitation and deformity of the left wrist. She reported a history of TCG resection, treated with curettage and obturation of the defect with autograft of the iliac crest 4 years ago. Physical examination revealed deformity of the left distal radius with pain on palpation and significant limitation of flexion-extension movements, with no evidence of distal neurovascular involvement and normal mobility of the fingers. Radiologically, an expansive lytic lesion was observed with thinning of the lateral cortical and rupture of the anteromedial cortical of the left distal radius, classified as grade III of Campanacci for TCG. Surgery was performed with a dorsal approach, dissecting planes until the tumor tissue was found with destruction of the anteromedial cortical at the distal third of the radius. Extensor tendons were removed from the tumor tissue and a 7 cm block resection was performed, preserving the carpal bones. Simultaneously, an autologous graft of about 9 cm from the distal third of the fibula was taken and a 7 cm molded block was placed in the area where the resection was performed. Subsequently, a pre-molded 12-hole 3.5 mm compression plate with a dorsal curvature of 10° dorsiflexion was placed to provide an optimal hand position; a metacarpo-carpo-radial arthrodesis was performed with distal fixation in the third metacarpal with three locking pins, a 3.5 mm cortical screw to the greater bone, two locking pins for the graft and three proximal locking pins. The cubito-carpo joint was stabilized and fixed with a 2.0 mm Kirschner wire, the wound was washed and the remaining autologous graft in the radiocarpal space was fragmented. Extensor tendons were rearranged and a flat closure was performed. Finally, a splint was placed on the forearm. The diagnosis of TCG was confirmed by pathology. There were no complications during surgery.

At 18 months of follow-up, clinical results were very encouraging and the patient reported being very satisfied. She had no pain or paresthesia and performed her daily activities; the patient had good grip strength (80% compared to the healthy side) and had fine motor function in the hand. The wrist was stable with pronation of 85°, supination of 80°, flexion-extension of 0°, and a DASH (Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand) functional outcome assessment questionnaire score of 6.7. Radiologically, the autograft was integrated at the distal end and not integrated at the proximal end. The patient was evaluated radiologically five years after surgery and continued to have no evidence of local recurrence and pulmonary involvement.
