A 74-year-old male complained of blurred vision in both eyes because of senile cataract in October 2015. Visual acuities were 6/20 OD and 8/20 OS with a normal intraocular pressure (IOP). Slit-lamp examination revealed mild cortical cataract OU. Fundus findings showed nothing of note. The initial ophthalmologist planned to perform cataract surgery for his right eye. His medical history was prostate hypertrophy, while he had no history of dementia. Viscoelastic materials with high-level cohesion were injected into the anterior chamber to dilate the pupil due to miosis following hydrodissection OD. Severe thermal corneoscleral injury occurred soon after beginning the phacoemulsification. The wound was tightly sutured by pedunculated conjunctiva; however, viscoelastic materials were injected again since the leakage was not suppressed. The next day, he was referred to our hospital. Visual acuity was hand motion and IOP was 3 mm Hg OD. There was marked corneal stromal opacity with intraocular fluid leakage. The scleral wound was found to be opening following conjunctival incision . Since mobility of the sclera was markedly involved, it was impossible to conduct direct suture of the injured sclera. Therefore, the patient underwent transplantation of a donor scleral graft using 10-0 nylon to the burn site . After the transplantation and confirmation of the absence of intraocular fluid leakage, the lens nucleus was extracted from the newly formed wound on the temporal side of the scald. Histologically, the injured sclera showed coagulation necrosis with eosinophilic materials . Attachment of the transplanted sclera was favorable and IOP recovered to normal. Three months after the surgery, macular edema occurred due to intraocular inflammation caused by the remaining lens cortex. Therefore, anterior vitrectomy was conducted leading to the resolution of macular edema, and an intraocular lens was eventually fixed in the ciliary sulcus 7 months later. The visual acuity improved to 2/20 OD with stable IOP and a reduced corneal opacity in October 2016 .