A 47-year-old male, who hospitalized due to a giant scrotal tumor. He has a history of chronic alcoholism, developed numerous soft masses in the anterior neck, supraclavicular fossa, nape, bilateral arms, and shoulders 10 years ago. The tumors were painless and gradually enlarged in size. Five years ago, the patient developed a soft mass in the scrotum. The scrotal mass rapidly increased in size, he complained that hindering his ability to have sexual activity. Furthermore, the patient found it difficult to perform his daily activities. A physical examination revealed masses in the anterior neck, nape, shoulder, upper back, and scrotum. The mass was soft and poorly defined. The largest one was the scrotal swelling, causing expansion of the scrotal skin and buried penis . The penis could not be palpated if it was not erect; a short portion of the penis protruding to the surface could be manipulated during an erection, the prepuce and meatus were not abnormal. Normal-sized testicles were palpable in addition to the tumor, which moved independent of the tumor. His BMI was 26. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed non-encapsulated adipose tissue on either side of the scrotum . An excision biopsy revealed a benign lipomatous tissue. Thyroid ultrasound image and thyroid hormones was normal. The levels of lipid in the blood, including cholesterol and triglycerides were within normal range. Liver function test results were abnormal. The levels of factors II, V, and VII were decreased, which in turn reduced the thrombocyte count and PTT levels. Thus, the patient was treated preoperatively with infusions of fresh frozen plasma and vitamin K.
An incision was made at the midline of the scrotal skin, and the tumor was dissected from the scrotal skin and surrounding tissues. The bilateral epididymis, spermatic cord, and testes were preserved. The lower part of the tumor could be easily dissected from the scrotal subcutaneous tissue. However, it was firmly attached to the scrotal skin. The resected fatty tumor was pale yellow, multi-lobed, and weighed 1650 g. The excess skin was excised in a wedge shape between the anterior and posterior scrotal regions to preserve the flap supplied by the anterior and posterior scrotal arteries . The patient was advised for quitting alcohol, weight loss after operation. At 3 months postoperatively, the patient confessed that he was able to perform normal sexual activity and his quality of life was improved.