An 80-year-old woman with a history of coronary artery disease, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, basal cell carcinoma removed via Mohs procedure on the nose, diabetic retinopathy, and macular degeneration presented with a history of a recent increase in the number of falls she had been sustaining due to a recent, sudden deterioration of vision bilaterally. She was initially seen by the ophthalmologist 2 months ago for loss of vision in her right eye that was thought to be related to her previously diagnosed diabetic retinopathy. She underwent focal laser photocoagulation for diabetic retinopathy in her right eye, with no significant improvement in vision. Upon further ophthalmic evaluation, a fleshy, salmon colored conjunctival tumor was identified in her left eye . She was referred to the ocular oncology service and subsequently the conjunctival tumor was biopsied. Histopathologic examination of the specimen revealed sheets of large neoplastic lymphoid cells with moderate nuclear pleomorphism, vesicular chromatin, and large nucleoli underlying the normal conjunctival epithelium . Small lymphocytes were observed admixed with the previously described atypical ones. Immunohistochemical studies showed the large lymphoid cells stained positive (diffuse, strong) for CD20 and MUM-1, less intensely positive for Pax-5, weakly positive for Bcl-6, and negative for CD10. The small background lymphocytes were CD3-positive . Histopathological findings were consistent with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with an immunophenotypic profile consistent with nongerminal center origin. Proliferation index estimated by Ki-67 labeling was found to be 80% and were positive for c-myc rearrangement.
The patient's laboratory workup including complete blood count with a differential, comprehensive metabolic panel, and coagulation profile, was within normal limits. Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was 506 U/L (normal range: 313-618 U/L). Her hepatitis screen was negative. She underwent orbital computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans that failed to reveal any discrete masses although the MRI revealed a mild asymmetric thickening and enhancement of the sclera in the anterior left globe. Additionally, both positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) and an MRI of her brain failed to reveal any other systemic central nervous system (CNS) involvement. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis after an uncomplicated lumbar puncture (LP) did not reveal any malignant cells.
Since the patient had a biopsied conjunctival tumor on the left side but had unexplained loss of vision on the right side as well, she was presumed to have CNS involvement and was treated with high dose systemic methotrexate in addition to rituximab. She received three cycles of methotrexate at 1.5 g/m2 (50% dose reduction due to age and low creatinine clearance) and rituximab at a dose of 375 mg/m2. The first cycle was complicated by severe diarrhea related to Clostridium difficile infection and dehydration and the third cycle was complicated by acute renal insufficiency, fluid overload, insufficient methotrexate clearance, and prolonged hospital stay. Further chemotherapy had to be stopped in view of the side effects. Ophthalmic follow-up revealed improved vision in her right eye. Interval MRI revealed interval improvement in nonspecific scleral thickening and enhancement along the anterior aspect of the left globe. Based on the documented improvement, the patient was to be continued on the same chemotherapy regimen; however, she declined further treatment. The patient was evaluated by radiation oncology but she opted to decline further treatment at this time. She has not followed up by physicians at this hospital after that and has been lost to follow-up.