A 60-year-old male patient diagnosed with non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy with reduced LVEF and LBBB was referred to our clinic for progressive exertional dyspnea and fatigue symptoms developed over the previous two years. The patient was in functional NYHA class II despite maximally tolerated doses of angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors, beta-blockers, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, and sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors for the past six months. The presenting ECG showed sinus rhythm with an LBBB morphology and a QRS duration of 160 ms . Echocardiography revealed an enlarged left ventricle (LV) with an ejection fraction of 26%, normal wall thickness, overt signs of intraventricular dyssynchrony (apical rocking and septal flash), moderate mitral regurgitation, biatrial enlargement, and non-dilated right ventricle. The lab results were unremarkable. Given the clinical, electrocardiographic, and echocardiographic findings, the patient had a class I recommendation for CRT. Our laboratory has adopted CSP as the first option for patients with CRT indications for the past two years. For this case with potentially difficult anatomy (dilated LV and atria possibly displacing and modifying the trajectory of the conduction system), we decided to perform the procedure guided by a 3D mapping system, the Ensite Precision system (Abbott Cardiovascular, Plymouth, MN, USA), to reduce the X-ray exposure. After obtaining two separate entry sites in the axillary vein, a conventional atrial lead was placed at the right ventricular apex and connected to the 3D system to serve as a reference and backup pacing. Using the other axillary route, a deflectable decapolar EP catheter was used to create the anatomy of the right atrium, the coronary sinus, and the basal part of the right ventricle. After delineating the tricuspid valve, we thoroughly mapped and tagged the His bundle (HB) cloud from proximal to distal (a). With the map completed, the EP catheter was withdrawn, and a deflectable Medtronic C304 His catheter (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) with a Medtronic SelectSecure 3830 lead (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) inside was introduced. The lead was connected in a unipolar fashion to the 3D system so that the tip of the lead would be visible on the map (a). The catheter was placed at the distal part of the HB cloud (b), where repeated pacing showed complete correction of the LBBB, but unfortunately, at unacceptably high thresholds (3 V at 1ms pulse duration) (c). In the next step, a point was marked on the 3D map at 1.5 cm from the distal His location towards the right ventricular apex (d). The catheter was placed at that spot, and the lead was screwed deep into the septum under minimal fluoroscopic guidance until fixation beats with right bundle branch block morphology were observed (a,b). Pacing at that site revealed a narrow QRS complex with a QR morphology in lead V1, a duration of 125 ms, and an LVAT of 70 ms (c). Differential pacing with two extra stimuli showed an evident change in the morphology of the premature complex, proving the initial capture of more than one structure and, implicitly, the LBB capture (d). The catheter was retracted and slit, followed by atrial lead placement in the right atrial appendage under fluoroscopy. The procedural pacing threshold was 0.75 V at 0.4 ms pulse duration with a detection of 12 mV and a fluoroscopy time of 2 min. The total procedural time was 120 min, with 17 min dedicated to 3D mapping. The final electrocardiography showed atrial synchronized, narrow-paced QRS complexes with different degrees of fusion . There were no periprocedural complications, and the patient was discharged uneventfully the next day. The pacing and sensing thresholds were stable over the follow-up period. The 3-month echocardiography follow-up revealed a significant increase in LVEF (from 26% to 43%) and a decrease in left ventricular volumes (the end-systolic volume decreased from 174 mL to 132 mL). The patient also had a substantial clinical improvement with no heart failure symptoms during normal daily activities.