A 82-year old lady presented to the Department of General Surgery at the University of Heidelberg, Germany with recurrent attacks of hypoglycemia and a large abdominal mass. While diagnostic tests repeatedly documented glucose levels below 40 mg/dl (normal levels 80 – 120 mg/dl), a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a large lesion of around 5 to 6 cm in relation to the pancreatic body and tail. There were also large masses of about 3–5 cm in the retroperitoneum and in the area of the celiac trunk and around the mesenteric artery. Furthermore, in the pancreatic body there was a hypervascularized area , that was suspicious for an insulinoma. Clinically this lady, who was not thriving, reported a weight loss of 12 kilograms over the previous 4 months. A somatostatin receptor scintigraphy showed an enhanced uptake in the region of the pancreatic body/tail as well as in the right axilla (a palpable mass was also noted there) and excluded the possibility of other involved areas.
She gave a past history of an operation done on the right eyebrow 2 years prior for a 0.8 × 0.8 cm lesion that was reported as a Merkel cell carcinoma. Histopathology showed rather uniform tumor cells in a trabecular growth pattern with monomorphous pale-stained nuclei and many mitoses . There was invasion of dermal lymphatics and blood vessels . Immunohistochemistry revealed strong positivity for cytokeratin 20 and neurofilament (not shown) in the characteristic dot-like pattern and a weak expression of chromogranin A . After excision, radiation therapy was also administered only at the site of the primary lesion, the draining lymphatic vessels and the first lymph node station. A year later, a large abdominal mass was noted of uncertain origin and an ultrasound guided biopsy showed an unspecified small cell cancer. In view of the large mass with additional suspicious areas being noted in the spleen, left adrenal gland and axilla, she had been subjected to palliative radiotherapy of 30 Gray over 2 months. However no definitive diagnosis of metastasis in these areas was established. With a working clinical diagnosis of symptomatic insulinoma not responding to medical measures, a decision for surgical resection of this large lesion was inevitable, the age of the patient and the previous history of palliative radiation just 6 months prior notwithstanding.
Surgical exploration revealed a large mass of about 5 cm in the tail of the pancreas, in close proximity to the spleen and the splenic flexure of the transverse colon. However there was no evidence of any metastatic disease to the liver, peritoneum and the adnexae. After a careful and meticulous mobilization, a distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, and adrenalectomy along with resection of the splenic flexure of the colon were performed.
Pathological examination revealed a tumor with manifestations in the pancreatic tail, the adrenal gland, the peripancreatic tissue, and the surrounding soft tissue. Grossly, the mass displayed a whitish and glassy cut surface, containing extended areas of haemorrhage and necrosis. Histologically, the tumor displayed endocrine architecture with mostly solid formations of rather monomorphic cells. The tumor was mitotically highly active (mitotic count >10 per high power field) and contained abundant areas of necrosis. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were strongly positive for the endocrine marker synaptophysin and for cytokeratin 20 while there was no expression of insulin. The proliferative activity (MIB-1) reached approximately 80% .
Furthermore, gross examination of the resected specimen revealed a well demarcated, brownish tumor of the pancreatic body, measuring 1.2 cm in diameter. This tumor microscopically displayed endocrine architecture with trabecular arrangements of uniform tumor cells, showing no mitotic activity. Immunohistochemistry revealed strong positivity for synaptophysin as well as focal positivity for insulin. The proliferative activity (MIB-1) was approximately 1% . The diagnosis of a poorly differentiated endocrine carcinoma (Merkel cell carcinoma) along with that of benign pancreatic insulinoma was thus made.
The patient had a smooth postoperative recovery, the bouts of hypoglycaemia completely disappeared, and she was discharged home within 3 weeks of surgery. She is presently asymptomatic and remains on regular follow up.