A 76 year old ‘never smoker’ female with no past medical history was diagnosed with locally advanced NSCLC during investigations for a community-acquired lower respiratory tract infection. The Medical Research Council (MRC) Dyspnoea Score was 3 and there was a dry cough. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest demonstrated a 4.5 cm (anterior-posterior) × 4.1 cm (craniocaudal) left lung upper lobe mass with abutment of the mediastinal pleura and distal atelectasis and pneumonitis .
An 8 mm ipsilateral lymph node was visible at station 10. Multiple sub-centimetre lung nodules were noted throughout the right lung. Histological and immunohistochemical assessment of core biopsies from the primary lesion via bronchoscopy favoured the adenocarcinoma subtype of NSCLC (see Table ). The molecular analysis revealed ALK fusion protein overexpression along with ALK rearrangement. This result is in keeping with an ALK rearranged adenocarcinoma. The main lesion had an SUVmax of 16 on 18fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission topography-CT (PET-CT) imaging and no other lesions were avid. Following a review of the imaging at the multidisciplinary meeting (MDM), staging was offered at T2 N0 M0 (TNM 8 ), and in light of the patient’s fitness, radical treatment was recommended.
During the assessment period for a primary lobectomy, the patient developed symptomatic atrial fibrillation. She underwent a successful direct current (DC) cardioversion and was discharged on edoxaban. Three weeks later the patient was noted to be in atrial fibrillation once more during an inpatient admission for the management of chest sepsis, for which she was discharged on digoxin. She was electively admitted to the Cardiology ward 6 weeks later for a second DC cardioversion procedure. Under conscious sedation, the patient received one synchronised shock of 120 J delivered via anterior-posterior paddles ie one placed at the left parasternal edge, one at the corresponding position on the patient’s back. One week post-procedure the patient attended the Emergency Department complaining of dysarthria and left-sided hemiparesis. CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain confirmed the presence of a dense right-sided middle cerebral artery territory infarction (see Fig. ). The patient was in sinus rhythm, transthoracic echocardiography was unremarkable and mild bilateral carotid atheroma only was noted on ultrasonography (< 50% stenosis), suggestive for a stroke secondary to a delayed cardiogenic embolus related to atrial fibrillation, despite anticoagulation.
Five days later, haemorrhagic transformation of the stoke was detected on MRI following clinical deterioration. A 3.5 cm intracerebral haematoma was identified within the right basal ganglia, causing effacement of the right lateral ventricle frontal horn, which was managed conservatively. The clinical condition stabilised and both her speech and weakness improved with rehabilitation from the department of Stroke Medicine.
As the patient’s ECOG PS recovered to 2 and her breathlessness resolved, work-up for radical treatment resumed, given her ongoing determination to gain control over the cancer. Updated cross-sectional imaging demonstrated complete regression of the left upper lobe lesion and a reduction of the previously documented mediastinal lymph node. Remaining atelectasis had a maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) 2.7 on repeat PET-CT imaging (8 months since first PET). A review of the patient’s medications was undertaken searching for possible effects on FDG uptake, which was negative. The merits and risks of radical radiotherapy versus active surveillance were explored with the patient who elected to proceed with the latter.
Clinical review after 6 months of active surveillance, dry cough and mild dyspnoea were reported by the patient. Corresponding with the imaging findings, thoracic imaging with CT showed increased patchy parenchymal changes at the site of the previous left upper lobe lesion without associated hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Repeat PET-CT imaging demonstrated increased uptake (SUVmax 10.2) in a sub-pleural 4 cm mass in keeping with local relapse (see Fig. ), and no additional sites of disease.
As the pulmonary function tests (FEV1 90% predicted; TLCO 80% predicted) were favourable and physical fitness had stabilised (ECOG PS 2) the patient was consented for a course of radical thoracic radiotherapy without chemotherapy. She completed 55 Gy in 20 fractions planned with the intensity modulated radiotherapy technique and delivered as 6 MV arc therapy, with daily online cone beam-CT image guidance, treating Monday to Friday for 4 weeks . Target volumes were subject to peer review . Tumour shrinkage was noted during routine offline imaging review.
There were no acute toxicities during routine clinical assessments on treatment, or at 6 weeks post-radiotherapy. On clinical review 4 months after treatment completion the patient was more frail and had continued respiratory symptoms. Around this time, the first radiological follow-up scan demonstrated radiation pneumonitis focally in left upper lobe. At 1 year the patient returned to ECOG PS 1 and the imaging demonstrated stable disease locally and no evidence of distant relapse. At 18 months post-radiotherapy there was radiologic progression in the lungs with new pulmonary nodules and effusion and new bone metastases correlating with new symptoms of dyspnoea, cough and back pain. Owing to poor performance status, she was not considered fit for systemic therapy including ALK-targeted therapy and was managed with multi-disciplinary best supportive care until her death 5 months later.