The patient was a 43-year-old Japanese woman who underwent 70 Gy heavy-particle radiotherapy administered as 5 fractions of 14 Gy for a right choroidal malignant melanoma (T3a, N0, M0 clinical-stage IIB according to the 8th edition of the International Union Against Cancer classification) . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) performed post-treatment revealed no abnormal accumulation of 2-deoxy-2-(fluorine-18) fluoro-d-glucose, and the complete response was recorded . PET-CT examination was subsequently performed regularly every 6 months, and no recurrence was noted up to 4 years after treatment, when contrast accumulation (maximum standardized uptake value 10.9) was observed on the posterior wall of the stomach .
Gastrointestinal endoscopic examination revealed a smooth, protruding lesion on the wall of the greater curvature of the stomach . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed extramural growth of a hypoechoic tumor with the presence of blood flow inside, on the posterior wall of the stomach that was approximately 2.2 × 2.0 cm in size . CT showed a mass with contrast enhancement in contact with the stomach wall . Based on the imaging findings, a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) at the posterior wall of the lower gastric corpus with extramural growth was suspected. Therefore, the patient was referred to our hospital for treatment.
Laparoscopic surgery was performed under general anesthesia. A black-pigmented tumor originating from the body of the pancreas was discovered to be in contact with the posterior wall of the stomach , but continuity was not observed. Based on the intraoperative findings, metastasis of the malignant choroidal melanoma to the pancreas was diagnosed. Since no other lesions were discovered in the abdominal cavity, it was determined that resection would be possible, and laparoscopic pancreatic tail resection was performed.
The resected tumor comprised a single black nodule with a long-axis diameter of 27 mm . Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed spindle cells with melanin pigment production . Immunohistological examination showed positive signals for the S100 protein, HNB-45, and Melan A, confirming the diagnosis . On postoperative day 20, a grade IIIa pancreatic fistula (Clavien–Dindo classification version 2) developed, but amelioration was achieved using conservative treatment. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 50.
Administration of 3 mg/kg nivolumab was initiated as adjuvant chemotherapy 2 months after surgery, but 2 months later multiple lung metastases were detected by CT. Therefore, administration of 3 mg/kg ipilimumab was initiated. Following the first dose, the patient developed colitis as an immune-related adverse event and grade 3 diarrhea (based on the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0 classification), the latter of which was ameliorated by oral administration of 30 mg prednisolone. There was an outbreak of dermatitis, which was also judged to be an immune-related adverse event, and the administration of ipilimumab was discontinued. Two courses of 800 mg/m2 dacarbazine were administered 12 months postoperatively, but the treatment was discontinued due to metastasis to the left kidney. Nivolumab administration resumed 28 months after surgery. The patient was alive after 17 courses of nivolumab without symptoms or exacerbation of the lesion.