A 77-year-old woman was referred to our department after she requested surgical treatment for a tumor located near the gastric fornix. She underwent a preventive esophagogastroduodenoscopy 2 years and 7 months prior to the referral. The examination had revealed a submucosal tumor-like lesion in the fornix, which measured 10 mm. After this diagnosis, she was referred to her previous physician. Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a low density, round mass, measuring approximately 20 mm that was located between the upper stomach and left lateral segment of the liver . Additionally, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the mass showed a high signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging and seemed to be distinct from the stomach . It was determined that the tumor would require careful follow-up. A follow-up MRI was performed 5 months later, and it showed slight growth of the tumor. An endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was also performed, and it revealed a cystic structure continuous with the gastric wall. Contrary to the previous CT and MRI results that suggested the presentation of an extra-gastric tumor, the EUS results suggested that a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) could not be ruled out. Owing to the conflicting results, the patient was referred to the endoscopy division of our hospital two years ago for detailed examination. On admission, abnormal symptoms such as fever, anemia, and jaundice were not observed, and her performance status was good (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group score of 0). She had a history of Sjögren syndrome but had no history of other systemic diseases such as diabetes and hypertension. She had no history of smoking and alcohol abuse. Additionally, she had no family history of malignant diseases. Laboratory studies were within normal range. The EUS was re-examined, and it was concluded that the cystic tumor with solid components did not to originate from either the liver or the stomach. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy was not performed considering the risk of tumor dissemination (according to Japanese Clinical Practice Guidelines for GIST, 3rd edition, it is contraindicated to perform EUS-FNA for extramurally grown submucosal tumor ). The differential diagnoses considered for the tumor were bronchogenic cyst, epidermoid cyst, lymph node with cystic degeneration, and neurogenic tumor. Since a few malignant findings were observed, regular follow-ups were recommended for the patient. These examinations indicated that there was gradual growth in the size of the tumor. A follow-up EUS performed 1 year and 6 months after admission revealed that the cystic tumor had grown to 25 mm in diameter, and there seemed to be no continuity between the tumor and the stomach . However, the CT scan showed an unclear part of the boundary between the tumor and the gastric wall . We could not completely exclude the possibility of GIST, and we explained the results to the patient. She requested surgical resection, following which we planned for a surgery at our division.
Since the tumor was rather small (less than 3 cm in diameter), we decided to resect the tumor using laparoscopic approach. The tumor was located close to the upper stomach, and we planned to place the trocars using the same arrangement as in upper gastrointestinal surgery. The patient was placed in the supine position with legs apart; the brunt port was inserted from the umbilicus; a 12 mm trocar and three 5 mm trocars were placed in the reverse trapezoid position in the upper abdomen; and the Nathanson’s retractor (HEIWA MEDICAL INSTRUMENTS Co., Ltd. Bofu, Yamaguchi, Japan) was placed in the epigastrium as the liver retractor . An initial laparoscopic examination revealed a firm, completely encapsulated mass located on the left of the diaphragm . Since the tumor was relatively small and visibility was good, we decided to continue with the laparoscopic approach. Partial diaphragmectomy with complete inclusion of the tumor was performed using laparoscopic coagulation shears . The tumor was packed in a plastic bag and then extracted via the umbilical incision. The defect of the diaphragm was directly closed by a running suture using the 3-0 V-Loc™ absorbable suture (Medtronic plc, Minneapolis, MS, USA) . The total operating time was 59 min. The intraoperative blood loss was negligible. A video recording of the surgical procedure has been provided in the Additional file .
The tumor measured 2.5 × 2.0 × 1.8 cm and was well encapsulated . The cut section of the tumor showed a tan or yellow solid component and cystic abnormalities. On microscopic examination, it was found that the tumor was surrounded by a pink fibrous capsule with a cystic area . Under low magnification power, the tumor showed a pattern of alternating highly cellular Antoni type A and less cellular Antoni type B areas . The tumor was composed of spindle cells with bland, twisted nuclei and indistinct cytoplasmic border arranged in short bundles or interlacing fascicles . In the Antoni type A area, the spindle cells showed nuclear palisading. Upon immunohistochemical analysis, the tumor cells showed diffuse positivity for both the S100 and SOX10 proteins . It was concluded that the tumor was a benign diaphragmatic schwannnoma.
There were no postoperative complications. The patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day and is doing well 4 months after the surgery.