A 54-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital because of blood in the sputum and hemoptysis.
A 54-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital because she had seen blood in her sputum for more than 4 mo and had had hemoptysis for 1 wk. The hemoptysis occurred without a clear reason. The coughed-out blood was bright red in clots and was accompanied by a large quantity of white and nonviscous sputum. The patient did not sweat excessively either during the day or night, did not feel cold or have a fever, did not feel chest tightness or shortness of breath, and had no dizziness or headache.
The patient had undergone surgical removal of gallbladder polyps more than 20 years ago, and had received minimally invasive surgery for breast fibroma more than 2 years ago.
The patient had no history of smoking or consuming alcohol, and there was no family medical history.
On admission, the patient's temperature was 36.7°C, with a heart rate of 78 beats/min, blood pressure of 110/68 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min. The patient exhibited clear consciousness and compliance throughout the examination. Her trachea was in a neutral position, there was no cyanosis in her mouth or lips, and no swollen lymph nodes were identified in the supraclavicular region of either side. The breathing sound of both lungs was clear; no obvious rale was heard. The heart rhythm was regular; no obvious pathological noise was heard. The patient’s abdomen was flat and soft; no tenderness or rebound pain was identified. Edema in her lower extremities was not evident, and no clear pathological signs were found in the nervous system.
Her hemoglobin level was relatively low at 98 g/L; the remaining routine blood examination results, C-reactive protein level, liver and kidney function indicators, and electrolyte levels were all within the normal range. A laboratory examination indicated that the levels of the tumor indices neuron specific enolase (NSE), carbohydrate antigen (CA)-724, CA-125, CA19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen, and alpha-fetoprotein were in the normal range.
A computer tomography (CT) image of the patient that had been obtained in November 2017 showed atrophy in the middle lobe of her right lung as well as bronchiectasis in the left lung and the middle lobe of the right lung accompanied by infections. Numerous nodules with a diameter of 0.3 to 0.5 cm were identified in the middle lobe of the right lung . Another CT image obtained in March 2018 revealed that the bronchiectasis in the middle lobe of her right lung was accompanied by atelectasis, which was more observable than the atrophy in the same location in the previous CT image .