A 55-year-old male patient was presented to a general hospital with fever, myalgia, and persistent cough. Polymerase chain reaction testing for COVID-19 was positive and he was admitted to the hospital due to severe respiratory symptoms. The patient is a known diabetic and hypertensive with a history of a nonfunctioning pituitary macroadenoma for which he underwent an endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal resection 11 years ago in another hospital. Pituitary tumor recurrence was documented in the available two postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies . After surgery, the patient was kept on maintenance levothyroxine and hydrocortisone for panhypopituitarism.
Six days after admission, the patient complained of severe headache and acute onset of ptosis and diminution of vision in the left eye. Ophthalmological evaluation revealed complete visual loss in the left eye, a visual acuity of 20/60 in the right eye, left oculomotor nerve palsy with ptosis, and dilated nonreactive pupil. Fundus examination revealed a pale left optic nerve head. Neurological examination was otherwise normal. Computed tomography revealed hyperdensity of the sellar and suprasellar areas. MRI was consistent with PA in a recurrent large pituitary adenoma [ and ].
The patient was transferred to our center and underwent an urgent endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery through which a near total excision of the tumor was achieved [ and ].
The procedure was performed under strict COVID-19 precautions including use of powered air purifying respirators and limited OR personnel. Intraoperative findings were similar to those usually seen in cases of PA and included dark blood mixed with purple-red adenoma tissues of variable consistencies . It was our observation that the nasal mucosa was pale and separated easily from the underlying bone. We have previously observed such features in two patients who previously tested positive for COVID-19. Histopathological examination demonstrated classic features of PA.
Within the first 3 postoperative days, the patient had some improvement of vision of the left eye so that he was able to perceive hand movement. Ptosis also improved partially. However, his chest condition progressed and he had to be transferred to COVID-19 intensive care unit in the referring hospital where he was intubated and put on mechanical ventilation. One week later, the patient unfortunately passed away due to complications of severe COVID-19 pneumonia.