A 24-year-old male was complained of intermediate dry cough for 1 month. He denied any history of fever, weight loss, chest pain. Chest CT showed a tumor located on the posterior 6th left rib, which measured about 20 mm × 18 mm. An area of local bony destruction with conserved cortex was noted, and the margins were delineated with some ossifying matrix. Enhanced CT revealed non-uniform enhancement. There was no evidence of extension to the adjacent soft tissue. The imaging first diagnosis was LCH, a giant cell tumor, or other type of neoplasm .
His family medical history was negative for any type of malignancy. Physical examination, the tumor wasn’t palpable and no pain by pressing on the chest wall. The overlying skin was normal, and no sensory deficit. Laboratory testing results, including tumor markers, complete blood cell count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were within the normal value. The derivation purified protein skin test and tuberculosis test were negative too.
The patient was anesthetized with double-lumen endotracheal intubation and lied on the right side. The endoscopic incision about 1 cm length was the 8th intercostal space of the left posterior axillary line, and another operating incision about 3 cm length is the 4th intercostal anterior axillary line. The right lung was ventilated and the left lung was collapsed. It was observed to be present on the posterior side of the 6th left rib, the margins were well-defined, and no sign of adjacent soft tissue invasion was noted. The electrocoagulation hook kept about 0.5 cm away from the tumor border and completely resected the tumor. Frozen section pathological examination demonstrated a benign or a low-grade malignant bone tumor. The more surrounding tissues and partial intercostal muscle were removed further. The straight pliers were used to guide the ribs to separate the ribs, and the wire saws cut off the broken ribs, including a margin of at least 1 cm of normal rib. No reconstruction was required for the rib deficit .
Pathological examination of hematoxylin and eosin (H-E) stained revealed typical polygonal-shaped chondroblasts and osteoclast-like giant cells. The chondroblasts were large and closely packed with a central, characteristically translucent cytoplasm and grooved nucleus .
IHC examination made a diagnosis of chondroblastoma .
There were no intraoperative or postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged after 5 days. Patient described only minimal pain, and had only 2 small incisions on the chest wall. There was little impact on lung function, and a shorten chest drainage tube time and hospital stay .
Radical resection and no adjuvant therapy were given postoperative. The patient was followed every 3 months with chest CT or chest radiograph and blood tests within the first year and every 4 months within the second year. The patient has no chest pain, chest tightness, no abnormal breathing on the chest wall and the lung function is normal . About 23 months follow-up there was no evidences of recurrence or metastasis.
A timeline showed the whole medical procedure of this case.