A 54-year-old male with a remote history of Hodgkin lymphoma treated with chemotherapy and mediastinal radiation was admitted to the hospital to undergo elective surgical mitral valve (MV) replacement and tricuspid valve (TV) repair. He previously had radiation-induced aortic valve stenosis requiring surgical aortic valve replacement with bioprosthetic aortic root in 2013. He was again referred to cardiothoracic surgery in 2019 for shortness of breath, fatigue, and severe pulmonary arterial (PA) hypertension (mean PA pressure 75 mmHg on right heart catheterization) resulting from radiation-induced calcific mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation (MR) and tricuspid regurgitation (TR). Intraoperatively, there was enormous calcification extending from the interannular fibrosa to the A1, A2, P1, and P3 regions of the mitral valve requiring extensive debridement (Video 1, Figure ). A bioprosthetic MV and TV annuloplasty ring were then successfully inserted with initial improvement in PA pressures by approximately 30% by invasive monitoring. Limited intraoperative TOE post-cardiopulmonary bypass showed preserved ventricular function, trace TR, and trace paravalvular MR in the A1 region where calcification had been heaviest, and debridement caused disruption of the anterior mitral annular structure.
He was admitted to the intensive care unit for post-operative care and weaned off ventilator and vasopressor support. He was found to have post-surgical complete heart block requiring placement of a permanent pacemaker on post-operative Day 11.
One week later, he developed shortness of breath, orthopnoea, and weight gain. Physical exam was notable for jugular venous distention, bibasilar pulmonary crackles, and peripheral pitting oedema. Despite escalating diuretics, the volume overload progressed with a net weight gain of 16 kg. He developed acute kidney injury, transaminitis, and hypotension requiring inotropic and vasopressor support. Laboratory investigation also revealed worsening haemolytic anaemia (haemoglobin nadir 8.1 g/dL, total bilirubin 43.8 mg/dL, lactate dehydrogenase 2993 U/L, haptoglobin <30 mg/dL, and schistocytes on peripheral smear). Additional testing ruled out adrenal insufficiency (Ante meridiem (AM) cortisol 18.8 µg/dL), hyperthyroidism (thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) 3.59 mIU/L, free thyroxine 1.25 ng/dL), or arteriovenous fistula at the recent left heart catheterization femoral access site.
Repeat transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) identified increased transmitral gradient (mean 14 mmHg, peak 33 mmHg) with normal pressure half-time (81 ms), elevated peak velocity (2.8 m/s), elevated velocity Time integral (VTI) ratio (2.92), and decreased indexed effective orifice area (0.4 cm2/m2) suggestive of significant occult MR vs. patient-prosthesis mismatch; it also revealed moderate TR and an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 80.3 mmHg . Due to concern for paravalvular leak causing severe haemolytic anaemia and high-output heart failure, a TOE was performed. Images confirmed a moderate-to-severe medial paravalvular mitral leak and a smaller posterolateral leak without evidence of valvular MR. There was a pacemaker lead crossing through the septal portion of the tricuspid annuloplasty ring with dehiscence and associated moderate TR. Most notably, the TOE unexpectedly identified a large septal defect between the LV and the RA , making the diagnosis of acquired iatrogenic Gerbode defect.
The Gerbode defect was adjacent to the medial aspect of the MV prosthesis and posterior to the TV apparatus. Because of the significant risk posed by surgical intervention, the decision was made to pursue transcatheter device closure.
The patient subsequently underwent right heart catheterization, which demonstrated mean RA pressure 30 mmHg, right ventricular (RV) pressure 80/8 mmHg with end-diastolic pressure of 28 mmHg, PA pressure 80/30 (52) mmHg, and mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 36 mmHg. Intraoperative TOE confirmed a Gerbode defect (6.5 mm × 7.8 mm). The defect was closed via right internal jugular approach using a 12-10mm AMPLATZER Duct Occluder (Abbott, Lake Bluff, IL, USA) with immediate drop in mean RA pressure to 21 mmHg, increase in systolic blood pressure by 30 mmHg, and trace residual shunt (Video 3). Because of the hemodynamic significance of the Gerbode defect, as well as the proximity of the defect to the mitral valve prosthesis, the paravalvular mitral leak was not primarily addressed. Incidentally, there was mild improvement of the paravalvular mitral leak following Gerbode closure due to some overlap of the retention disc with this area (Video 3).
Following defect closure, there was rapid recovery of renal function, resolution of haemolysis and increased response to diuresis . On repeat TTE 1 week later, the device remained in appropriate position with insignificant residual shunt. Despite the fact that a mild paravalvular mitral leak persisted with a prosthetic mitral valve mean gradient of 9.5 mmHg, the patient clinically improved, and the decision was made to defer any further attempts at repair. He was discharged after a prolonged hospital course asymptomatic on daily diuretics, including bumetanide, spironolactone, and metolazone. The patient completed his subsequent follow-up visits at an outside facility closer to his home, but 8 months later, he remained well with no hospitalizations following his discharge.