A 70-year-old man (weight 70 kg, body mass index 25.7 kg/m2) with underlying hypertension and dyslipidemia underwent an elective open hernioplasty for right inguinal hernia under ambulatory surgery. He had normal airway features: good mouth opening, Mallampati score of 1, thyromental distance > 6 cm and normal tongue protrusion. General anesthesia was induced with intravenous propofol 200 mg plus fentanyl 100 μg and a size 4 LMA ProtectorTM Airway was placed smoothly in a single attempt by a senior resident. The cuff was inflated with 25 ml of air and the black line indicator on the cuff pilot valve remained within the green zone throughout the surgery. However, we did not check the intra-cuff pressure using manometry. The oropharyngeal leak pressure was 25 cmH2O. The sternal notch test and bubble test were performed after insertion to confirm the placement of the LMA protector . Anesthesia was maintained with a mixture of sevoflurane and oxygen/air. The patient’s breathing was supported with a pressure support of 8 cmH2O, which generated a tidal volume of 400–450 ml and the maximum minute ventilation attained was 12 L/min with peak pressures of 8–10 cmH2O. He was placed in a supine position with standard American Society of Anesthesiologists monitoring for the surgery which lasted for 180 minutes. The surgery was uneventful, and the patient’s vital signs were stable throughout. Postoperatively, the LMA was removed smoothly when he was awake. Moreover, blood stains or minimal secretions were not observed on the device.
At the post anesthesia care unit, the patient complained of difficulty in chewing food and a weird tongue movement. He had no voice changes or altered taste sensation. On examination, the patient’s tongue was seen to be deviated to the left during active protrusion . All sensations of the tongue were intact and there were no tongue fasciculations or wasting. The neurological examination revealed no lateralizing signs or limb weakness. The gag and cough reflexes as well as other cranial nerves were normal. The patient was referred to the ENT surgeon the same day. The nasoendoscopy examination was unremarkable. The working diagnosis was that of an isolated left hypoglossal nerve palsy or neuropraxia. He was allowed to go home the same day with reassurance, oral prednisolone for one week, and instructed for follow up at the ENT outpatient clinic. Neuroimaging was not required. He achieved complete recovery 3 months after the injury (, ) and was subsequently discharged from the follow-up clinic.