A 62-year-old female was referred to our hospital as a case of upper airway obstruction secondary to possible advanced thyroid cancer + Grade 5 dysphagia after five days of stay. She presented with anterior neck swelling of 12 years’ duration, which increased in size rapidly over five days with associated fever, shortness of breath, a hoarse voice, difficulty swallowing both solids and a fluid diet, and vomiting of ingested matter. She had long-standing intolerance of heat and irritability, and was easily fatigued, and had experienced unquantified weight loss despite having a good appetite along with anterior neck swelling. Otherwise, she had no history of cough, orthopnea, body swelling, previous neck surgery or trauma, treatment for tuberculosis, or chronic medical illnesses like diabetes, asthma, hypertension, cardiac or renal disease. For the above complaint, she was treated at the referring hospital with oxygen supplementation, ceftriaxone, and dexamethasone for a week but did not show improvement.

Upon presentation, the patient was acutely sick looking, in severe respiratory distress and had a stridor with oxygen saturation (SPO2) of 77% on a 15-liter per minute face mask. She had a respiratory rate of 40–44 breaths per minute, pulse rate of 118 beats per minute, blood pressure of 145/90 mm Hg, and temperature of 37.8 0C. Examination of the neck revealed a large mass more on the right side of the anterior neck, which was shiny without ulceration or discharge. The mass was non-tender and warm to the touch, with a firm-to-hard consistency. It measured 15×13 centimeters, extending from the sternum to the submental area, but had no retrosternal extension on either palpation or percussion. Upon oropharyngeal assessment, the patient had a Mallampati score of III.9 Otherwise, there were no oropharyngeal lesions or cervical lymphadenopathy, and no pertinent findings on other systems.

Laryngoscopic glottis visualization showed complete obstruction of the glottis, class 4 according to the Cormack–Lehane scale, but no visible mucosal infiltration, thickening, or bleeding.9 With the above history and following physical examination, mixed type 1 and 2 respiratory failure, secondary to upper airway obstruction, anterior neck mass compression, and hospital-acquired pneumonia was considered. With this, a difficult airway was anticipated and prepared for double setup airway management but there was no place for a surgical airway. Adequate preparation was made to increase the success rate of endotracheal intubation with a bronchoscope. A rigid bronchoscope with a size of 7 mm was used to visualize the airway and possible intubation; however, we could not advance the scope beyond the glottis area due to the compression effect of the mass causing resistance. No visible infiltrative mass was noted to the level of the airway evaluated. The patient was then intubated with a 6 mm endotracheal tube secured at a depth of 18 cm and put on a mechanical ventilator: AC/VCV mode, FiO2 of 100%, positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cm of H2O, SPO2 ranging from 96–98%, tidal volume of 360 mL, and rate of 14.


Once the patient was stabilized, she was investigated with a complete blood count showing leucocytosis of 25.47×103, with left-shift and moderate anemia. Her thyroid function test result was within the normal range. Fluid analysis from the aspirate of swelling was chocolate-colored thick pus with a cell count of 108,000/mm3, a neutrophil of 85%, and a low glucose level. Gram stain from aspirate revealed gram-positive cocci in pairs; however, culture and sensitivity tests were not done due to their unavailability in our setup. Cytology results from the aspirate demonstrated intense suppurative inflammation along with necrotic material, which raised suspicion of malignancy. Neck ultrasound showed a homogenously hypoechoic avascular midline ovoid mass more on the right, with posterior acoustic enhancement measuring 13×10.7 cm, and a significant mass effect on the cervical esophagus and trachea. Head and neck computed tomography (CT) performed two days prior to her presentation revealed a well-defined lesion, with water attenuation at the right neck region extending from the clavicle inferiorly to the hyoid bone level, cranially measuring 11×10.5x10.8 cm (craniocaudal, transverse, anterior–posterior). The lesion had enhancing soft tissue foci, likely thyroid tissue. The lesion displaced right-side vascular structures postero-laterally and midline structures (larynx, trachea, and esophagus) on the left lateral side, suggesting a large cystic mass originating from thyroid tissue.

Subsequently, after stabilization and initial investigation, incision and drainage (I & D) of the thyroid abscess was done, draining a total of 900 mL thin pus with the initial aspirate. Antibiotics were initiated and wound care was done on a daily basis. The patient was extubated after four days of intubation with improvement. Subsequently, the patient had persistent discharge from the wound and neck swelling increased. A right-side thyroid lobectomy with cystic mass excision was then performed, and a 6×6 cm smooth cystic mass on the right thyroid lobe on an elective base was found interoperatively. The patient was discharged in a better condition after 10 days of stay in the hospital. The biopsy result turned out to be follicular nodular disease.