A 46 year old Zambian woman was referred from another hospital with a 4 week history of fevers, night sweats, vomiting, diarrhoea, and renal impairment. She had been diagnosed HIV positive in 2005, and started on HAART one year later. She had previously been treated for Herpes simplex virus infection, Cytomegalovirus pneumonitis, and Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP). At referral her blood CD4 count was 480 × 106/L (range in HIV negative populations, 400-1500 × 106/L); and she had an undetectable plasma HIV load. On arrival at our centre, she was confused, and had obvious pitting oedema of both lower limbs, widespread lymphadenopathy, and hepato-splenomegaly. Investigations revealed anaemia, leucocytosis, thrombocytopaenia, and acute renal and liver dysfunction.
A CT scan showed hepato-splenomegaly and gross lymphadenopathy involving the thorax, abdomen and pelvis . Inguinal lymph node excision biopsy confirmed the clinical suspicion of Multi-centric Castleman's disease (MCD) . Rituximab (375 mg/m2) together with hydrocortisone and rasburicase, was administered as specific treatment. She developed rapidly progressive metabolic acidosis, oliguria, and rising serum creatinine and was admitted to the ICU for haemofiltration. Antiretroviral therapy was continued on the ICU with ritonavir-boosted lopinavir and saquinavir. Abacavir and lamivudine, which the patient was already taking, were stopped because of their association with lactic acidosis and hepatic steatosis.
Following admission to ICU she rapidly became hypotensive, hypoglycaemic, coagulopathic and more anaemic. A possible basis for this could have been the systemic manifestations of a "cytokine storm" associated with MCD; increased expression of IL-6 is typical of MCD. Vasopressor and inotropic support with noradrenaline and dobutamine was required to maintain an adequate mean arterial pressure (MAP). Because of rapidly escalating requirements for noradrenaline she received a continuous infusion of hydrocortisone (10 mg/h) as per local departmental protocol, to treat probable relative adrenal insufficiency. Empirical antibiotics and antifungal agents were given to treat sepsis as a potential cause for ensuing multi-organ dysfunction, and she required a continuous infusion of 20% dextrose for refractory hypoglycaemia. To treat her acute renal failure and profound metabolic acidosis (serum lactate of 18.5 mmol/L), haemofiltration was undertaken with large volume 5 litre cycles (~90 ml/kg/hour) of lactate-free replacement fluid. This strategy was adopted to target early shock reversal and removal of IL-6, increased expression of which is a hallmark feature of MCD.
The chest radiograph progressed over four days to bilateral diffuse patchy consolidation , associated with greatly increased oxygen requirements (FiO2 0.8), and consistent with a diagnosis of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). The patient became drowsy and hypercapnic. Her trachea was therefore intubated, and mechanical ventilation was commenced.
She developed epistaxis and bleeding from insertion sites of arterial, central venous, and haemofiltration catheters. She had a positive direct Coombs' test consistent with autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (AIHA), a recognised association of MCD. In addition she had elevated prothrombin (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin times (APTT), reduced platelets and reduced serum fibrinogen consistent with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). She received methylprednisolone, folinic acid, and red cell concentrate to treat anaemia; plus cryoprecipitate, fresh frozen plasma, vitamin K, and platelets for DIC. In addition to this extensive physiological support, her Castleman's disease was treated with weekly infusions of the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, rituximab, for four weeks.
From day 10 there was evidence of clinical improvement. She had a tracheostomy in the second week of her ICU stay, and she was slowly weaned from inotropic/vasopressor, ventilatory, and finally renal support. At day 21 of her ICU admission, she was discharged to the ward to complete her treatment with rituximab, and to continue rehabilitation from global muscle weakness, and reduce dependence on her tracheostomy. The patient was discharged home, in remission from her disease, after 149 days in hospital. When last seen in clinic she remained in remission and living independently 14 months from her treatment.