A 42-year-old woman with progressive exertional dyspnoea and World Health Organization functional class (WHO FC) III–IV and a recent episode of haemoptysis was referred to our Pulmonary Hypertension Centre. She had no cardiovascular risk factors and family medical history was not available because the patient was adopted at the age of 12. She had no history of human immunodeficiency virus infection, no exposure to drugs or toxins involved in the development of PAH, no history of chronic liver disease, deep vein thrombosis, or connective tissue disease. At our first physical examination, the patient did not have elevated jugular venous pressure, hepatomegaly, ascites, or peripheral oedema; but the auscultation revealed an accentuated pulmonary component of the second heart sound. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and right bundle branch block. Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed the suspicion of pulmonary hypertension (PH): systolic pulmonary arterial pressure was estimated to be 80 mmHg, the pulmonary artery trunk was dilated and the right ventricular (RV) outflow tract acceleration time was shortened. No pericardial effusion was detected. Six minutes walking test (6MWT) showed impairment in functional capacity (220 m). Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging showed a hypertrophic, normal-volume right ventricle with mild depressed global systolic function (RV ejection fraction 51%) and no evidence of congenital heart disease. The left ventricle ejection fraction was normal with flattening of the interventricular septum . High-resolution computed tomography excluded parenchymal lung disease and perfusion lung scan was negative for mismatched perfusion defects, ruling out the suspect of chronic thromboembolic PH . Although the patient had never been complaining of angina coronary angiography was performed to exclude left main stem coronary artery compression by the dilated pulmonary artery trunk. The exam did not demonstrate any coronary artery abnormality. Finally, right heart catheterization (RHC) confirmed pre-capillary PH with severe reduction of cardiac index and a remarkable increase of pulmonary vascular resistance . The patient was non-responder to acute vasoreactivity testing performed by inhaled nitric oxide and a conclusive diagnosis of IPAH was made. After a comprehensive clinical assessment, based on ESC/ERS table risk stratification, the patient was classified as high risk and an initial combination therapy including a parenteral prostacyclin analogue (PCA) was proposed. However, the patient refused PCA for personal concerns about the potential side effects. Consequently, oral therapy including low-dose diuretics (furosemide 50 mg once daily) and specific drugs acting on the three separate signalling pathway involved in PAH were used. So a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor (Sildenafil 20 mg three times daily), an endothelin receptor antagonist (Macitentan 10 mg once daily), and selexipag were started under strict medical supervision. Selexipag was started at dosage of 200 μg twice daily and titrated up to 1200 μg twice daily over 30 days. The therapy was well tolerated without hypotension. At 3- and 6-month follow-up on the same medication we found a significant clinical and haemodynamic improvement as confirmed by a comprehensive revaluation including echocardiography, CMR , brain natriuretic peptide, 6MWT, and RHC . So the patient was reclassified as low risk . After 6 months clinical conditions were still stable on the same medical regimen, referral for lung transplantation is under evaluation.