A 22-year-old man presented with leg tremor in standing position for the previous 8 months. This tremor was initially bilateral, but 7 months after development, it subsided in the left leg and persisted only in the right leg. No tremor was evident when the patient was walking, reclining, or in a non-weight-bearing position. He denied any falls and had no unsteadiness. There were no other complaints, and the patient had no significant medical history or family history of tremor.
On examination, he showed incessant quivering in his right leg while standing, but the tremor disappeared when he was asked to walk, sit, lie down, or lean against the wall for support (Video ). There was no resting or postural tremor of upper limbs. Bilateral tendon reflexes were diminished, and there was no plantar response. Auscultation over the right popliteal fossa while the patient was standing revealed the “helicopter sign”, a sound similar to a helicopter, indicating OT. All other components of neurological examination were normal. Laboratory tests, including routine blood tests, blood biochemistry, vitamin B12, thyroid hormone, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear autoantibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody tests, were normal. Furthermore, the tests of the blood and cerebrospinal fluid samples, including tests for anti-paraneoplastic antibodies, autoimmune antibodies and anti-ganglioside antibodies, were all normal. Brain MRI revealed mild, asymmetrical, non-enhancing white matter lesions, mainly in the right frontal and posterior periventricular regions, on T2-weighted imaging . No abnormal signal was found in spinal cord on MRI. Chest CT was normal except for a residual thymus gland. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET was performed, and no abnormal metabolism was identified. Electroencephalography (EEG) was normal. Electromyography (EMG) recorded from the right gastrocnemius revealed a 6–8 Hz tremor, which was present when the patient was standing and disappeared when he was resting or walking , and no abnormalities were found in the left leg. These features were consistent with slow OT.
Considering the clinical presentation and imaging findings, blood and urine metabolic screening was performed. These tests showed a phenylalanine/tyrosine ratio of 2.06 and a blood phenylalanine level of 140 μmol/L, while there was no phenylalanine in the urine. Whole-exome sequencing with next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology confirmed the presence of a compound heterozygous mutation in c.158G > A and c.728G > A of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. Pedigree verification showed that the compound heterozygous variants were inherited from the parents as follows: c.158G > A from his mother and c.728G > A from his father. The patient’s final diagnosis was OT secondary to mild HPA.
Our patient had not received any relevant interventions prior to admission. Based on the above diagnosis, we tried clonazepam (1 mg, qd), carbamazepine (100 mg, qd), and trihexyphenidyl (2 mg, tid) in sequence, but there was no clinical response to these treatments. After discharge, the patient was treated with levodopa/benserazide tablets (250 mg, tid) and a low-phenylalanine diet. One month later, the tremor was markedly alleviated. Three months later, the tremor disappeared .