A 70-year-old man with hypertension initially presented with imbalance and dizziness and underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which demonstrated a 3.2 cm × 2.8 cm × 3.7 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass in the suprasellar region which extended to the posterior fossa resulting in mild mass effect on the midbrain and ventral pons and displacement of the optic chiasm . An endonasal endoscopic approach was used for debulking of the mass. However, unbeknown to the surgical team, the patient had been on daily intranasal oxymetazoline for years, and as a result, excessive nasal cavity bleeding was encountered. Thus, only a biopsy was obtained.
The patient was diagnosed with EVN with ganglioid differentiation. Histopathological analysis showed a moderately hypercellular tumor marked by a proliferation of small cells with scant eosinophilic cytoplasm and generally rounded nuclei. These cells were intermixed with occasional large cells with large nuclei and prominent nucleoli resembling neurons or ganglioid cells . The tumor demonstrated diffuse positive staining with antibodies to synaptophysin (prediluted; Biogenex; Fremont, CA) and occasionally NeuN (1:800 dilution; Millipore; St. Louis, MO). Tumor cells were negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (1:600 dilution; DAKO; Carpinteria, CA) and isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (NADP+) mutation (IDH- 1 mutation). A Ki-67 (prediluted; Ventana; Indianapolis, IN) labeling index was 6–7%. FISH testing showed no evidence of 1p/19q codeletion.
He was followed with serial imaging due to the favorable prognosis of the tumor. 1 year later, the patient’s tumor subsequently progressed and the patient developed short-term memory impairment as well as obstructive hydrocephalus. A right modified orbitozygomatic craniotomy and placement of a left-sided external ventricular drain was performed. Most of the tumor in the interpeduncular cistern was resected with some residual tumor in the third ventricle that did not descend. The patient had third nerve palsy postoperatively; otherwise, he was doing well. Weaning him from the external ventricular drain was difficult due to persistent obstruction at the foramen of Monro. The patient then underwent a left frontal trans-sulcal transtubular transventricular debulking of the intraventricular tumor near the foramen of Monro with septum pellucidotomy. He was successfully weaned from his ventriculostomy.
At the 6 weeks postoperative follow-up, the third nerve palsy resolved. His short-term memory and balance were significantly improved. He underwent radiation therapy with a dose of 5400 cGy in 27 fractions 5 months following surgery to treat his residual tumor. His last follow-up was at 1 year after surgery, and he continued to improve. MRI showed a slight decrease in the size of the residual tumor as compared to his preradiation MRI.