A 71-year-old female with a past medical history of undifferentiated connective tissue disease (UCTD) presented to an acute care hospital in December, 2020 after experiencing sudden onset of lower extremity weakness over 8-10 min, sensory loss from the lower trunk down, urinary retention, and worsening hypotension.
This individual had recently been exposed to COVID-19 through a household member and subsequently tested positive, with COVID cycle thresholds suggestive of recent infection. She demonstrated cough and fever before hospitalization, but did not require supplemental oxygen beyond the first few hospital days. She was issued 5 d of IV methylprednisolone and remdesivir, followed by an oral prednisone taper of 5 additional days. Neurological exam in acute care found incomplete sensory deficits T3-8 but complete absence of sensation from T9 and below.
During inpatient rehabilitation, we did acquire some key historical information about her UCTD, which to date had never progressed to a defined connective tissue disorder such as mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD). This condition is characterized by the presence of certain antibodies, particularly presence of the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNP). Notes received indicate a negative titer for U1snRNP in 2020 when she had acute COVID-19, similar to her level when last tested in 2016. No lab quantification of U1-anti RNP titer was listed among lab results, other than a note stating it was not present. She had no clinical features of MCTD other than presence of sclerodactyly and stated history of Raynaud’s, which was not active during rehabilitation. She had myalgias but no evidence of synovitis or myositis that would prompt us to request a muscle biopsy. At the time of her admission to rehabilitation, this individual’s discomfort and spasms, as well as pain were in the middle and upper trunk and mid-back. However, during past UCTD exacerbations, she had endured aching and often sharp pain specifically in the posterior cervical spine and shoulders and during more significant attacks, pain and swelling in her fingers. Except during practice with wheelchair transfers, she reported no shoulder, arm, or hand pain with physical or occupational therapies.
The possibility exists that some of the pain and spasms she was feeling was a different manifestation of her usual UCTD flare. In the past, such instances had always affected more proximal areas of the body, specifically neck, shoulders and hands. In her 2.5 years since discharge from her second inpatient rehabilitation stay, she has only experienced two significant UCTD exacerbations, both during an acute hospital admission for secondary complications of her NTSCI. The first occurred in the summer of 2022 when septic from a severe UTI. Her antibiotics for that condition included first intravenous cephalosporins and then ciprofloxacin. Both agents may have impaired absorption of hydroxychloroquine prescribed daily for chronic UCTD. In addition, several doses of this long-term medication were missed due to acute illness. During this hospitalization, she became weaker and had increased joint pain, neck pain, and hand swelling. However, the only serology that was abnormal among rheumatologic indices was an elevated ESR of 3 points beyond the upper limit of normal, which could have been outside the normal range simply due to the UTI. During this admission, the same labs as appeared in Table were performed and no findings revealed a change in her degree of UCTD.
Upon arriving to rehabilitation, her exam demonstrated a C7 left, T3 right ASIA Impairment Scale A, with a zone of sensory preservation to T8 bilaterally and complete absence of sensory and motor function from T9-S5. Her first month of rehabilitation was marked by expected neurogenic bowel and bladder, moderate thoracic non-radiating back pain, and mild spasticity below T9. She also had a band-like tightness in the T4-5 dermatomes in the absence of imaging findings there. The pain continued to intensify during subsequent weeks in rehabilitation, progressively taking on more neuropathic features with relentless mid-back and chest tightness.
She was discharged home after 8 wk but continued to experience unrelenting truncal pain between the T3-T8 dermatomes, above and at the level of the infarct, estimated to be located at T8. Several additional acute care and rehabilitation admissions for pain and urinary tract infections ensued during the subsequent two months. Her exam in this time now showed T3 complete SCI with partial preservation to T8.
Table gives additional studies undertaken in the diagnostic workup, including the presence of viruses other than SARS-CoV-2 (enterovirus, Varicella zoster, Herpes simplex, and West Nile), and markers of inflammatory, autoimmune, and neoplastic disorders. Specifically, there was no evidence of Neuromyelitis Optica, based on absent aquaporin-4, and no evidence of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody, which is characterized by immune mediated demyelination of the spinal cord and other regions of the central nervous system. Moreover, immunoglobulin G synthesis of the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) index was also negative, suggesting other inflammatory processes were not present. No oligoclonal bands were detected in CSF, a finding commonly seen in multiple sclerosis (MS) and in neoplastic processes such as multiple myeloma. Myelin basic protein was elevated but is a nonspecific finding, present in autoimmune disorders such as MS and ischemic conditions. including stroke. Lumbar puncture on presentation had serum and cerebrospinal fluid studies that were entirely unremarkable.
Her managing team at the acute care hospital did not have access to her outpatient records about her rheumatologic condition from her community physicians. They did perform a comprehensive serologic workup during her acute COVID admission, but the specimens were sent to an outside lab. Her results were not finalized prior to acute hospital discharge and thus were never added to her inpatient record, nor subsequently forwarded to the rehabilitation team.
Several weeks into her first inpatient rehabilitation stay, partial rheumatologic history and the labs drawn while admitted for COVID-19 were eventually obtained from her outpatient physician’s office. This individual’s initial diagnosis of UCTD occurred in 1993, prior to acute COVID-19, and was classified as non-antinuclear antibody UCTD. Her condition was based on the presence of CREST syndrome, the pneumonic of which represents calcinosis, Raynaud’s syndrome, esophageal dysmotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasias. This information was from her first available outpatient record dating back to 2004, nearly 20 years preceding this publication. In 1993, her predominant features were Raynaud’s affecting fingers and sclerodactyly. She began on disease-modifying medication hydroxychloroquine and a plan was made to arrange for oral prednisone as needed for any exacerbations. Outpatient records from 2004-2020 indicate patient reported feeling well, with a “stable UCTD presentation”, without changes in lab indices, recorded hospitalizations, or flares. Documents did note an exacerbation of symptoms of neck and shoulder pain in 2016 that was managed as an outpatient with a combination of hydroxychloroquine and nifedipine, a calcium-channel blocker. At that time a core panel of rheumatologic markers was drawn, identical to the panel drawn in December 2020 given in Table . No specific rheumatologic markers were concerning, with the exception of an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate that resolved using the above medications. Between 2016-2020, she continued with annual visits to rheumatology without a documented flare or change in medications. Although normal values vary from one lab to another, the purpose of each test and the ratio of positive to negative values is similar between institutions. The labs were selected by the referring facility where the acute care team made the decisions in diagnostic workup.
Initial workup included magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine, which showed acute cord ischemia T9 to the conus medullaris. Thoracic cord expansion and increased intramedullary signal extending many vertebral segments were compatible with a spinal cord infarct, particularly in light of the CSF findings and her acute onset of weakness. The above helped to differentiate an infarct from transverse myelitis. The brain MRI was negative for optic neuritis or lesions suggestive of MS, features needed to diagnose those conditions.
Figure demonstrates a lengthy region of T2 hyperintensity from T9 to the conus, yet absent imaging findings above T9, despite observed sensory abnormalities for many segments rostral to T9. She was diagnosed with a T8 spinal cord thrombotic stroke. Her infarct occurred approximately 7 d after acute infection with COVID-19, consistent with the timing reported by Zhang et al in relation to COVID cytokine storm.