A forty year-old male was brought to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah (8.30 am) in a state of collapse. He was unable to give a history himself or to stand. On examination his blood pressure was unrecordable and oxygen saturations were recorded as low.
The patient had no past medical history. He had spent two weeks in the jungles of Borneo before leaving for an urban setting. Ten days after leaving the jungle he experienced the onset of fever and body aches. Two days later, he sought treatment at a government outpatient clinic continuing to complain of fever and myalgia. A specific diagnosis was not made and he was able to work although he developed rashes the next day. He remained unwell for the next two days, when he presented in a state of collapse and had developed abdominal pain.
Resuscitation measures were begun and the patient was immediately intubated, given adrenaline/atropine and sodium bicarbonate. On examination and after resuscitation measures his vital signs were: symmetrical air entry into lungs, BP 58/44 mm Hg, pulse rate 40-50 per minute with poor peripheral perfusion and cyanosis. Heart sounds were normal. He had generalized petechiae and his abdomen was tense and distended.
Resuscitation measures continued for one hour, during which time "coffee grounds" were observed in the nasogastric aspirate. The patient became asystolic after one hour and although cardiopulmonary resuscitation was given for a further 20 minutes, there was no response. The patient was pronounced dead two hours after admission.
Dengue haemorrhagic shock was suspected and a post-mortem examination was performed approximately 24 hours later.
Laboratory results are summarized in Table . The patient was not anemic, but was thrombocytopenic and had an eosinophilia. He was also hyponatraemic and had elevated blood urea, potassium, lactate dehydrogenase and amino transferase values. Serum creatinine was not available. A blood sample taken 24 hours post-mortem showed >10% of erythrocytes infected with predominantly pigmented parasites . Heavily pigmented monocytes were also present . Plasmodium knowlesi, as a single species infection, was confirmed by nested-PCR . Post-mortem dengue serology was negative and dengue, respiratory syncytial virus and enterovirus were not isolated in organ samples.
External examination showed a well-nourished adult male. The conjunctivae showed tinges of jaundice and the right eye had subconjunctival haemorrhages. There were multiple petechial haemorrhages on the body and venepuncture sites were associated with marked bruising. Coffee ground material was noted in the mouth. Internal examination revealed no tissue oedema or excess fluid in the body cavities.
The external surfaces of the cerebrum were dusky. The cut sections showed multiple petechial haemorrhages. The cerebellum also showed petechial haemorrhages externally and on multiple cut sections . The brain stem and upper spinal chord were grossly normal. Both lungs were heavy (weighing on the right 720 g and left 690 g) and cut sections were congested and 'beefy' in appearance. Petechial haemorrhages were present on the endocardium with extensive subendocardial haemorrhages involving the left ventricular wall. The haemorrhages were most prominent at the apex of the heart. The liver (2640 g) and spleen (340 g) were markedly enlarged. The cut surfaces of the spleen were soft and friable. The gallbladder, pancreas and kidneys were grossly normal.
Haematoxylin and eosin stained sections from various organs were available for examination. Parasitized red blood cells (PRBC) were abundant although parasite bodies were obscured by haemozoin (malaria) pigment. Chemical removal of pigment and oil immersion (×1,000) magnification revealed trophozoites that were discernibly bigger than those of P. falciparum. Immunohistochemistry stained sections from the brain were Plasmodium anti-aldolase positive and negative for P. falciparum- specific staining .
Many petechial haemorrhages (up to 600 μm diameter) arising from the rupture of the small vessels of the cerebrum and cerebellum were observed Sequestration of PRBC was evident within small blood vessels . Congested larger vessels and areas of haemorrhage showed considerable amounts of malaria pigment . Clumps of platelets or evidence of thrombi in vessels were not seen. There was no evidence of vasculitis or perivascular chronic inflammatory reaction in the brain or any other organ examined (heart, kidney, liver, adrenal gland and spleen). There was no evidence of perivascular or diffuse parenchymal oedema in the brain. Diffuse astrocytosis or microgliosis was not observed, nor was there evidence for acute gliotic reactions about the haemorrhages. There was no aggregation of polymorphs in the vessels, no perivascular inflammation, nor generalized encephalitis. There was no diffuse thrombotic microangiopathy, but within one haemorrhage there was probably some fibrin at the site of the vessel. Immunohistochemistry of sections from the brain was negative for CD54 (which stains intercellular adhesion molecule-1, ICAM-1).
Although sections from the spleen showed some autolysis, expansion of the red pulp and atrophy of the white pulp was noted. Germinal centers were not observed. Abundant pigment-containing macrophages and some haemophaghocytosis was evident in the red pulp and parasitized red cells were plentiful . There was no necrosis or fibrin deposition in the spleen.
There were many PRBC's in the liver sinusoids with haemozoin pigment in Kupffer cells and evidence of haemophagocytosis. The portal tracts and sinusoids had moderate chronic lymphoplasmacytic inflammation. Overall the liver was non-cirrhotic but with severe macrovesicular steatosis. No cholestasis, regional necrosis or thrombotic microangiopathy was observed .
The renal cortex showed dilated and congested blood vessels. Many PRBC were observed within glomerular capillaries with pigment deposition in the mesangium. There was no evidence of thrombotic microangiopathy (disseminated intravascular coagulation, DIC). The tubules showed acute tubular necrosis and regeneration. There were a small number of eosinophilic intra-tubular casts .
Sequestration of PRBC's was evident in the small vessels of the heart . Endothelial cells were prominent as sometimes observed in patients with sepsis whose cells are responding to generalized stimuli . There was no evidence of myocarditis and the heart muscle fibers appeared normal. There was focal petechial haemorrhage in the subendocardium, which may relate to resuscitation, or be secondary to malaria.
The adrenal gland appeared active with eosinophilic cytoplasm in the fasciculata layer with no evidence of PRBC sequestration or of parenchymal haemorrhage. Samples of lung, intestine or bone marrow were not available for histopathology examination.
The overall picture was one of systemic malaria infection with multi-organ damage, particularly in the brain where there was much vascular rupture and petechial haemorrhaging.