The present case is a 71-year-old male patient who had a laparoscopic radical cystoprostatectomy and ileal conduit for muscle-invasive bladder cancer (pathological stage T4aN2Mx). During the perioperative period, a foley catheter was used as traction and as a drain through the urethral route, and the catheter was removed on the 4th postoperative day. The patient’s past medical history does not reveal chronic disease, including diabetes. Also, his renal function test and other laboratory parameters were within normal limits. The preoperative clinical lymph node status was N0. The intraoperative blood loss was minimal, and no blood transfusion was needed. Enoxapirin was used for one month postoperatively. Two weeks postoperatively, the patient presented with yellow-white discharge from the meatus and bruising in the glans around the meatus . Physical examination revealed glandular necrosis. Appropriate antimicrobial therapy (Meropenem + Teicoplanin + clindamycin ) was initiated after the patient’s admission. Initial laboratory investigation revealed an elevated white blood cell count (12,420ng/dl), and CRP (19.9), while other parameters were within normal limits.
The urethral discharge culture showed an E.coli, Klebsiella pneumonia, and Enterococcus faecium. Colistin and Tigecycline antimicrobial therapy were started after infectious disease consultation.
Surgical exploration was planned for the patient, as there was no improvement on the 9th day of the antibiotic therapy. During the procedure, it was observed that the necrosis was not limited to the glans. The necrosis had spread to the entire penile urethra and corpus spongiosum, and an excision of approximately 14 cm of corpus spongiosum was performed .
The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 6th postoperative day . The pathology findings reported no malignancy and showed dıffuse hemorrhage and necrosıs of the urethra and extendıng to the surrounding tıssues. Glans necrosıs, ulceratıon, hemorrhage and chronıc ınflammatıon were also reported.