A 67-year-old Caucasian female with glipizide- and metformin-treated diabetes mellitus and enalapril-treated arterial hypertension presented for open reposition and Zuggurtung fixation of a fracture of the olecranon. The elbow was fractured in a bicycle accident and had been conservatively treated for 14 days prior to surgery. The patient had suffered from diarrhoea and signs of confusion in the period between the trauma and surgery, but had been free of gastrointestinal or neurological symptoms during the week before surgery. The patient had not sought professional medical advice for these symptoms. When the patient presented for surgery, she was lucid, without any gastrointestinal symptoms and otherwise physically well. The preoperative laboratory work-up tests were without pathological signs . At the operating ward, 1 g paracetamol, 100 mg diclofenac, 10 mg oxycodone and 25 mg meclizine were administered orally as premedication. The anaesthesia was induced with propofol and fentanyl. The airway was secured by orotracheal intubation after which the anaesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane. The time of surgery was 31 min and the total anaesthesia duration was 70 min. After uncomplicated surgery and anaesthesia, the patient was transferred to the postoperative unit from where the patient went home after 3 h accompanied by her next of kin. During the first postoperative evening and night, the patient’s next of kin observed that the patient had problems with articulating words followed by increasing anxiety and confusion. At the next morning, the patient only spoke unrecognizable words, and by the afternoon, she could not walk. Approximately 24 h after leaving the hospital, the patient presented at the emergency ward. Respiration and circulation were normal and the patient was afebrile. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain was performed as well as an analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid, with both indicating no pathological signs. A neurological consult ordered an electroencephalogram (EEG) and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain to be performed as soon as possible at a secondary hospital to which the patient was referred. At arrival to the secondary hospital on the second postoperative day, the patient did not respond verbally, could not open her eyes spontaneously and the best motor response was withdrawal of the limbs on pain stimulation (Glasgow Coma Scale, GCS 9). It was noted that plasma creatinine was elevated to 313 μmol × L-1. Except for an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) at 76 mg × L-1, all blood analyses were in the normal range, including haemoglobin, leucocyte and platelet count. On the night between the second and third postoperative day, the patient suffered a generalised tonic-clonic seizure. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, where she, was orotracheally intubated and mechanically ventilated. A second CT scan of the brain showed no bleeding or ischaemic signs. The patient was respiratory and circulatory stable and did not require an increased oxygen fraction or vasoactive drugs. The patient was anuric, was not icteric and did not have any pathological signs on the skin. Blood cultures were drawn and an antibiotic was given based on a body temperature of 38.9°C and tachycardia. The patient was started at 4 g piperacillin-tazobactam 3 times per day intravenously (i.v.). The cultures did not show any bacterial growth. Because the patient had elevated serum potassium of 5.8 mmol × L-1 and hyponatraemia of 131 mmol × L-1, blood was analysed for serum cortisol on the suspicion of Addison’s disease. Accordingly, the patient was given 100 mg hydrocortisone i.v. Cortisol in serum was found to be 796 nmol × L-1 and thus the suspicion of Addison’s disease was refuted. The patient was now anaemic with a haemoglobin of 86 g × L-1 and thrombocytopenic with a platelet count of 31 × 109 × L-1. Lactate dehydrogenase was elevated to 21.5μkat × L-1 and haptoglobin low at 0.07 g × L-1, which indicate haemolysis. The blood film showed schistocytosis., On the third postoperative day, plasmapheresis was started on the indication of HUS/TTP. One plasma volume was replaced daily for four days and continuous veno-venous haemodiafiltration was performed between plasmapheresis treatments. The patient’s haemoglobin and platelet count improved during treatment . The same positive development was seen for creatinine. Neurological status improved slowly and on the seventh postoperative day, GCS was 6 with withdrawal of the limbs on pain stimulation. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) revealed enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) in faeces. The serotype was non-O157, produced verotoxin type 2 and was eae-gene negative. Blood analysis of Adamts-13 protein activity showed normal levels and antibodies against the protein were not observed. Signs of multiple small ischaemic fronto-temporal cortical lesions were noted on an MRI scan, as well as lesions in the circulus Willisi and the basilar artery with narrowing and more distal dilatations of the vessels. Analyses of anti-neutrophil antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. The neurological consult assessed the clinical picture together with the MRI findings as thrombotic microangiopathy. The patient continued to show slow improvement in neurological status with spontaneous eye opening and the ability to move all limbs, although with substantial weakness. The patient could make eye contact on instructions on the 20th postoperative day but was still anuric and in need of intermittent haemodialysis and mechanical ventilatory support. On the 21st postoperative day, the patient suffered a generalised tonic-clonic seizure followed by deep coma (GCS 3). EEG showed generalised deeply suppressed activity. A joint decision was made with the next of kin to withdraw all treatment. The patient died 6 h later.