A 44-year-old woman had undergone first allogeneic cord blood transplantation (CBT, 2.35 × 106/kg nucleated cells, two locus mismatch) for acute myeloid leukemia after two courses of induction therapy that led to hematologic complete remission. The patient was pre-treated with cytarabine, cyclophosphamide, and total body irradiation conditioning. Graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis consisted of cyclosporine and methotrexate. Her medical, family, and social histories were unremarkable. The patient underwent a second CBT (2.0 × 107/kg nucleated cells) 32 days after the first due to graft failure.
Seven days after the second CBT, she presented with high fever and shaking chills. Upon physical examination, painful induration with linear erythema along the superficial veins was observed in the peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) site, which was inserted on the day after the second CBT. Two sets of blood samples were drawn for culture and meropenem treatment was started. The blood culture was positive on the third day of incubation (10 days after the second CBT). Gram staining of a positive blood culture revealed GPR , and vancomycin was added thereafter. Fever persisted and PICC was removed on day 11 after the second CBT (PICC was maintained for 10 days). The VITEK® 2 system (bioMérieux, Durham, NC, USA) was not able to identify the organism. Blood cultures drawn on days 10, 11, 15, and 22 after CBT were also positive for GPR. On the 14th day after the second CBT, Ziehl–Neelsen staining was performed and was found to be positive for acid-fast bacilli .
The nucleotide sequences were analyzed using the National Center for Biotechnology Information BLAST . The almost full-length (1442-bp) 16S rDNA gene sequence of the isolate shared 100% similarity to M. wolinskyi type strain ATCC 700010.
In addition to PICC removal, imipenem/cilastatin (IPM/CS), amikacin (AMK), levofloxacin (LVX), and azithromycin (AZM) were started empirically. Antibiotic susceptibilities were determined using the broth microdilution method (BrothMIC RGM®; Kyokuto, Tokyo, Japan) based on the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute M24 recommendations .
According to the susceptibilities, IPM/CS and AZM were discontinued, and minocycline (MIN) was added. LVX was changed to moxifloxacin (MFX) based on previous case series . After 1 month of intravenous administration of AMK, the patient was discharged on an oral regimen of MFX and MIN. Although MXF had to be discontinued after 4 months due to nausea, MIN was continued for 6 months.
After 3 weeks of combination antimicrobial therapy, blood cultures became negative. She showed successful engraftment by day 28. The patient responded well to therapy and no recurrence of infection was identified at 1-year follow-up.