A 43-yr-old, 66 kg, 175 cm man was to undergo gastrectomy for a tumor in the stomach. He had no history of hypertension, myocardial infarction,or angina pectoris,but with a smoking history(10 packs year).His physical examination was normal. Preoperative resting electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram(UCG) were within normal limits. Laboratory data revealed no abnormalities.
No premedication was given. After the patient,s arrival in the operating room, intravenous access was established. Lead II and V5 of the ECG were monitored. Blood pressure (BP) was 128/70 mmHg and heart rate(HR) 75 beats/min. An ultrasound-guided subcostal TAP block was performed bilaterally . Each hemi abdomen was injected with 20 ml 0.3% ropivacaine to give a dual block from T6-T9. TAP block was uneventful without heart rate and blood pressure variations. After 30 min, general anesthesia was induced, then it was maintained with sevoflurane inhalation, target controlled infusion (TCI) remifentanil and given sufentanil and cisatracurium intermittently. The patient was mechanically ventilated with a tidal volume of 500 ml and respiratory rate of 10 breaths/min to maintain PetCO2 at 35–40 mmHg under end-tidal CO2 monitoring. Arterial BP was continuously monitored via a left radial artery catheter.
Two hours after start of the operation, when the surgeons were dissecting para gastric lymph node, ST segment elevation in lead II was noted and lead V5 showed no abnormalities. The change recovered abruptly without treatment 30 s later. When it happened, SpO2 was 100%, end-tidal sevoflurane concentration was 1.3% and no obvious hemorrhage. Except for this, the patient,s course during 4 h of operation was uneventful: BP was about 100/70 mmHg, HR about 70 beats/min, body temperature about 36.5 °C and estimated blood loss was less than 300 ml. Four hours after start of the operation, the arterial BP was 88/55 mmHg and aramine 0.4 mg was given intravenously. The BP increased to 110/65 mmHg without HR change. Approximately 5 min later, the ECG showed premature ventricular contractions and a marked ST segment elevation again . Ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation were subsequently noticed with BP decreased to 32/14 mmHg, and electric defibrillation was initiated with repeated infusions of epinephrin. Within approximately 2 min, the ECG returned to sinus rhythm and BP gradually to normal. The patient remained hemodynamically stable for the remainder of the operation. Following the operation, he was transferred to the cardiac care unit (CCU) in our hospital. Serial ECGs and cardiac enzyme studies showed no abnormalities, thus ruling out myocardial infarction and CAS was diagnosed. The patient suffered no further cardiac attacks during his hospital stay. Consent was obtained from the patient to publish this case report.