A 13-year-old Moroccan boy with no medical history consulted with our department regarding a functional impairment of his left lower limb that developed after a football game. No particular sprain or accident had occurred. A clinical examination revealed slight lameness without visible muscular atrophy. Muscular testing showed paralysis of his tibialis anterior and extensor hallucis longus; his common extensor digitorum was also partially deficient. Stretching of the EPSN was diagnosed based on functional disability after the football match. However, subsequent examination in our Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation revealed an asymptomatic minor soft tumefaction localized at the neck of his fibula. The Tinel sign was present with a sensory deficit on the back of his foot. An electromyographic study of the nerve revealed severe damage to the EPSN at the neck of his fibula with a slow nerve conduction velocity. An electromyographic study of the nerves of his right lower limb was normal, and X-rays showed no abnormalities. Ultrasound of the tumefaction revealed a tubulated, non-compressive, anechoic mass without a Doppler signal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed low signal intensity on T1 images, high signal intensity on T2 images, and a heterogeneous pattern due to the presence of some fine regular partitions. The lesion was in contact with the EPSN at its proximal part and coursed downward externally, following the path of its external collateral. A gadolinium injection revealed regular peripheral enhancement of the lesion, defining a central cystic area with low signal intensity .
An intraoperative examination revealed a mass at the origin of the fibular communicating branch and the lateral sural cutaneous nerves . The mass was compressing but not invading the EPSN; the mass originated from collaterals of the EPSN; electrostimulation of different nerves allowed us to differentiate the motor EPSN of the sensory collateral. Finally, we completely removed the tumor with the origin of the two collateral nerves. There were no postoperative complications. A pathologic examination confirmed a neurofibroma. Our patient underwent several rehabilitation sessions, but his steppage gait persisted. Nerve grafting may eventually be conducted to address his steppage gait.