A 76-year-old Japanese man with a history of hypertension, laryngeal cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and type 2 diabetes mellitus developed a cerebral arteriovenous malformation hemorrhage and was hospitalized at Aichi Medical University Hospital, Japan. His vaccination history was unknown. Case characteristics and laboratory data on the first visit are summarized in Table . Following surgery for removal of the hematoma, he began rehabilitation and was encouraged to engage in early postoperative ambulation. In March, 2015, on the 66th day of hospitalization, he developed a sudden fever and exhibited a sharp decline in oxygenation.
At the onset of fever, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 37.8 °C; blood pressure, 84/41 mmHg; heart rate, 107/min; respiration rate, 30/min; and SpO2, 82% (room air). Blood gas analysis (room air) showed pH 7.538, 25.7 mmHg, 47.6 mmHg, HCO3
− 21.4 mmol/L, and lactate 38.9 mg/dL. His level of consciousness was I-2 on the Japan Coma Scale. Physical examination showed coarse crackles and wheezes in the right lung. Based on chest radiography and computed tomography images , hospital-acquired aspiration pneumonia was diagnosed.
Piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g was administered three times daily as initial treatment . Streptococcus pneumoniae infection was suspected based on a rapid identification test using a sputum smear, and a strain of S. pneumoniae was isolated from the blood culture sampled at the onset of fever. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and teicoplanin was added to his treatment regimen. However, his SpO2 and respiratory rate continued to be unstable. After 5 days of concomitant teicoplanin administration, the patient died.
Streptococcus pneumoniae detected in the smear and the morphologic characteristics of the colonies on blood agar are shown in Fig. . The isolate was mucoid serotype strain 3, with a thick capsule. Antibiotic susceptibility to penicillins, cephalosporins, carbapenems, and levofloxacin was good, with resistance observed only to a macrolide (erythromycin) .