Medical History
V.R. was a 2-year-old boy when he was referred to our Hospital Pediatric Emergency Room for a suspected allergic reaction. He was born at term via vaginal delivery, with birth weight adequate for gestational age. He had been exclusively breastfed for 6 months; thereafter, complementary feeding, including regular intake of fish, eggs, and cow’s milk, was introduced without clinical problems. His familial history was negative for allergies. At 12 months of age, he was diagnosed with atopic dermatitis and treated with skin moisturizers.

Clinical Presentation
At 2 years of age, due to the occurrence of generalized urticaria, angioedema, wheezing, sneezing, and two vomiting episodes, V.R. was referred to our Hospital Pediatric Emergency Room, after being assisted at home by the territorial Emergency Service Team (EST). On EST first clinical evaluation, he presented with fair general conditions; generalized urticaria, rhinitis, and lips and eyelid angioedema were still present, and his vital signs were as follows: 96% peripheral oxygen saturation rate on ambient air; blood pressure 95/55 mmHg (50° pc 101/63 mmHg); heart rate 150 beats per minute (bpm) (normal range 80–120 bpm), respiratory rate 32 breaths/min (normal range 25 ± 4 breaths/min), and a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15. The symptoms had occurred 15 min after a meal of smoked salmon, anchovies, mayonnaise, butter, salmon roe, and lumpfish roe. V.R. had previously eaten smoked salmon and mayonnaise without any symptoms. No intake of other foods/juices, alcohol, or medications was reported. During the ambulance trip to the hospital, intramuscular adrenaline (0.01 mg/kg), methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg), and oral cetirizine (0.25 mg/kg) was administered by the EST. The child was admitted to our Pediatric Emergency Department in fair general condition with lips and eyelid angioedema; vital sign parameters were stable compared to the previous evaluation. The results of routine laboratory analysis on admission were within the normal range.

Clinical Course
After 12 and 24 h, due to worsening eyelid angioedema with reappearance of urticaria, a further administration of intravenous chlorpheniramine (0.25 mg/kg) was necessary. Tryptase (a protease released from mast cells during an acute allergic reaction) serum level in the acute phase (peak) was 5.39 μg/L, whereas the baseline level, detected 24 h after the allergic reaction, was 2.34 μg/L. In the pediatric population, the peak total serum tryptase should be at least 120% of the baseline tryptase level plus 2 μg/L (≥1.2 × baseline tryptase + 2 μg/L) to diagnose acute mast cell activation in anaphylaxis [11]. Indeed, in our patient, the peak tryptase level met this criterion, exceeding the diagnostic cutoff level (4.81 μg/L = 120% + 2 µg/L of the baseline level). After 36 h of hospitalization, V.R. was discharged in fair clinical condition, though the result of the specific food IgE test was not yet available. An adrenaline auto injection kit (0.15 mg) was prescribed, after instructing the patient of its proper use.


Follow Up and Specific Allergy Tests
One week later, the patient returned to our outpatient office for a routine visit and was in good clinical condition. Food-specific serum IgE (by Immuno-CAP, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden), meantime assessed, tested as follows: egg white (0.67 kUA/L), milk (1.12 kUA/L), beta-lactoglobulin (0.13 kUA/L), caseine (0.18 kUA/L), alfa-lactalbumin (0.48 kUA/L), peanut (<0.35 kUA/L), cod (<0.35 kUA/L), wheat (<0.35 kUA/L), shrimp (<0.35 kUA/L), salmon (<0.35 kUA/L), parvalbumin (<0.35 kUA/L), LTP Pru p3 (<0.35 kUA/L), and Betv2 (<0.35 kUA/L). Level ≥ 0.35 kUA/L was considered positive. Unfortunately, we could not perform the serum food-specific IgE test for fish roe (salmon and lumpfish roe), because it was not yet available in Italy.

Based on a food-specific serum IgE test, only an allergic sensitization to cow’s milk and egg proteins was evident; indeed, these foods had previously been eaten without any symptoms. Prick-by-prick tests for smoked salmon, anchovies, mayonnaise, salmon roe (red caviar), and lumpfish roe were also performed. All these foods had been eaten a few minutes before the occurrence of the allergic reaction. The prick by-prick test was positive for salmon roe (red caviar 11 mm × 10 mm) and lumpfish roe (4 mm × 4 mm), but negative for all the other foods tested. Positive (histamine) and negative (saline solution) controls were included.