Full term newborn, 38 weeks gestational age, planned caesarean section, Apgar 8-8, birth weight 2,895 g, length 47 cm, head circumference 34 cm and normal thoracic circumference.

Relevant family history: His 29-year-old mother was diagnosed with SHCC, requiring mechanical ventilation through a tracheostomy from the age of 2 years and later NIV with nasal interphase and pressure-driven adjustment throughout her life. As her condition was not associated with a respiratory drive defect during wakefulness, a planned caesarean section was performed without complications.

During the neonatal transition period, the newborn presented frequent desaturations. The arterial blood gas showed hypercapnia (PaCO2 60-80 mmHg) and respiratory acidosis (pH < 7.20 with excess base of 8-10). The rest of the parameters of the internal environment were normal.

He was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit of the San Borja Arriarán Clinical Hospital, where a normal respiratory pattern and pulse oxygen saturation (SpO2) > 95% were observed in the waking state, mild central hypotonia, with progressive improvement to a normal tone. During the transition from waking to sleeping, he presented very shallow breathing, not associated with increased respiratory work, wheezing or stridor, with progressive desaturation, SpO2 < 85%, which worsened with the administration of oxygen without NIV, with blood gases through the umbilical catheter in the range previously described. As sleep deepened, SpO2 tended to stabilise between 85-90% with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) using positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 6-7 cmH20 administered with a nasal mask alternated with a short binasal cannula, without normalising arterial blood gases.

At 36 hours of life, he was switched to NIV mode from cycled CPAP using inspiratory pressure (IP) of 14-16 cm H2O and PEEP of 4 cm H2O with nasal mask as the interface, normalizing oxygenation during sleep and blood gases in sleep and wake.

In view of the high suspicion of SHCC, the PHOX2B gene was sequenced, confirming a heterozygous pathogenic variant with genotype 20/26 at 7 days of life. The study was completed with cerebral ultrasound, echocardiogram and 24-hour Holter rhythm, all normal. The need for specialised sleep studies was discarded given the confirmed diagnosis and the urgent requirement of complete NIV during sleep. She was evaluated by a multidisciplinary team including cardiologists, sleep specialists, pulmonologists, speech therapists, paediatricians and home hospitalisation kinesiologists with expertise in prolonged NIV.

After one month of life, he was transferred to a lower complexity unit to maintain SVNI during full sleep, that is, with the adequate push pressure that allows the complete normalization of non-invasive monitoring of the SpO2 line > 90% while sleeping, and the complete normalization of blood gases while awake, including the excess base. A Philips hybrid ventilator, Trilogy EVOMR, was used with a single-rail circuit and external exhalatory valve for delivery of PEEP = 0 cm H2O and push pressure of 14-16 cm H2O, in pressure control mode, assisted controlled (PC/AC) with respiratory frequencies of 30 per minute and inspiratory time of 0.7 second.

He presented a satisfactory evolution, without complications, so he was discharged to home hospitalization with the same nasal SVNI schedule only when he slept. At 7 months of age, a clear normal psychomotor and neurocognitive development was clinically verified, without requiring hospitalizations for events of any kind.
