In 2003, the Department of Oral Pathology and Surgery at the School of Dentistry, University of Athens referred a young 22-year-old female with Hajdu-Cheney Syndrome (HCS) to the Postgraduate Clinic of the Department of Periodontology, in order to receive periodontal treatment . The patient was diagnosed in 2001 with HCS after clinical, radiographic and histological examination . After gene examination of both parents, none of them was found bearing a mutation in the NOTCH2 gene . Her physical examination showed that her height was 145cm and her weight was 45kg. The patient had thick coarse hair, low-set ears, small face and stature, thin lips, small mouth and short hands with clubbing of the fingertips . According to her medical history, the patient suffered from emphysema and allergic rhinitis, whereas oral intake of Vitamin D and calcium were prescribed daily for the treatment of osteoporosis [, ].
During orthodontic treatment between the ages of 12 and 21 years, all of her first premolars were removed . At the age of 20 years, the patient received non-surgical periodontal treatment (scaling and root surface debridement), as well as limited periodontal surgery in the lower anterior region [, ]. Detailed records regarding both orthodontic and periodontal treatment were not available. The patient was a non-smoker, visited her dentist every 6 months, brushed her teeth twice every day (Bass technique) and used dental floss and interdental brushes. At the time of the referral, the patient suffered from generalized advanced chronic periodontitis, increased tooth mobility and premature tooth loss . Clinical and radiographic examination of both parents and her 4 years younger brother showed that the mother and the younger brother had normal dentition, whereas the father was diagnosed with chronic advanced periodontal disease with increased mobility of various teeth.
The patient was treated in collaboration with the Department of Prosthodontics. Clinical and radiographic examination of the patient revealed a number of significant findings. There was generalized horizontal bone loss of ~ 50%. However, alveolar bone loss around various teeth such as #4 (in place of #5), 14 and 24 was extensive (~ 100%). Tooth roots appeared short and cervical, whereas cervical resorption lesions were also evident (teeth #3, 10, 20 (in place of #19), 26) [, ]. The patient received non-surgical periodontal treatment in all four quadrants, which included scaling and root surface debridement. During this period, teeth #4, 14 and 24 were extracted due to extensive alveolar bone loss . The maxilla was then rehabilitated with the placement of a provisional fixed partial denture of metal acrylic and the anterior region of the mandible with the placement of a Maryland bridge . Upon completion of the periodontal treatment, the patient was enrolled in a periodontal maintenance program.
After careful consideration of the possible implications deriving from the patient’s condition (osteoporosis, generalized advanced periodontitis) and having taken her young age into account, we decided to proceed with the placement of dental implants, while implementing specific protocols such as longer healing periods. So, although in the current literature no other case of implant placement in a patient with HCS was described, in February 2005, a dental implant (Nobel Biocare, Replace Select Straight, TiUnite RP 4.3 x 13mm) was placed in the upper right first premolar region .
During the healing period, in March 2009, further teeth were extracted (#2,3,30). During the extraction of tooth #30, a bovine xenograft (Geistlich Bio-Oss Collagen 250 mg) was placed in the post-extraction site, in order to achieve ridge preservation and the region was rehabilitated with a resin-bonded bridge (Maryland bridge).
Five years after placement and successful osseointegration of the dental implant in position #5, an additional implant (Nobel Biocare, Replace Select Tapered TiUnite Regular Platform (RP) 4.3 x 8mm) was placed in the upper right first molar region . Bone mineral density appeared physiological (Bone Type III) .
Six months after implant placement, a porcelain fused to metal, three unit implant supported fixed partial denture 3 (4) 5 was placed in the upper right region . During this period of time, teeth # 18, 19 were extracted due to excessive bone loss.
Clinical and radiographic examination of the patient during the periodontal maintenance program in three months interval after implant placement revealed no abnormalities in the implant region. After successful oral rehabilitation of the posterior upper right region, 2 additional dental implants were placed in the posterior left region (during surgery tooth #20 - in place of #21- was extracted) and 1 in the posterior right region of the mandible (Straumann Standard Platform (SP) Tissue Level) .
Six months after implant placement, a porcelain fused to metal, three unit implant supported fixed partial denture 19 18 was placed in the left region of the mandible, whereas a porcelain fused to metal implant supported crown was placed in the right region of the mandible .
Five years after implant placement, clinical and radiographic examination of the patient during the periodontal maintenance program (in three months interval) revealed no abnormalities .
For the reader’s better understanding, Table presents the patient’s detailed dental treatment chronologically.