We report the case of a 42 year-old Caucasian male with a history of harmful alcohol consumption (4 standard units a day) and allergic asthma who was evaluated in our emergency department complaining of spontaneous hematomas on the limbs as well as cutaneous and mucosal petechiae. He also reported one episode of self-limiting epistaxis. He denied any blood in his stools or hematuria and was not taking any medication. He had quit smoking 5 years ago (20 pack-year) and currently vapes. Family history was notable for a brother with scleroderma.
He reported having received his second dose of the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) vaccine elasomeran one week prior to noticing bruises on his limbs.
Initial evaluation revealed hematomas on all limbs and petechiae with a hemorrhagic bulla on the inside of his cheeks. No hepatosplenomegaly or adenomegaly was noted either on physical examination or on abdominal ultrasound.
Laboratory workup revealed normal hemoglobin level and leukocyte count but severe thrombocytopenia with 2 G/l (150–300 G/l). Peripheral blood smear confirmed true thrombocytopenia without any other abnormality. Coagulation profile, renal and liver function tests were all within normal range. Lactate dehydrogenase reached 390 U/l (87–210 U/l). Protein electrophoresis and immunofixation excluded any paraprotein. A nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2 was negative and serology showed a response to vaccination without prior exposure to the virus (anti-S positive and anti-N negative).
Vitamin B12 and B9 levels were low: cyanocobalamin 105 pmol/l (125–574 pmol/l) and folate 4.5 nmol/l (8–60 nmol/l). Normal levels of intrinsic factor excluded pernicious anemia, and after vitamin supplementation, the values normalized within two weeks. Ferritin was slightly elevated at 449 µg/l (11–342 µg/l).
Hepatitis B, C and HIV were excluded as well as acute Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus and Parvovirus B19 infections.
As a result of this workup, ITP was immediately suspected. We excluded vitamin B12 and folate deficiencies as the cause of thrombocytopenia since there was no anemia or macrocytosis and no improvement after vitamin supplementation. Treatment commenced with oral dexamethasone at 40 mg/day on D2 to D5 in combination with intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg) at 1 g/kg on D2 and D3, according to the hemorrhagic score (9 points) . Response was considered satisfactory with thrombocyte levels reaching 78 G/l on D5 , allowing patient’s discharge with close ambulatory follow-up.
Follow-up consultation 3 days after discharge revealed relapse of thrombocytopenia to 2 G/l, requiring a second hospitalization for the same treatment with oral dexamethasone (40 mg/day) from D8 to D11 and IVIg (1 g/kg) on D10 and D13. As this combination now proved ineffective, treatment with romiplostim was initiated at 7 µg/kg/week (= 500 µg/week) on D12, increased to 10 µg/kg/week (= 700 µg/week) as of D19 because no improvement was noticed.
Immunologic work-up showed a slightly increased level of anti-SSA antibodies (52KDa) at 26 units (normal: < 20 units). In the absence of any clinical manifestation compatible with an underlying auto-immune disease, this result was considered irrelevant.
Prednisone 1 mg/kg/day for 3 weeks was initiated on D14. These combined treatments increased platelet levels to 45 G/l, allowing patient’s discharge on D19.
Six days later, during ambulatory follow-up, the patient had again relapsed (thrombocytes = 2 G/l), and was re-admitted to the hospital. He received one dose of IVIg (1 g/kg) upon admission (D25). The treatments with romiplostim and prednisone continued without improving platelet levels, which stagnated below 10 G/l. After 3 weeks prednisone was slowly tapered.
Given the known association of Helicobacter pylori infection with ITP, we performed a serology which came back positive. The patient received 10 days of an eradication regimen consisting of amoxicilline, clarithromycine, metronidazole and esomeprazole. A negative breath test one month later confirmed eradication.
Peripheral blood flow cytometry did not show any abnormal lymphocyte population.
Bone marrow aspirate was compatible with ITP, showing elevated numbers of megakaryocytes without dysplasia and no blasts on the bone marrow smear nor on flow cytometry (see Fig. ). Circulating anti-platelet antibodies against glycoprotein Ia-IIa were detected, demonstrating a humoral auto-immunity in the disease.
Despite all these treatments, profound thrombocytopenia persisted. A treatment of weekly rituximab for 4 weeks at the dose of 375 mg/m2 (700 mg/week) was started on D34 after a negative interferon-gamma release assay (QuantiFERON). After one month of romiplostim at the maximum dose, we switched on D46 to eltrombopag 75 mg/day.
On D36, we initiated a treatment with dapsone 100 mg/day, as both a treatment option for ITP and an approved Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis, indicated in the context of drug-induced immunosuppression. In order to offer some bleeding protection, 500 mg of oral tranexamic acid was administered daily, being the minimal effective dose in our patient.
In the absence of improvement, it was decided to administer vinca alkaloids due to their rapid onset of action. The patient received 2 doses of vincristine, 2 mg each, on D57 and D64. Unfortunately, platelet levels remained at 1 G/l two weeks later.
Since diverse medical therapies had failed, and the patient remained at high risk for major bleeding, splenectomy was planned. In order to establish a sufficient platelet level for surgery, the patient received another 4 days (D76 to D80) of dexamethasone 40 mg/day and 2 days of IVIg (1 g/kg) on D79 and D80. This induced a rapid rise in platelet levels to 181 G/l. Treatment with eltrombopag was abruptly discontinued.
The patient underwent laparoscopic splenectomy on D80. Platelet levels then rapidly rose, reaching 1,520 G/l on D87, and progressively normalized. Six months later, the patient’s platelet levels remained in the normal range (302 G/l on D259).