A 47-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 2, para 0, was referred to our institution for abnormal uterine bleeding. She had an extensive past medical history which included SLE, anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome (APS), idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), as well as previous dissecting right vertebral artery aneurysm and left cerebellar infarction. Her body mass index (BMI) was 18.1. Workup revealed severe anemia requiring an 8-unit red cell transfusion, and subsequent to gynecological examination, endometrial sampling cytology with conventional biopsy revealed Grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma; serum tumor markers were obtained for evaluation and anticipated ongoing management of endometrial cancer; CA-125, CA19-9, and CEA levels were 176 U/mL, 27U/mL, and 1.8 ng/mL, respectively. Given her intravascular hypercoagulability due to ITP, we administered continuous heparin along with methylprednisolone (mPSL) pulse therapy to bring her hematology profile within an acceptable range of tolerability for surgery. The patient’s laboratory results and serologies are summarized in Table . Her medications included prednisolone 20 mg twice a day, candesartan 8 mg daily, amlodipine 5 mg daily, rabeprazole sodium 3 g daily, and 600 μg subcutaneous teriparatide daily.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies revealed cancer invasion into the uterine myometrium . On computed tomography (CT) imaging, abnormal masses involving a large segment of multiple encapsulated lymphadenopathies and measuring up to 6 cm were present both in pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes , strongly suggesting retroperitoneal metastases from endometrial cancer. However, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) imaging showed only slightly abnormal FDG uptake in the lymph nodes (Standardized uptake value (SUV)-Max = 2.1) in comparison with high FDG uptake in the uterus (SUV-Max = 19.1). Eventually, total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed for primary staging, avoiding lymph node dissection due to ongoing ITP-related thrombocytopenia.
On the basis of preoperative findings, we initially diagnosed the patient as International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IIIC2 uterine endometrial cancer, with 70 % myometrial invasion, lymphovascular invasion, and metastasis to the pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes. The patient subsequently underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel (175 mg/m2) and carboplatin (area under the curve, 6). However, no change in size of lymphadenopathy was observed after 3 cycles of chemotherapy. As her overall condition improved, with platelets stabilizing at >80,000/μL, and the patient wishing to avoid radiation therapy due to the considerable complications, we then performed dissection of retroperitoneal (pelvic and para-aortic) lymph nodes. On gross exam, we found well-circumscribed lymph node masses growing along the lymph vessels , which were systematically dissected , and found to have no metastatic involvement or cured remnants of metastatic disease (0 out of 100 lymph nodes), although there was an option to perform intraoperative diagnosis using frozen sections if necessary. Final pathological diagnosis was consistent with LAM arising from the retroperitoneal lymph nodes.
Microscopically, masses was composed of neoplastic smooth muscle leiomyoma-like tumor cells with clear to eosinophillic cytoplasm arranged in alveolar pattern without necrosis , and slit-like vascular channels lined by endothelial cells . Lymph node tumors were focally positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), caldesmon, Melan A, HMB-45, and estrogen receptor (ER), characteristics suggestive of LAM . Interestingly, re-examination of uterine tissue from the primary operation revealed that regional LAM tissue was co-localized with endometrial cancer with similarly arranged alveolar structure . Unlike normal myometrium smooth muscle cells, immunostaining of smooth muscle cells for HMB-45 and Melan A was positive in the LAM lesions. Moreover, we found that LAM cells had locally invaded into the lymphatic vessels of the myometrium. Taken together, our findings presented herein suggest that LAM initially occurred in uterine smooth muscle, subsequently invading the retroperitoneal lymph nodes by ascending via a lymphogenous route. The patient is currently asymptomatic after the final diagnoses of LAM and endometrial cancer (stage IB), with no evidence of recurrence or metastasis to date. No recurrent enlargement of lymph nodes or pulmonary LAM has been observed on repeat CT imaging. However, she is currently maintained on low dose warfarin therapy for SLE-related intravascular hypercoagulability. Long-term follow-up by both internal medicine and gynecological healthcare providers will continue to be important to correctly diagnose LAM and/or cancer-related diseases.