A 79-year-old woman presented with recurrent cough and hemoptysis. A computed tomography (CT) and laboratory studies indicated bronchiectasis in the lower lobe of the left lung associated with allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis. One month later, a sudden and massive hemoptysis prompted an emergency fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB), which exhibited substantial bleeding in the left lung and its aspiration into the right lung. A single-lumen endotracheal tube was immediately placed in the right main bronchus to isolate the right lung, followed by mechanical one lung ventilation (OLV). We had to choose a single-lumen tube in the endoscopy room unequipped for emergency airway management. An emergency computed-tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a bulged left bronchial artery, urging BAE. The common trunk of bronchial arteries arose from the thoracic aorta , complicating selective advancement of an embolization catheter. The BAE failed to achieve satisfactory hemostasis. During BAE, oxygenation worsened down to SpO2 40%. A shift to bilateral mechanical ventilation provided a slight amelioration in blood gas analysis at FiO2 0.35; pH 7.37, PaCO2, 35.5 mmHg, PaO2 104 mmHg, HCO3− 20.2 mmol/l, and BE − 4.5 mmol/l. However, we were afraid that severely decreased lung compliance produced by persistent blood afflux in both lungs would hamper sufficient and protective mechanical ventilation. We, thereby, decided to install VV-ECMO using a poly-2-methoxyethylacrylate (PMEA)-coated circuit (Capiox®, TERUMO, Japan) withholding the use of anticoagulants with the setting of pump speed 1500 rpm, pump flow 2 L/min, O2 flow, 2 L/min. The coagulation system examinations following the installation of ECMO were activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 40 s and serum fibrinogen 158 mg/dl.
Following 2 days, no apparent active bleeding observed let us confine only to performing FOBs for bronchial cleaning, hoping for spontaneous hemostasis. The finding and lowering extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support (FiO2 1.0 to 0.5) suggested possible withdrawal from VV-ECMO despite chest X-rays manifesting atelectasis in the whole left lung . On day 3, however, an FOB found active rebleeding in the lateral and posterior basal bronchi, where thrombin solution was instilled. The single-lumen tube was replaced by a 35-Fr left-sided double-lumen endobronchial tube through which only the right lung was ventilated and the left lung was kept pressurized at a constant airway pressure 10 cmH2O with 100% O2, intending astriction. Notwithstanding the efforts, we thought such conservative means were only palliative and a radical surgical measure should be adopted. In the meantime, ECMO weaning trials were carried out in accordance with the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization guideline , indicating possible weaning. The ECMO was, however, kept operated at the minimal setting, pump speed 1250 rpm, pump flow 1.5 L/min, O2 flow 0.5 L/min, in preparation for surgery-associated worsening of gas exchange and unexpected hemorrhage. Preoperative total amounts of blood products transfused were fresh frozen plasma (FFP) 6 units, packed red cells (PRC) 6 units and platelets 10 units. The preoperative APTT was 42 s and serum fibrinogen 173 mg/dl.
On day 4, resection of the left lower lung lobe was scheduled under inhalational anesthesia with sevoflurane while the patient was on ECMO. We were concerned about unstable depth of intravenous anesthesia produced by abrupt changes in hemodynamics and circulation volume. Depth of anesthesia was closely monitored with the bispectral index (BIS®, Medtronic, USA). The VV-ECMO remained well-controlled during the surgery without major cardiovascular or respiratory events. The surgery achieved considerable hemostasis, with the operation duration 3 h 51 min and intraoperative bleeding volume 863 ml. She was transfused with FFP 8 units, PRC 10 units, and platelets 20 units. Postoperative chest X-ray showed good aeration in the resting left upper lung . Bilateral mechanical ventilation presented a marked improvement in gas exchange. However, VV-ECMO still remained operated in the postoperative ICU at the minimal setting since unstable hemodynamics and slowly progressing anemia were sustained.
On day 5, the patient developed a hematoma in the left thoracic wall. An exploratory thoracotomy was performed, achieving hemostasis. Intraoperative bleeding of 2500 ml was compensated by transfusions of FFP 18 units, PRC 12 units and platelets 20 units. Serum fibrinogen was below 100 mg/dl preoperatively but recovered to 132 mg/dl after surgery. For inspection of intravascular emboli formed possibly after prolonged anticoagulation-free ECMO, a postoperative CTA was performed and found, instead, extravasation of contrast medium from intercostal arteries. Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) provided a dramatic hemodynamic stability, enabling weaning from VV-ECMO on the same day. Eventually, VV-ECMO was kept operated without anticoagulation for as long as 5 days. On day 6, a CTA detected floating thrombi in the inferior vena cava and bilateral popliteal veins, which required a continuous heparin administration. She was extubated on day 8 and transferred to a general ward on day 9. She was discharge uneventfully from the hospital on day 53.