A 39-year-old male patient with MEN-1 who had an anterior mediastinal mass was referred to our hospital. The patient had undergone total parathyroidectomy and auto-transplantation of a partial parathyroid for hyperparathyroidism 6 years ago. His vital signs showed no abnormalities. He had a temperature of 37.2 °C, blood pressure of 117/72 mmHg, heart rate of 100 bpm, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 98% in room air. Laboratory data revealed a serum antiacetylcholine receptor binding antibody level below 0.2 nmol/L (normal, below 0.2 nmol/L), serum cancer antigen level 5 U/mL (normal, below 35 U/mL), serum α-fetoprotein level 3 ng/mL (normal, below 10 ng/mL), serum human chorionic gonadotropin β subunit level below 0.5 mIU/mL (normal, below 0.5 mIU/mL), and serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor level 292 U/mL (normal, below 475 U/mL).
Chest computed tomography revealed an isolated anterior mediastinal mass on the thymic gland with a maximum diameter measuring 22 mm and without invasion into the surrounding tissues . Thymic carcinoid is classified as MEN-1 and has a poor prognosis; thus, we decided to remove the tumor. The patient was intubated with a double-lumen endotracheal tube for one-lung ventilation under general anesthesia and positioned in the left lateral decubitus position. A 5-cm skin incision was made at the fifth intercostal space (ICS) in the anterior axillary line, and a wound protector (Gel POINT Mini Advanced Access Platform, Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA, USA) was placed at the subcutaneous muscular layer . Through the wound protector, an 8-mm camera port was placed at the fifth ICS in the anterior axillary line as the second arm. Two 8-mm assisted ports were inserted at the fourth and sixth ICS on the anterior side as the first and third arms, respectively . The distance between each port was about 3 cm. After the da Vinci® Xi (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was positioned; a robotic arm was mounted to each port with a bipolar fenestrated grasping forceps on the first arm and a monopolar spatula on the third arm. The rigid 30° oblique viewing endoscope was used. Carbon dioxide (CO2) was insufflated at a set pressure of 5 mmHg. Depending on the situation, the robotic instruments on the left and right arms were replaced and da Vinci® Vessel Sealer Extend (Intuitive Surgical) instruments were also used. Part of the thymic and pericardial fat including the tumor was dissected from the inferior side, and complete dissection was performed from the cranial side, resulting in the removal of the tumor. To prevent robotic arm collisions, the left and right forceps were moved vertically with the endoscope in between . The final histopathologic examination diagnosed the tumor as a thymic carcinoid tumor . Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed the presence of a number of atypical pleomorphic cells. Immunohistochemical staining showed the presence of neuroendocrine markers chromogranin A, synaptophysin, cytokeratin AE1/3, and Ki-67 (5–10%) . Thus, confirmation of a thymic carcinoid tumor was obtained. The postoperative course was uneventful.