A 12-year-old Syrian boy was admitted to our hospital due to epistaxis, anorexia, weight loss, and night sweats. Medical and family history were unremarkable. The physical examination revealed preauricular, postauricular and submandibular lymphadenopathy with the largest node measuring approximately (3 × 5) cm . Furthermore, a hard palate mass was found deviating the uvula to the right causing dysphagia and dyspnea. Laboratory tests showed WBC count 35380/μL, Hgb 10,1 g/dl, platelets 641 × 103/μL and ESR 124 mm/hr.
Abdominal ultrasound showed mild spleen enlargement without focal lesions. Chest radiography was normal without mediastinal widening.
A CT scan revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes on the right side of the neck .
Excisional biopsy of the enlarged cervical lymph node (3 × 4)cm was performed and further pathological assessment showed complete effacement of lymph node architecture with proliferation medium to large-sized anaplastic and Reed-Sternberg-like cells in the interfollicular zones and subcapsular sinuses admixed with histiocytes, small lymphocytes and few eosinophils. In addition, the neoplastic cells showed cohesive growth pattern with abundant cytoplasm, wreath-like or multiple nuclei, multiple nucleoli, and occasional mitotic figures .
In addition, a bone marrow sample showed reactive inflammation with hypercellular bone marrow. No evidence of involvement by neoplastic cells was found. Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma (CHL) based on routine staining with the recommendation to proceed with immunohistochemistry staining to confirm the diagnosis. However, immunohistochemistry was not available in our institution at the time.
The patient received chemotherapy based on ABVD protocol. However, the patient reentered our hospital 5 months later with no evidence of significant improvement, therefore, the diagnosis was doubted. Consequent immunohistochemistry staining showed strong CD30 positivity for large Reed-Stenberg-like cells and CD3 positivity whereas ALK, CD15 and CD20 were negative . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with ALK-negative ALCL. The patient received 5 cycles of chemotherapy comprising of (vinblastine 10 mg/m2, methotrexate 500 mg/m2, ifosfamide 1g/m2, etoposide 100 mg/m2and cytarabine 1g/m2). Unfortunately, the patient passed away after 6 months.