A 52-year-old woman, gravida-3, para-3, 3 years post-menopausal, presented with post-menopausal bleeding of “several weeks” duration. She ultimately underwent a biopsy on which a diagnosis of endometrioid adenocarcinoma, FIGO grade 1 was rendered. Imaging showed a left adnexal mass whose features were equivocal regarding benignancy. A decision was made to perform a total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. An intraoperative pathologic assessment was performed, which showed the adnexal mass to be benign but the endometrial mass to be of large volume (a 9 × 6 cm soft polypoid mass that occupied the entirety of the uterine cavity) with myometrial invasion and lower uterine segment involvement. A bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy was also performed. Microscopic examination of the permanent sections of the case showed a grade 1 endometrioid carcinoma of the endometrium, with 35% invasion of the myometrial wall thickness, focal lymphovascular invasion, and metastases to 2 of 16 pelvic lymph nodes . Approximately 40% of the tumor was comprised of columnar glands showing more nuclear stratification, more nuclear enlargement, and more prominent nucleolomegaly than the background glands (atypical areas). These areas also showed comparatively increased mitotic indices (average 17 MF/10 HPF) than the background glands (average 9 MF/10 HPF), from which they were spatially distinct. Immunohistochemically, the atypical areas showed a p53 aberrant immunophenotype, characterized by diffuse and marked nuclear positivity for p53 in more than 90% of lesional nuclei. The p53-aberrant areas were also p16-diffusely positive, vimentin-positive, Napsin A-negative, estrogen receptor positive, and progesterone receptor-positive . The remainder of the tumor (60% of tumoral volume) displayed a p53-wild type immunophenotype, and were p16-mosaic positive, vimentin-positive, Napsin A-negative, estrogen receptor positive, and progesterone receptor-positive. As such, the p53-aberrant and p53-wild type areas showed an identical immunophenotype with the exception of the latter being p16-mosaic positive. Foci of lymphovascular invasion and myometrial invasion showed a p53-wild type immunophenotype and were identical in immunophenotype to the other p53-wild type areas within the tumor. Areas of background hyperplasia showed a p53 wild type immunophenotype. The endometrioid carcinoma at its primary site showed minor squamous differentiation, and no solid components in both the p53-wild type and p53-aberrant areas.
The 2 lymph nodes with metastatic disease each showed a distinct biphasic pattern, comprised of both p53-wild type and p53-aberrant areas in foci that were spatially apposed but not intermixed. The p53-aberrant areas were identical in morphology and immunophenotype to the “atypical areas” of the endometrial tumor described above. The p53-wild type tumoral areas were comprised of glands with less columnar configuration and more non-specific cytoplasmic clarity. However, they showed foci of squamous differentiation and were otherwise immunophenotypically identical to the p53-wild type areas within the endometrial tumor . All components of the tumor at both the primary and metastatic sites showed loss of MSH2 and MSH6 with retained expression of MLH1 and PMS2. The patient declined germ-line testing, and underwent adjuvant chemotherapy. The case is too recent for meaningful follow-up.
All immunohistochemical studies were performed on 4 μ-thick, unstained slides of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections using the Ventana Benchmark automation and the Ultra View detection kit (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ) and the following primary antibodies: Estrogen receptor (ER; Clone SP1; prediluted, Ventana), Progesterone receptor (PR; clone IE2; prediluted; Ventana), p53 (clone DO-7; dilution 1:40; Ventana), Napsin-A (polyclonal, prediluted; Cell Marque, Rocklin, CA), Vimentin (clone V9, dilution 1: 1000, Ventana), p16 (Clone JC8, prediluted, Santa-Cruz, Dallas, TX), MLH1 (clone G168–15, prediluted, Biocare Medical, Concord, CA), PMS2 (Clone A16–4; dilution 1:25; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), MSH2 (clone FE11, prediluted, Biocare Medical), and MSH6 (clone BC/44, prediluted, Biocare Medical).