A 47-year old male patient presented to the emergency department of our center with a 4-day history of moderate abdominal pain increasing gradually in severity over the duration of illness. The pain started as generalized all over the abdomen, and then mobilized to the right iliac fossa. The pain was associated with frequented vomiting which started as greenish juice then became food particles. It was also associated with increased an abdominal girth and obstipation. Physical assessment showed a distressed patient with a respiratory rate of 22 and heart rate of 120 bpm. His Blood pressure was 90/60 and Temp 37.8° C orally. O2 Saturation was 90 at room air. Abdominal examination revealed marked abdominal distention, with localized guarding in right iliac fossa. On Digital rectal examination there was no masses or blood and no stool. On presentation, laboratory findings included elevated Creatinine (1.5 mg/dl), BUN (27.0), Na (143) and normal WBC count (5900 cell/mm3), hemoglobin (10.4 g/dl), platelets (136 × 103/μl), INR 1.7. Plain abdominal radiographs showed dilated small and large bowel loops .
The abdomen CT scans with contrast enhancement was advised after resuscitating the patient and stabilizing his condition, and showed dilated small and large bowel with sigmoid volvulus plus large amount of preihepatic and pelvic free fluid. Swirl sign at the mesentery of cecum suspected strangulated bowels due to transmesentric defect . Intraoperative findings: 2 × 4 cm defect in the mesentery of cecum, Gangrenous sigmoid volvulus and part of the terminal ileum entrapped through the mesenteric gate, and much free fluid . Surgical treatment started with deflating the sigmoid colon, and reducing it through the defect. We also reduced the small bowel. After that, resection of all nonviable segments was performed. End-to-end anastomosis of small bowel, colostomy on the left side, and closure of defect was done. Immediately after recovery from surgery, the patient was transferred to ICU and stayed for three days, during which he developed atelectasis and systemic inflammatory response with acute kidney injury and blood hemolysis but these rapidly reverted to normal. Following that, the patient was transferred to surgical ward in which he spent seven days with a complication of superficial wound infection and ileus. The infection was treated with IV antibiotics according to antimicrobial susceptibility testing and dressing was applied. Ileus was treated conservatively. On the tenth postoperative day, the patient was discharged with functioning stoma and excellent general condition. We are planning to restore GI continuity after 3 months.