A 63-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital for examination and treatment on July 26, 2022. Six months prior to admission, she experienced upper and middle abdominal distension after eating, which was slightly relieved by anal venting. She reduced the amount of food consumed per meal and did not experience any further bloating. One month prior to admission, she developed vague right upper abdominal pain after consuming fatty foods, which was paroxysmal and tolerable and improved with a light diet. No other symptoms such as acidity, eructation, vomiting, or diarrhea were reported.
Upon initial physical examination, pain was present in the left upper abdomen upon pressure, without rebound pain. The rest of the examination was unremarkable. Further investigation through barium meal examination, endoscopy, and abdominal MRI was arranged. Barium meal examination revealed a locally depressed fundus of the stomach with a smooth mucosal surface , while endoscopy showed a large submucosal bulge with a smooth surface at the fundus of the stomach , suspected to be gastric submucosal tumor. MRI detected a 6.4 x 7 cm mass in the left upper abdomen with low signal on T1-weighted images and high signal on T2-weighted images, with partial intensification in the arterial phase and progressive intensification in the venous phase .
Laparoscopic surgery was initially planned; however, intraoperatively, it was discovered that the mass was connected to the liver by pedunculi. The mass exhibited dimensions of 9 * 8 cm and had a soft consistency with angulated surface vessels closely associated with the lesser curvature of the stomach . The mass was removed en bloc with 2 cm margins. The final pathology report indicated a hemangioma . The patient timeline of diagnostic testing and Therapeutic intervention are shown in . A follow-up telephone call conducted three months post-operation revealed that the patient had experienced resolution of symptoms and reported no additional discomfort.