A 33-year-old female complained of abdominal pain in the left upper quadrant and discomfort without any obvious cause for 1 mo prior.
The pain presented as intermittent dull pain. Occasionally, she felt abdominal distention and experienced acid regurgitation without nausea, vomiting, fever, jaundice, diarrhea, or constipation. Other complaints included poor sleep and loss of appetite. There was no change in weight or bowel habits.
The patient reported that she had no history of past illness.
The patient reported no family history of malignant tumors.
Physical examination revealed an enlarged spleen with an irregular edge and tough quality; the inferior margin of the spleen extended to 4 cm below the left costal margin.
Laboratory findings included a low red blood cell count (3.4 × 1012/L) and low hemoglobin level (93 g/L), which suggested anemia, without evidence of thrombocytopenia (platelet count: 9.7 × 1010/L) and hypersplenism. Other blood tests, including those for tumor markers, liver and renal function, and coagulation, were within normal limits.
Imaging examination showed splenomegaly with an irregular shape. Computed tomography (CT) showed that the density of the spleen was uneven. The lesions exhibited hypodensity (31 HU), isodensity (40 HU) or hyperdensity (55 HU). Contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) revealed that the degree of enhancement ranged from moderate to high (100-150 HU), gradually decreased in the venous or delayed phase (100-120 HU), and was nearly equal to the splenic parenchyma (78 HU) around the lesions (80-90 HU) in the delayed phase. There were also some lesions with no obvious enhancement .
Ultrasound (US) showed multiple hyperechoic lesions with unclear boundaries. Some were integrated, and some were heterogeneous. The largest lesion was 5.4 cm × 5.0 cm, protruding to the outside of the spleen. Two accessory spleens were displayed, and the diameter of the larger accessory spleen was 1.1 cm. The features of the lesions varied on contrast-enhanced US (CEUS) .
Given the negative results of cervical, axillary, inguinal and abdominal lymph node ultrasounds and the bone marrow biopsy, no typical sign of hematologic malignancy was observed.