A 3-year-old Arabic boy from Yemen presented with intermittent episodes of shortness of breath, lethargy, fatigability, vomiting, and "cyanotic" discoloration of his skin, lips, mucous membranes and nail beds for the past two years. He was thought to have methemoglobinemia due to persistent cyanosis. He was born in Yemen and moved to the USA for further treatment one year prior to his visit to our clinic. He was evaluated in several institutions in Yemen, Europe and the USA for these problems but no specific diagnosis was ever made. He had one maternal uncle who died suddenly at 35 years of age and 4 full siblings (all males) who died of unknown causes between 2 and 4 years of age. His deceased siblings had similar symptoms and discoloration of mucous membranes. None of them had autopsies. He had 4 other siblings (2 brothers and 2 sisters) who were alive with no medical problems. He had normal electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine (Cr) levels on several occasions. He had normal results for cardiac examination, echocardiogram, hematologic evaluation and hemoglobin electrophoresis.
He was referred to our center for further evaluation of his cyanosis. The result of his physical examination was normal, except for the noted discoloration of his lips and nail beds. His arterial blood showed mild hypoxemia as follows: pH 7.32, PaCO2 37.1 mmHg, PaO2 86 mmHg, and HCO3 18.9. His methemoglobin and carboxyhemoglobin levels were 1.10% and 0.3%, respectively. He had a previous chest X-ray during one of his prior admissions which was interpreted as normal. However, upon further examination of the film at our clinic, we identified a subtle parenchymal hyperlucency of a large part of his right mid-lung area . His chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple cystic lesions in his right lung that was compatible with CPAM . CT scan of the abdomen showed no abnormalities of the adrenal glands, or other abdominal organs.
Before the surgical removal of his CPAM, he was admitted with lethargy, vomiting, dehydration, hypotension, and drowsiness. Laboratory results during this hospitalization were as follows: glucose, 2.42 mmol/L (44 mg/dl); sodium, 132 mmol/L; potassuim 3.8 mmol/L; chloride, 101 mmol/L; bicarbonate, 13 mmol/L; BUN, 7.5 mmol/L (21 mg/dL); Cr, 17.68 umol/L (0.2 mg/dL); calcuim, 2.17 mmol/L (8.7 mg/dL); magnesium, 0.57 mmol/L (1.4 mg/dL); and phosphorous, 1.2 mmol/L (3.7 mg/dL).
After the initial resuscitation with boluses of 25% dextrose and normal saline solutions, a repeat glucose test showed a value of 21.78 mmol/L (396 mg/dL). One hour after that, his glucose level dropped again to 2.1 mmol/L (39 mg/dl), and a second 25% dextrose solution bolus was thus given. Our patient had low serum cortisol level, normal aldosterone, and normal growth hormone concentrations . His serum adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) concentration was elevated at 2,630 pg/ml. ACTH stimulation test did not result in an increase in his cortisol levels . He had no detectable anti-adrenal antibodies and a non-reactive purified protein derivative skin test. He was started on hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone and had a surgical removal of the CPAM a few weeks later.
Our patient's serum ACTH concentration decreased to 13 pg/ml six months after the treatment. A pathological examination of the lung cysts showed multiple thin-walled cysts that ranged from 0.3 cm to 1.5 cm in diameter and filled with clear fluid. The cysts appeared to occupy approximately 90% of our patient's parenchyma. Microscopically, the cysts were lined with columnar (respiratory type) epithelium. This was compatible with the diagnosis of CPAM.
One year later, he was readmitted with a seizure and loss of consciousness. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed bilaterally diffuse symmetric high T2 and FLAIR signal abnormality involving the white matter of several parts of his brain, which was suggestive of a diffuse and active demyelination process . He had elevated VLCFA levels, which was compatible with the diagnosis of X-ALD. His VLCFA levels were as follows: C22:0 of 20.02, C24:0 of 33.61, C26:0 of 1.2, C24 and C22 of 1.679, and C26/C22 of 0.06. Consequently, he was started on anti-seizure medications N-acetyl-L-cysteine, and was continued on corticosteroids. He was also referred for bone marrow transplant evaluation.