An 83-year-old white man presented to our emergency department with shortness of breath. His past medical history was significant for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, anemia of chronic disease, sick sinus syndrome, pulmonary hypertension, and chronic kidney disease. His medications included probenecid, finasteride, albuterol-ipratropium bromide by inhalation, furosemide, carvedilol, omeprazole, tamsulosin, mirtazapine, ferrous sulfate, metolazone, losartan, budesonide, and prednisone. He was also on apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for anticoagulation due to non-valvular atrial fibrillation. He did not have a history of bleeding or clotting disorders, although he had presented to our emergency department with complaints of hemoptysis at least once previously due to his cardiopulmonary disease.
Acute-on-chronic congestive heart failure and exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were diagnosed. Five days into his hospital stay he awoke with diffuse abdominal pain. He and his wife both denied history of recent abdominal or chest trauma, including falls. After the onset of his abdominal pain, while sitting up in bed, he had a witnessed syncopal event and became unresponsive. A medical emergency response team was called to his bedside and laboratory tests were immediately performed. He recovered and was stabilized, but soon after he developed abdominal distention, tympanic bowel sounds, and altered mental status. He decompensated rapidly with a drop in blood pressure from baseline values of 100/50 mm Hg to 54/32 mm Hg. An immediate abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was completed at that time with the differential diagnosis being considered including bleeding gastric or duodenal ulcer, ischemic bowel, myocardial infarction, or septic shock. His CT showed a splenic hematoma with associated enlargement of his spleen measuring 13.6×11.5×15.5 cm and blood in his abdominal cavity . On hematologic tests, his serum hemoglobin was reduced from his baseline value of 9.3 g/dL on admission to 5.3 g/dL (normal range 13.5 to 18 g/dL). His activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was within normal range; however, his prothrombin time (PT) was elevated at 16.1 seconds (normal range, 9.5 to 12.7 seconds) consistent with his use of apixaban.
Rapid transfusion of two units of packed red blood cells, followed by three units of fresh frozen plasma was initiated. Despite attempts at resuscitation, he remained hypotensive and in shock. Due to multiple comorbidities which could potentially complicate surgical intervention, he was urgently transferred to interventional radiology for an emergency splenic artery embolization. An angiogram completed during the procedure showed a splenic artery that was patent and tortuous, with medial displacement of his spleen by a hematoma consistent with what was seen on CT imaging. He was successfully stabilized by embolization of the bleeding source; he was subsequently transferred to our intensive care unit.
The following morning, subsequent to the embolization of the bleeding source, his hemoglobin had decreased from 8.6 g/dL to 6.6 g/dL, which raised a concern that he had recurrent bleeding; a laparotomy was performed with a splenectomy and evacuation of a large intra-abdominal hematoma. During the procedure, 3600 mL of blood and clots were evacuated from his abdominal cavity.
Following the surgery, he underwent prolonged mechanical ventilation due to respiratory failure and temporary hemodialysis for acute-on-chronic kidney injury. He was eventually discharged to a short-term rehabilitation facility for physical therapy after an extensive hospitalization.