A 83-year-old lady with a BMI of 32 presented to us with a history of fall at home. Radiographs showed left-sided intertrochanteric femur fracture (AO 31A2.1) with marked osteopenia (Singh’s index Grade 3) . She was operated with TFNA Depuy (Dimension 11 x 200 mm and helical blade of 80 mm). An acceptable reduction of the fracture and stable fixation was achieved intraoperatively . The position of the helical blade in the head was in the optimal position (center–center) assessed as per Cleveland index . Tip apex distance (TAD) was found to be 29 mm, assessed in magnification controlled anteroposterior view and lateral view as per the Baumgartner’s method . Neck-shaft angle measured after fixation was 132.1o and the normal side was 131.4o . The patient was mobilized partial weight-bearing with the help of walker from the next day of surgery.
She presented to us 6 weeks after the surgery with severe acute onset pain in the left hip, along with inability to bear weight. There was a history of fall at home. Radiographs showed implant failure (cut through of the helical blade) . Laboratory investigations ruled out infection. The patient was planned for implant removal and bipolar hemiarthroplasty.
Posterior approach was used and the previous incision was incorporated. Intraoperative samples were sent for culture and histopathology. Cemented bipolar hemiarthroplasty with calcar reconstruction using a mesh was performed as the calcar was deficient . The patient was mobilized full weight-bearing from the same day of surgery with the help of walker. All intraoperative samples sent, which were negative. The patient was followed up at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and till her last follow-up of 14 months. At each follow-up visit, the patient was assessed clinically and radiologically. Clinically, the patient was asymptomatic at her last follow-up visit and was mobilizing full weight-bearing without any support. Radiologically, there was no sign of loosening or radiolucencies.