A 55-year-old man was found unconscious on the street and transferred to the emergency center of our hospital. At admission, the patient’s vital signs were stable, but he was unresponsive, the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 4 (eye opening, 1; verbal response, 1; and motor response, 2), both pupils were maximally dilated (diameter, 6.5 mm), and pupillary light reflexes on both sides and vestibulo- ocular reflex (VOR) were absent. There were no visible local head injuries. Head CT revealed massive acute subdural hematoma above the right cerebral convexity causing prominent brain shift with subfalcine and transtentorial herniation, the obliteration of basal cisterns, as well as diffuse subarachnoid hemorrhage [-]. Immediately upon diagnosis, burr hole above the hematoma was made under local anesthesia, dura was opened, and subdural drainage tube was inserted. The patient was transferred to the OR, where large size right-sided decompressive craniotomy with removal of the bone flap was done and subdural hematoma was evacuated. However, prominent swelling of the brain and its protrusion through the bone defect remained, thus it was decided to perform internal decompression with extensive resection of the lateral and medial part of the right temporal lobe. Thereafter, frontal and parietal lobes still remained swollen, thus for the avoidance of brain compression after surgery the bulk of the temporal muscle down to the zygomatic arch was removed from the skull in one piece along with the periosteum. Extensive lax duraplasty with DuraGen® (Integra LifeSciences, Princeton, NJ) was done, probe for ICP monitoring was inserted, and skin was closed. No subdural or subcutaneous drainage was left.
Immediately after surgery, CT demonstrated significant reduction of the brain shift, “reappearance” of the ambient cistern, large area of infarction within the right parietal and occipital lobes caused by compression of the posterior cerebral artery at the time of herniation, and subcutaneous hematoma [-]. The patient underwent standard treatment in ICU, including normothermia therapy. On the 1st postoperative day, his best motor response was characterized as withdrawal to pain, diameter of the left (contralateral) pupil reduced from 6.5 to 3.5 mm, and VOR has recovered, whereas on the 3rd day, the left pupil started to react to light . Gradual recovery of the patient continued thereafter. On the 45th day after primary surgery, cranioplasty and ventriculoperitoneal shunting were done, and on the 70th day, he was transferred for further treatment to the neurorehabilitation facility. At that time, his GCS score was 4T4 (eye opening, 4; verbal response, tracheostomy; and motor response, 4) and CT demonstrated asymmetric hydrocephalus, extensive infarction of the right parietal and occipital lobes, and small epidural CSF collection in the right temporoparietal area [-]. At 3 months after discharge, the condition of the patient corresponded to the Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) score 3 (severe disability).