A previously healthy 60-year-old female seeking medical attention through teleconsultation presents with profound dyspnea, oppressive chest pain, fatigue, episodic hallucinations, and difficulty sleeping. The patient describes that her symptoms began 7 days ago with non-productive cough and fever, later progressing to dyspnea that exacerbated with minimal effort, for what she originally sought medical attention at an ER. At the ER triage the patient presented with profound dyspnea, an oxygen saturation of 86% at room air, and a respiratory rate of 32 breaths/min. However, despite the severity of the respiratory compromise, the patient could not be admitted due to hospital oversaturation. Unfortunately, the patient was sent home with medical recommendations, including nebulization with normal saline, acetylcysteine and ambroxol hydrochloride. She was also advised that a chest CT scan was needed.
At the medical teleconsultation, the patient presented marked respiratory distress accompanied with a respiratory rate of 31 respirations per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 85% at room air. A relative of the patient described what is compatible with skin and mucous membrane dryness, skin pallor and bilateral 1+ pitting edema. The patient handed-off a copy of the CT scan where bilateral pulmonary edema and consolidations with ground-glassing were observed encompassing nearly 90% of the lung parenchyma . A basic panel of laboratory tests, and a PCR test for COVID-19 were ordered, the latter of which confirmed the diagnosis . She was prescribed with IV normal saline for rehydration, pharmacologic management with IV methylprednisolone (250 mg every 24 h for 3 days), followed by prednisone (40 mg for 7 days), nitazoxanide (500 mg every 8 h) for 7 days and a single dose of 40 mg of subcutaneous enoxaparin, all of which were administered by an outpatient registered nurse at home. Standard oxygen therapy through nasal cannula was also recommended. Medical treatment is best depicted in Fig. . Colchicine was added at the third day of treatment (2 mg loading dose, followed by 0.5 mg every 8 h up to the end of treatment).
Daily follow-ups were established to monitor for signs of clinical improvement. Two weeks later from the initial consultation the patient presented marked improvement in her symptoms, as well as in her CT scan , which prompted in discontinuation of the medications and the oxygen therapy. At one-month follow-up the patient presented a nearly complete resolution of the initial symptoms, with a partially restored capacity to perform her daily activities. At the 45th day a negative PCR test for the viral RNA was reported. However, spirometry and diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) at 3rd, 4th and 6th months showed results compatible with a restrictive pattern evidenced by reduced FVC, FEV1 and DLCO measurements with respect to predicted values , while the 6-min walk test showed a decreased walking distance. Radiographic changes persisted at the 6-month follow-up chest CT scan .