A 54-yr-old Caucasian male was referred for evaluation of a rapidly increasing neck tumor noticed for the first time four months earlier. He complained of sporadic dysphagia without weight loss. He was a heavy smoker until recently but had no previous medical history. He worked as a house painter, for seven years, in his thirties. The physical examination revealed an asymmetric multinodular goiter with a left dominant nodule with firm consistency and no palpable regional nodes. Serum TSH was 1.3 μUI/ml (normal: 0.5–4.7 μUI/ml), T4 7.3 μg/dl (normal: 5.4–11 μg/dl) and T3 126 ng/dl (normal: 52–160 ng/dl). Antimicrosomal and antithyroglobulin antibodies were negative. A thyroid ultrasound demonstrated a multinodular gland with the right and left lobes measuring 6 × 4 × 3 cm and 9 × 7 × 6 cm respectively. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck showed a slight tracheal deviation to the right without compression. A Tc-99 m scintigraphy disclosed irregular uptake in both lobes of the thyroid and a large cold nodule in the left lobe. FNAC from both lobes revealed a clear-cell carcinoma with an immunocytochemical profile suggestive of a secondary tumor from the kidney (refer to section pathology).
FNAC results prompted a clinical and radiographic investigation. An abdominal CT scan revealed a tumor of the left kidney measuring in greatest diameter 10 cm. Bone scan, chest computed tomography scan, liver ultrasound and laboratory data were normal and there was no evidence of other distant metastases.
Initial treatment included a left radical nephrectomy and a total thyroidectomy. One year later, there was evidence for cervical nodal metastases. The patient was then submitted to right radical neck dissection with internal jugular vein ligation and section of spinal accessory nerve and left modified radical neck dissection type III. At histological examination, only right nodes were metastatic.
Both thyroid lobes were sampled. Smears were air dried and acetone fixed and stained with May-Grünwald-Giemsa (MGG) and Papanicolaou (PAP) stains, respectively. An additional sample was fixed in formalin and processed as a cell-block using the Shandon Cytoblock® Kit (Thermo Electron Corporation, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Cell block (CB) sections were stained with hematoxilin-eosin. Immunocytochemistry was performed on CB sections, using an avidin-biotin method with diaminobenzidine as the chromogen for the following antibodies: thyroglobulin, calcitonin, vimentin, CD10, TTF1 (Dakocytomation, Denmark A/S) and cytokeratin AE1/AE3 (Zymed Laboratories, Inc, San Francisco, CA).
Smears consisted of a clear, large cell neoplasia with large nuclei, prominent nucleoli and finely vacuolated cytoplasm, with indistinct borders. The tumor cells were arranged in aggregates of variable size and shape, many of them centered by thin walled capillaries. This intimate relationship of neoplastic cells and vessels was better appreciated on cell-block sections. These cells were immunoreactive for pancytokeratin (AE1/AE3), vimentin and CD10 and were negative for thyroglobulin, thyroid transcription factor1 (TTF1) and calcitonin .
The smear pattern together with the immunocytochemical profile was consistent with the diagnosis of secondary tumor, most probably from renal origin.
The nephrectomy specimen showed a renal cell carcinoma, clear cell type. It was classified as Fuhrman 3 and showed extra renal local spread and no vascular invasion.
The thyroid gland was multinodular and all the nodules consisted of metastasis of a clear cell neoplasia. The histological pattern was similar to the renal tumor. Immunocytochemical study was performed using the same antibodies that were tested on cytological samples with identical results.
RNA from cells left inside of the needle used for FNAC was isolated with the QuickPrep micro mRNA Purification Kit (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Buckinghamshire, UK), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Half of the RNA was reversed transcribed with Superscript (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in 20 μl reaction volume with random primers and cDNA kept frozen. To screen for VHL mutations in thyroid aspirates, 2,5 μl of first-strand cDNA was used as a template for PCR using primers designed by us (F-5'-TCAGAGATGCAGGGACACAC-3', R-5'-TGACGATGTCCAGTCTCCTG-3').
Somatic DNA was extracted from samples corresponding to renal carcinoma and thyroid metastases obtained during surgeries and immediately frozen with liquid nitrogen until nucleic acid extraction using TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA). Genomic DNA was also obtained from peripheral venous blood and isolated by a manual method adapted from Bowtell .
DNA samples were amplified by PCR using primers previously described . The screening of VHL mutations was performed by single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis (SSCP). To further characterize the abnormal pattern observed in the SSCP, PCR purified products were either sequenced directly using the ABI PRISM® BigDye™ Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and the ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analyser or subcloned into pGEM®-T Easy Vector (Promega, Madison, USA), and subsequently sequenced using the ABI PRISM® BigDye™ Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and the ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analyser. Restriction analysis, using the restriction endonuclease BstZ17 I (New England BioLabs®, Inc., Beverly, USA) was also performed.
The same alteration, a heterozygous 680delA (codon 156/exon 3) of the VHL gene was identified in thyroid aspirates, renal carcinoma, thyroid metastases and lymph node metastases. It causes a frame-shift and creates a premature stop predicting a truncated pVHL . Constitutional DNA (peripheral venous blood) was analyzed and did not show the mutation. No other alterations were observed in exons 1 and 2 of VHL.