A 56-year-old woman had been followed up for two years before the initial visit with suspected age-related macular degeneration oculus sinister (OS) at a previous clinic. One year before the initial visit, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.9 OS, and fluorescence angiography (FA) showed leakage of fluorescence at the macula, which indicated the possibility of central serous chorioretinopathy at the clinic. One month before the initial visit, SRD was observed with BCVA of 0.5 OS, and local photocoagulation was performed. However, due to residual SRD and worsening visual impairment OS, she was referred to our hospital. Her medical history was limited to the inguinal hernia surgery 20 years ago, and she had neither a smoking habit nor family history. At the initial examination, her BCVA was 1.5 oculus dexter (OD) and 0.8 OS, with normal intraocular pressure oculi uterque (OU). Slit-lamp microscopy did not detect any findings OU. Color fundus photography (CFP) showed no abnormality OD , while an irregular brownish lesion was noted around the macula OS . Therefore, coloration of the posterior pole in the left eye was generally more yellowish-brown than the right eye. Although swept-source (SS)-OCT images (DRI OCT Triton; Topcon Inc., Tokyo, Japan) demonstrated no abnormalities of retino-choroidal structures OD , SS-OCT showed the markedly hyporeflective choroidal structure OS as well as SRD where the retinal thickness was preserved. Moreover, the lumen of the choriocapillaris was suggested to be compressed beneath the RPE layer OS . FAF indicated enlarged macular hypoautofluorescence suggesting chronic RPE damage OS . There was no choroidal elevation on B-mode echography OU . FA revealed reduced choroidal perfusion in the macula in the early phase and scattered focal hyperfluorescent spots that intensified from early to late phase OS . Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) demonstrated serpiginous-like fluorescence blockade throughout OS . There was no obvious abnormal shadow on orbital magnetic resonance imaging. Based on the clinical findings, her left eye was diagnosed with choroidal melanocytosis together with SRD. Central serous chorioretinopathy was ruled out by the absence of choroidal thickening on SS-OCT, descending tract on FAF, and choroidal vascular hyperpermeability on ICGA. The absence of choroidal elevation observed by fundus examination and echography, and irregular melanin pigmentation of the choroid supported the diagnosis of choroidal melanocytosis rather than choroidal nevus. She was observed without any treatment. Fifty-eight months after the initial diagnosis, her BCVA was 0.5, CFP showed slightly darker macular pigmentation, and SRD persisted on SS-OCT.
The institutional review board of Hokkaido University waived the need for ethical assessment of this clinical study because of it being a single case report with a non-invasive study. This study adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.
This study evaluated the alterations of choroidal blood flow of choroidal melanocytosis using LSFG. Relative blood flow values were obtained as the mean blur rate (MBR) after quantitative measurement of blood flow velocity by LSFG software (LSFG-NAVI, version 3.1.39.2, Softcare Ltd., Fukuoka, Japan) according to previous reports [, ]. The pupils of the patient were dilated with 0.4% tropicamide (Mydrin-M; Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka) before examination. Ophthalmic examinations were conducted after pupils of both eyes had completely lost their light reflex. The macula in the LSFG images was manually marked and vessels were automatically segmented using threshold values defined by the system software (LSFG Analyzer, version 3.0.47.0). The macular area was identified by an experienced examiner by comparing the initial FA images and FAF images. Since LSFG images also show retinal blood vessels, the macular area was determined by comparing their length and vascular runways with the FA images. A circle of about 750 μm in diameter to the fovea was defined as the region of interest on LSFG , based on FA findings. Four to five consecutive measurements were taken for each circle, and the mean values were used for analysis. All examinations were conducted by a single experienced operator. Ocular perfusion pressure (OPP) was calculated using the patient’s blood pressure and intraocular pressure, as previously described [, ].
The MBR values OD are shown in Fig. B as follows: 10.9, 10.6, 10.1, and 9.0 arbitrary units (AU) at 18, 24, 36, and 58 months after the initial visit, respectively. The MBR values OS are shown in Fig. B as follows: 1.24, 1.30, 1.32, 1.28, and 1.42 AU at 12, 18, 24, 36, and 58 months after the initial visit, respectively. The MBR (mean ± standard deviation) for 58 months was 10.15 ± 0.72 AU OD and 1.31 ± 0.06 AU OS. OPP was 82.2, 76.2, 82.9, 73.0, and 68.0 mmHg OD, and 83.2, 78.2, 82.9, 72.0, and 69.0 mmHg OS at 12, 18, 24, 36, and 58 months after the initial visit OS, respectively, revealing no significant changes in either eye.