A 45-year-old male presented with cough for more than two months without obvious cause in August 2022. He claimed no other notable symptoms, and no evident abnormality was found in the laboratory blood test. Thus, infectious diseases were preliminarily excluded. For further examination, a chest CT scan showed that there were multiple nodules in both lungs with enlarged hilar lymph nodes, and multiple filling defects in both pulmonary arteries, consistent with pulmonary thromboembolism It was considered as tumor metastasis. An abdominal CT was performed for further evaluation. It showed an enlarged heterogeneous left renal mass almost completely replacing the left kidney (size 12.2 cm*9.7 cm), with mild perirenal fluid and fat stranding. There was associated tumor thrombus present in the left renal vein, along with enlarged metastatic retroperitoneal lymph nodes. The patient had a history of hypertension and diabetes, which were under well control with regular medication, and had no history of other diseases or surgery.
The patient underwent lung and kidney percutaneous core needle biopsy and the histological manifestations and immunochemistry (IHC) findings of the two samples are similar. Microscopically, the tumor cells were small to medium sized round or oval cells with poor adhesion. The cytoplasm was eosinophilic but scant, and the nucleoli were prominent with rough chromatin. The mitotic rate was high (> 10 mitotic figures per 10 high power field). Most of the tumor cells were organized in a solid sheets pattern. Large aeras of necrosis and partial myxoid stromal changes were observed . And in some aeras, the tumor cells were distributed around the open thin-walled vessels. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were focal positive for CD99 ; multifocal positive for WT1 with unequal strength, BRG1, focal weak positive for AE1/AE3 and diffuse positive for GATA3 , whereas S-100, Synaptophysin, Vimentin, CK7, PAX8 and TTF-1 were negative. The Ki67 proliferation index was high (> 80%). The fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay showed separated red and green signals or single red signals seen in the nuclei of 30% of tumor cells, suggesting the existence of CIC gene translocation . Moreover, the next generation sequencing (NGS) assay confirmed the existence of a fusion of CIC-LEUTX genes. The breakpoints were at chr19: 42799274 and chr19: 40276608 for CIC and LEUTX, respectively .
The patient received chemotherapy (paclitaxel + carboplatin) and immunotherapy(pabolizumab). However, brain metastases were found 2 months after diagnosis. Due to the rapid progression, a new chemotherapy regimen (Doxorubicin + vincristine + cyclophosphamide) and radiotherapy was applied. Unfortunately, treatment was not effective enough and the patient passed away 7 months after diagnosis.