A 27-year-old woman, who had never smoked, presented with a fever persisting for the past two days. The patient had no relevant past medical history or family history. A physical examination revealed left costovertebral angle tenderness and a urinalysis revealed the presence of pyuria. There were no other indications suggestive of an obvious fever source. The diagnosis was pyelonephritis, and intravenous ceftriaxone was administered. An incidental finding on screening chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a 9 mm pulmonary nodule with a round shape and smooth margin in the left upper lobe (A). She reported no weight loss, hemoptysis, or shortness of breath. A three-dimensional CT scan obtained at a 0.63 mm thickness with volume rendering showed that the nodule volume was 425 mm3 (B). Volume rendering was obtained on Aquarius iNtuition 3D workstation (TeraRecon Inc., San Mateo, CA). Based on its radiological features, a benign pulmonary nodule was suspected and a radiographic follow-up was planned. One year later, the nodule enlarged to a maximum diameter of 14 mm (A) with an estimated volume of 1050 mm3 (B). No other pulmonary lesions or lymphadenopathies were observed. Due to the health insurance limitations, positron emission tomography was not accessible. A rapid growth pattern, with an estimated VDT of 249 days calculated using the Schwartz formula, prompted us to consider a malignancy . Transbronchial biopsy was considered non-diagnostic because of the absence of a bronchial connection to the lesion, based on the thin-section CT. A surgical resection was planned for both diagnostic therapeutic purposes. The patient underwent a thoracoscopic lingulectomy successfully and was discharged uneventfully on the fifth postoperative day.
A histopathological examination revealed that the tumor was composed of a mixture of papillary, sclerotic, and solid patterns. The papillary area showed cores of fibrovascular sclerotic stroma and epithelioid cells lined by cuboidal epithelium. The solid area exhibited sheets of round to oval cells with pale eosinophilic cytoplasm . Additionally, there was chronic infiltration of inflammatory cells, predominantly lymphocytes and plasma cells . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the epithelial cells tested positive for cytokeratin (CKAE1/AE3) and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) (A and B), while the stromal cells were positive for TTF1 but negative for CKAE1/AE3 (C). No mitotic activity was not observed. Those results were consistent with a diagnosis of a PSP. She is currently disease free at 2 months since surgery.