A 75-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital due to a 2-year history of gradually progressive gait disturbance. She had suffered from RA since the age of 25. Because of an exacerbation of this disease, she started taking prednisolone (5 mg/day) and sulfasalazine at 67 years, and had been continuously treated with minocycline (200 mg/day) since the age of 68. She noticed a gradual increase in blue-black skin pigmentation on both legs at 72 years. Thereafter, she began to have difficulty walking, and would frequently catch the tip of her foot on the ground. No exposure to other drugs known to cause pigmentary changes was recorded.
Examination of the patient revealed blue-black pigmentation related to minocycline therapy on the distal parts of the legs . The muscle strength was normal in the upper limbs and trunk, but she was unable to perform toe- or heel-walking. There was mild symmetrical weakness and atrophy in the lower limb muscles, but no wide-based gait. Strength testing was performed using Medical Research Council grades, and the results were as follows: hip flexion 4+/5, hip extension 4+/5, knee extension 4/5, knee flexion 4-/5, ankle dorsiflexion 4-/5, and ankle plantar flexion 4-/5. The tendon reflexes were normal except for the absence of ankle jerks. A stocking distribution decrease in appreciation of superficial pain was identified in both legs. Vibration sensation was decreased in the toes and ankles. Laboratory tests, including creatine kinase levels, were normal except for the tests related to RA. Chest roentgenogram and electrocardiogram showed no abnormalities. A nerve conduction study demonstrated no detectable abnormalities except for low amplitude in the bilateral sural nerve action potentials. Needle electromyography showed low amplitude and short duration motor-unit potentials with early recruitment in the quadriceps femoris, biceps femoris and tibialis anterior muscles. No abnormal spontaneous activity was seen in any of the muscles. Skeletal muscle CT revealed diffuse muscular atrophy of the lower extremities. Because the patient was suspected of having myopathy and sensory neuropathy, peroneus muscle and sural nerve biopsies were performed after informed consent was obtained.
The biopsied specimens were snap-frozen in isopentane-liquid nitrogen, and cryosections were stained with a standard battery of histological and histochemical reactions. Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were also stained with Prussian blue stain (for iron), Masson Fontana preparation (for melanin) and hydrogen peroxide melanin bleach. Histopathological studies of the biopsied muscle revealed modest variability in myofiber diameter with scattered angular atrophic fibers . There were a considerable number of atrophic fibers with rimmed vacuoles , and multiple collections of granular pigment-containing histiocytes in the endomysial and perimysial perivascular areas. The granules and rimmed vacuoles showed high acid phosphatase activity . The pigmentation was mainly found outside the myofibers, but the NADH-tetrazolium reductase reaction readily identified dark-brown depositions in some fibers. Almost all of the rimmed vacuoles contained granular depositions . No necrotic or regenerating fibers were present. There was no inflammatory infiltrate, except for histiocytes containing pigment that stained bright blue with the Prussian blue . This histiocytic pigment stained black on a Masson Fontana preparation , bleached in response to potassium permanganate, and showed no fluoresce under ultraviolet light, indicating that it was composed of iron and melanin.
Electron microscopy was performed on glutaraldehyde-fixed tissue using a standard electron microscopic processing protocol and a transmission electron microscope. Electron microscopy revealed that the pigment granules were localized in the cytoplasm of histiocytes, in the spaces between myofibers, and adjacent to small blood vessels . In the myofibers, the granules were localized in the subsarcolemmal cytoplasm, either individually or in clusters . Remarkably, autophagic vacuoles were consistently observed in association with many of the granular pigment clusters . Two distinct morphological patterns were evident among the granules found in myofibers: irregularly shaped, highly electron-dense granules, and membrane-bound vesicles of differing electron density with distinct internal structures, often associated with small lipid droplets.
In addition to the standard battery of histological stains, the sural nerve biopsy specimen was embedded in epoxy resin and examined by light and electron microscopy. Light microscopy of the sural nerve showed a reduction in the number of large diameter myelinated fibers, but no other specific features . However, Prussian blue and Masson Fontana staining revealed perivascular deposits of iron and melanin in the epineurial blood vessels. Electron microscopy revealed a few highly electron-dense granules in the cytoplasm of Schwann cells, where the myelin sheath was disrupted .