A 60-year-old woman with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and epilepsy experienced gradual anhedonia over 2 weeks and insomnia for 3 days without any discernable psychological causes. She had two episodes of repetitive neuropsychiatric SLE (NPSLE) in the past, which required methylprednisolone pulse therapy 12 years ago and 2.5 years ago (7 months and 2 months of hospitalization, respectively). During her first hospitalization, she was diagnosed with epilepsy. She had been managing both her SLE and epilepsy well for years with prednisolone 3 mg/day, azathioprine 50 mg/day, hydroxychloroquine 200 mg/day, valproate 500 mg/day, and perampanel 6 mg/day. Although she had gone shopping with her family the day before admission, her consciousness deteriorated abruptly, and she was transferred to a university hospital. At the emergency department, her Glasgow Coma Scale was E4V1M2. Her temperature was 38.6°C, and her blood pressure was 179/89 mmHg. Comprehensive examinations, including blood and cerebrospinal fluid analyses, cranial MRI, and culture examinations, revealed no significant findings. On day 2, the patient exhibited symptoms including stupor, mutism, staring, rigidity, and withdrawal. She remained in a semi-sitting position for long periods without reacting. Her consciousness deteriorated to E1V1M1, requiring a benzodiazepine challenge under EEG monitoring. The initial low-amplitude basic activity with rare α waves on EEG improved remarkably to 40–60 μV α waves promptly after diazepam was administered intravenously , and her status improved to E4V5M6. Although she relapsed on day 3, a second benzodiazepine challenge restored her from E1V1M1 (stupor) to E4V5M6 within minutes and this was video recorded (Video ; Figure ). She was subsequently treated with lorazepam 1.5 mg/day orally. After confirming the need for ongoing lorazepam medication with the help of the video recording, she was discharged without recurrence on day 13. Her cognitive function was assessed with a score of 30 on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) during her outpatient visit on day 27, and there were no subsequent relapses.