Written informed consent for the publication of this article was obtained from the patient prior to submission of the manuscript.
A 62-year-old female with a past ocular history of conjunctival melanoma in the left eye, which had been treated with topical excision and beta brachytherapy with ruthenium 10 years earlier, was referred to our department for the management of actinic keratopathy. Uncorrected distance visual acuity (UCVA) at presentation was Counting Fingers (CF) at 50 cm. The patient underwent uneventful penetrating keratoplasty, and the 1-month postoperative UCVA was CF at 1 m. Three months postoperatively she presented as an emergency to our department complaining of red painful eye and reduced visual acuity. UCVA had decreased to hand movement (HM). Slit-lamp examination revealed conjunctival injection and a diffuse corneal melting abscess infiltrating the corneal rim . Corneal scraping was performed and sent for microbiologic cultures and analysis. The patient reported professional exposure to plant material, making a fungal infection highly possible. Intensive antibiotic and antifungal therapy was introduced including voriconazole topical and per os, amphotericin B per os, topical moxifloxacine and doxycycline. Cultures confirmed fungal keratitis with Purpureocillium lilacinum (anc. Paecilomyces lilacinus), which was voriconazole-sensitive, and this treatment was subsequently pursued. Despite aggressive medical treatment, corneal melting progressed to the stage of graft perforation. We decided to proceed with a combined repeat PKP and PACK-CXL. The operation was performed under general anesthesia without any intraoperative complication. PACK-CXL was applied intraoperatively on the infected graft. A modified protocol was utilized with riboflavin instillation every 2 min for 15 min followed by UVA irradiation at 9 mW for 10 min. The irradiation zone was set from limbus to limbus to cover an area extending over the donor-recipient junction and the corneoscleral rim, as it seemed that the infection had spread to the recipient rim. PACK-CXL was repeated after placement of the new graft with the same irradiation zone and according to the same parameters for 10 min. Immediate postoperative UCVA was CF at 30 cm. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the graft remained clear thereafter. Nine months postoperatively the patient had regained a UCVA of CF at 1 m. No signs of infection or graft-related complications were noted .