A 35-year old Caucasian female with a history of multiple sclerosis and atopic diathesis (including bronchial asthma) presented for chronic respiratory discomfort to obtain a second opinion on her treatment. Furthermore, she had noted recurrent coughing that deteriorated in autumn. Prednisolone prescribed due to her allergic asthma had only insufficiently relieved symptoms. Previously, she had completed a specific immunotherapy addressing her allergy towards certain phytocomponents, and quit smoking after accumulation of 2 pack years in total. With seasonal fluctuation of symptoms, spirometry revealed stable static and dynamic respiratory flow values with slight obstruction. Asthma control testing (ACT), a patient-based questionnaire , revealed eight points at initial presentation (target range ≥ 19 points), indicating poorly controlled asthma. There were no signs of acute infection and an influenza immunization had recently been implemented.
Next to oral contraception and seasonal antihistamines, her medication included inhalative steroids in combination with a long-acting betamimetic agent and a short-acting betamimetic nebulizer on demand. Therapy with montelukast had to be discontinued due to gastrointestinal adverse effects. Her relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis was kept in a steady state by dimethyl fumarate (Tecfidera) and glatiramer acetate. She experienced two episodes in the past 9 years and was left with residual mild hypoesthesia, gait disturbances, and chronic fatigue.
Physical examination detected no pathologies in the patient, a medium-build [body mass index (BMI) 21 kg/m2] woman in good condition. Auscultation revealed vesicular respiratory sounds without rales. No cardiac murmur was audible. Her fingers did not show clubbing. Cardiac natriuretic peptides presented within normal limits. Besides hypereosinophilia (0.27 GPL/L), laboratory testing revealed a hypoxemia with an adequate response to oxygen (initial: 67 mmHg, with 3 L O2: 72 mmHg), that persisted in rest and exertion.
Due to this blood gas analysis presenting relevant hypoxemia, further investigations were undertaken. In the meantime, daily self-assessment of peak flow values for continuous monitoring of dynamic respiratory function was recommended.
Scintigraphy was performed to rule out a ventilation perfusion deficiency. For the subjacent computed tomographic (CT) scan, contrast media was injected into the left brachial veins. Secondarily to the exclusion of pulmonary embolism, venous contrast filling suspected an additional left superior cava vein connected to the left atrium.
The diagnosis was confirmed by echocardiography: following the attestation of a normal biventricular function with regular sized atria and no evidence of dilatation of the coronary sinus , contrast media was applied via the left brachial veins. Recordings of the apical four chamber view demonstrated an instant and complete opacification solely of the left-sided cardiac cavities . The right atrium and ventricle were unaffected and septal structures were intact. Contrast media inflow originated from the lateral base of the left atrium . On transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), contrast enhancement commenced at the junction of the left atrial appendage and the left pulmonary veins as depicted in midesophageal pulmonary vein view . As the CT scan reconstruction visualizes , the drainage location site could be specified as being the left atrial appendage. Herein, the persistent left vena cava superior complied with type IIIb of Schummer’s classification of PLVCS, with an atypical draining into the left atrial appendage .
Following the imaging modalities, cardiac catheterization was performed to assess the effect of the PLVCS on the patient’s hemodynamics. Pulmonary circulation showed normal proportions of pressure and resistance. The composition of intracardiac blood gas analyses revealed a Qp/Qs of 1.2, reflecting a hemodynamically nonrelevant right-to-left shunt, with an oxygen saturation of 69% in the PLVCS not altering the saturation of the left atrium (95%). To assess its functional impact, we complemented a spiroergometry. The patient completed the testing with a peak oxygen uptake of 23 mL/min/kg, rated as an unrestricted exercise capacity.
Furthermore, the cerebral condition was—on account of her multiple sclerosis—frequently appraised by magnetic resonance imaging. T2-weighted sequences revealed multiple lesions of varying sizes in various cerebral compartments, mainly in white matter (frontal, mesencephalic, occipital) and cerebellar.
The main diagnostic concerns in the present case of an atypical draining PLVCS into the left atrial appendage were to distinguish the hypoxemia and neurologic disorders from the known bronchial asthma and multiple sclerosis.
The initial complaints about dyspnoea on exertion and coughing were accompanied by mild hypoxemia. After imaging revealed a PLVCS draining atypically into the left atrial appendage, further testing was implemented. The resulting right-to-left-shunt that led to an opacification of the left atrium during echocardiography could have been the etiology. Invasive testing revealed an oxymetrically nonrelevant shunt, which later allowed unrestricted exercise testing. In the meantime, the patient received bronchial asthma treatment according to guidelines. She especially stated a relief of her symptoms using inhalative tiotropium bromide in addition to betamimetics and physical conditioning. The frequency of her coughing attacks declined using steam inhalation with brine. Thereupon her asthma control testing increased from 8 to 19 points (the latter being within physiological limits), indicative of a correlation between symptoms and asthma rather than the incidental finding of PLVCS.
Regarding her cerebral lesion, a differentiation between injuries from her known multiple sclerosis and paradoxical embolic insults from her right-to-left-shunt was essential. The patient had developed symptoms suspicious of multiple sclerosis for 9 years at the time of presentation: chronic fatigue, mild hypoesthesia, gait disturbances, and voiding dysfunction, but no focal deficiency. These symptoms resided from two episodes of her relapsing–remitting disease progress analogous to temporal dissemination. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a demyelination mainly of white matter and cerebellar structures, as represented in the reviewed McDonald criteria. Responsive to immunomodulating treatment with dimethyl fumarate and glatiramer acetate, clinical and imaging follow-ups over the past 5 years have not shown disease progression, with a constant disability score (EDSS) of 3.5. Though T2-hyperintense, the lesions showed no relevant signs of infarction (cortical location, diffusion deficiency, contrast enhancement). Typical symptoms, time course, imaging, and response to specific treatment assigned her neurologic disorders to multiple sclerosis rather than embolic strokes resulting from right-to-left-shunting caused by PLVCS.
Proposed treatment options of a persistent left vena cava superior with drainage into the left atrium include percutaneous closure with an Amplatzer device and surgical intervention, with the latter usually being subject to complex operations of coexisting cardiovascular defects . These interventions are reserved for symptomatic patients.
The presented case of an atypical drainage into the left atrial appendage resulted in a minor right-to-left-shunt. Its subordination correlated well with adequate oxygen utilization, quantified by spiroergometry. The left atrium showed no evidence of volume overload. Substantiated with a small shunt volume and no evidence of embolization, no specific treatment was required for the venous anomaly. This restraining approach is subject to constant reevaluation in case of an aggravation.
The respiratory symptoms were allocated to a known and lately aggravated bronchial asthma that was successfully treated with inhalatives according to current guidelines.
Since no specific treatment was required, further therapy of the coexisting medical conditions will reside with the respective practitioners. Nonetheless the patient will remain in cardiologic control for periodic surveillance at regular intervals.