A 68-year-old man was referred to our institution with a diagnosis of rectosigmoid colon cancer. Colonoscopy revealed a type 2 tumor at the rectosigmoid colon . Right hemiparesis was present as a result of two cerebral infarctions that had occurred during the 2 months prior to his first admission. After consultation with a neurologist, we considered that it was necessary to wait several months before performing a major operation due to the risk of inducing another cerebral infarction. However, advanced cancer would be expected to grow during the waiting period. We therefore considered that it was necessary to administer systemic chemotherapy to suppress tumor growth. We initially administered five courses of preoperative chemotherapy (mFOLFOX6). No cerebral events or severe adverse events occurred during the chemotherapy. Stable disease, according to the RESIST criteria, was achieved with the preoperative chemotherapy. A laparoscopic Hartmann’s operation with D3 lymph node dissection was performed at 4 weeks after the last course of chemotherapy. The patient’s postoperative course was good without any complications. The final diagnosis of the rectal cancer was Dukes B with well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma and rectal tumor invasion to the subserosa (T3) without lymphatic or venous invasion . The resected specimen was free from cancer cells. The patient had complained of a perianal abscess for 5 years before his first admission. However, we gave priority to treating the rectal cancer. Although his anal symptoms did not worsen during chemotherapy, at 1 month after the Hartmann’s operation for rectal cancer, his perianal abscess worsened and induration with two secondary open lesions was detected on physical examination . The pathological examination of the biopsied perianal tissue revealed adenocarcinoma. Because the perianal tumor was localized without invasion of the neighboring tissue on magnetic resonance imaging findings , and considering his physical states, we performed local excision under spinal anesthesia for curative resection. The final pathological diagnosis of the resected specimen was metastatic adenocarcinoma to an anal fistula originating from rectal cancer, and the resected margin was free from cancer cells . Immunohistochemistry revealed that both the rectal tumor and anal tumor were cytokeratin 7 (CK7) − and cytokeratin 20 (CK20) + . Based on the pathology of the primary tumor and the absence of lymphatic or venous invasion, metastasis was considered to have occurred due to the implantation of exfoliated cancer cells. Seven courses of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with the same regimen have been administered. No recurrence of the tumor has been seen for 31 months after the operation. If a locally recurrent tumor had been found near the rectum and anus without distant metastasis during follow-up, laparoscopic resection of the tumor with the residual rectum and anus would have been attempted after considering the patient’s performance status.