We report on a male patient in his fifties of North European ancestry with stage IV colorectal cancer and no known familial history of cancer. The patient had not participated in colon cancer screening tests. Clinical symptoms were unexplained weight loss for a period of six months before diagnosis. Initial diagnosis then presented a primarily metastasized adenocarcinoma of the cecum and bilobular hepatic metastases. Due to polytope bilobular liver metastasis surgical resection was not indicated, and he was admitted to a palliative chemotherapy (CTX). Figure shows the course of events.
The patient gave informed written consent for serial blood sample collection for biomarker analysis and the study was approved by Kiel University’s medical faculty ethics board (#A110/99). For analysis of ctDNA, we obtained a pre-treatment blood sample in week 2 and a mid-treatment blood sample in week 10, after three cycles of chemotherapy. The patient opted out of further blood sampling when he progressed. The blood samples were collected in Streck cfDNA BCT tubes from which plasma was centrifuged according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and stored at − 20 °C until DNA isolation. The plasma was thawed at room temperature. DNA was isolated from the plasma using the PerkinElmer NEXTprep-Mag cfDNA kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Ultra-deep sequencing of the ctDNA was performed on Illumina NextSeq 500 with 2x150bp reads using the PANCeq pan-cancer panel .
For analysis of tumour tissue mutations, we obtained DNA from a pre-treatment colonoscopy biopsy from the primary tumour in the cecum in week 0 and four tissue samples from an emergency hemicolectomy in week 19 (cecum, lymph node, pericolonic and peritoneal metastases). The tissue samples were obtained from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples after HE staining and histological identification and marking of cancer cell regions by the pathological laboratory. Tumour DNA was isolated from the tissue using the RecoverAll™ Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit for FFPE (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Exome sequencing of the tissue DNA samples, and a patient-matched blood buffy coat DNA sample was performed on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 with 2x150bp reads using the IDT xGen Exome Research Panel (Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc.) according to the manufacturers’ protocols. Sequence data analysis was performed with GenSearchNGS (Phenosystems S.A.), Alamut Visual (Interactive Biosoftware), IGV and pibase [–].
Initial mutational profiling of a colonoscopy sample from week 0 within the routine diagnostics of the pathological analysis revealed the following: KRAS mutation p.G12D; no mutation in exon 15 of BRAF; MSI stable. Our blood sample from week 2 revealed the KRAS mutation and four more major tumour mutations in the following genes (see Table ): APC (in 49% of sequences), TP53 (39%), KRAS (32%), THSD7B (20%), and a copy number amplification of a chromosomal segment on chromosome 4 containing FBXW7. The copy number amplification was deduced from a genomic stretch of germline polymorphisms with near-identical allele frequencies of around 0.25 (see Additional file : Table S1) instead of the expected allele frequency of 0.50. Retrospective exome sequencing of the initial cecum tumour tissue biopsy confirmed these mutations and the FBXW7 amplification and detected further major clonal mutations (Additional file : Table S2) that were not covered by the ctDNA sequencing panel.
Based on the mutation in the KRAS gene, chemotherapy with FOLFIRI + Bevacizumab (standard dosages) commenced shortly after initial diagnosis. After three cycles of chemotherapy, the blood sample from week 10 revealed major changes in the tumour allele frequencies: TP53 (6%), APC (5.5%), KRAS (4%), and THSD7B (3%). The amplification of the chromosome segment with FBXW7 was not clearly detectable any longer in the cfDNA (polymorphism allele frequencies 43–52%). After six cycles of chemotherapy, a re-staging by CT-scan was performed in week 15 and suggested a stable disease of the primary tumour and showed a regression of the liver metastasis . In parallel, the routinely tested cancer markers CEA and CA19–9 dropped, from 18.5 μg/l to 8.7 μg/l, and from 906kU/l to 394kU/l, respectively.
However, four weeks after the CT scan the patient was admitted to the emergency room with an ileus caused by a substantial increase in size of the primary tumour, a circumferentially growing tumour of 4 × 3.5 cm size at the ileocecal valve. In emergency surgery a right hemicolectomy was performed. Retrospective exome sequencing of the tissue samples obtained from the hemicolectomy (cecum, lymph node, pericolonic and peritoneal metastases) confirmed that the FBXW7 amplification was no longer clearly detectable in the cecum, lymph node, or peritoneal metastasis, but possibly in the pericolonic metastasis sample. The major clonal mutations detected in the pre-treatment biopsy remained conserved in all post-treatment samples, with no new major clonal mutations detected .
After surgery, a second line chemotherapy with FOLFOX + Bevacizumab was started. Unfortunately, short-term imaging of the tumour burden exposed progressive disease, so that shortly afterwards a 3rd line chemotherapy by Trifluridin + Tipiracil was started. Therapy monitoring by ultrasound imaging of the hepatic metastasis presented substantial progression of the tumour load and hence inefficiency of the systemic therapy. The patient was transferred to best supportive care and deceased 8 months after initial diagnosis.