The patient, a 47-year-old male piano tuner, complained of weakness in his left hand, with no apparent traumatic causes of flexion or extension of the distal phalanges of his left thumb for two months.
Over the past 2 mo, his condition has progressively deteriorated with weakness in his left hand, as well as ancient flexion weakness in the distal left thumb and significant restriction of movement.
The patient has no family history of alcohol or tobacco addiction and was in good overall mental condition.
No significant medical history.
Left thumb long flexor tendon strength grade 4, left index finger deep flexor tendon strength grade 0, left thumb short flexor strength grade 5, left index finger short flexor strength grade 5, no significant abnormalities of superficial skin sensation in the left hand and left forearm. The palmar aspect of the left wrist is flatter than that of the right wrist (anterior rotator muscle), and there are no significant abnormalities in finger movement or blood flow in the remaining fingers.
None.
Digital radiography examination: The left ulnar radius is regular in shape with continuous bone cortex and clear bone trabeculae, with no obvious signs of bone destruction. The distal ulnar flexor and flexor carpal joint gaps were moderate and there were no obvious abnormalities in the surrounding soft tissues .
Colour ultrasonic Doppler examination: Widening of the median nerve cross-section over the left elbow, left side wide (0.48 cm × 0.29 cm), hypoechoic, star grid-like changes, the left side of the median nerve at the elbow is about 0.54 cm × 0.29 cm wide (right side is about 0.52 cm × 0.27 cm wide) locally hypoechoic, local nerve bundle thickness varies, one obvious narrowing is visible, local nerve bundle width is about 0.08 cm, proximal segment is 0.17 cm, the distal segment is 0.14 cm. The body surface was marked and the median nerve at the wrist was approximately 0.62 cm × 0.23 cm wide on the left (0.76 cm × 0.38 cm wide on the right).