An 18-year-old patient came to our clinical center for correction of local chest deformity. This patient’s chest deformity is congenital. The patient did not receive any treatment. When examining the chest, there is a complete absence of the pectoralis major muscle on the right, local retraction at the level of the 3rd and 4th intercostal spaces, incomplete development of the right nipple, and thinning of the subcutaneous fat layer of the skin.

The patient is asthenic, height - 184 cm, weight - 59 kg. BMI - 17.4. After hospitalization, the patient underwent a computed tomography scan of the chest, which revealed local depression of the chest at the level of the third and fourth ribs and deformation of the cartilaginous parts of the ribs. After preoperative preparation, the patient underwent thoracoplasty with the installation of a wire-frame structure.

The operation took place under intubation anesthesia. After processing the surgical field, an arcuate incision was made along the anterior wall of the chest from the level of the second rib on the right to the fifth intercostal space on the right. The skin is dissected, subcutaneous fat, periosteum and soft tissues are mobilized to the outer boundaries of the deformity. A defect in the third and fourth ribs on the right is visually noted. After skeletonizing the II to V rib on both sides to the outer boundaries of the deformation, the ends of the III and IV ribs were skinned. An autograft was taken from the cartilaginous part of the 5th rib. Then a frame structure is formed using Kirschner wires.

Additional costotomies of the third and fourth ribs on the right were also performed. The wound is washed and sutured tightly in layers, leaving a drainage tube. The operation time was 80 minute, intraoperative blood loss was 2000 mL. The next day after the operation, the patient was activated and rehabilitation measures were started (breathing exercises, inhalations). The drainage tube was removed on the second day after surgery. The patient was discharged 4 days after surgery. The sutures were removed 14 days after the operation. A follow-up examination of the patient was carried out 6 months after the operation. Clinical and tomographic results are satisfactory. Removal of metal structures is planned no earlier than 2 years after the operation. The purpose of our operational manual is to restore the frame structure of the cage. The second stage of surgical treatment is the replacement of the pectoralis major muscle defect with a silicone prosthesis. However, this operation is performed by aesthetic surgeons.