A 5-year-old Asian boy presented with decreased visual acuity in his right eye . He was born with CL/P at 40 weeks of gestation. However, he had no family history of CL/P. His mother received a measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine during the first trimester of pregnancy. No relevant history of smoking, alcohol consumption, folate deficiency, exposure to ionizing radiation, or any severe infection during pregnancy was found. Prenatal fetal ultrasonography showed unilateral CL/P on the right side without brain lesions. Postnatal renal ultrasonography of the child revealed mild hydronephrosis in the right kidney without dysfunction. Follow-up examination at 4 years of age confirmed that both the kidneys were normal. He underwent several cardiological and endocrinological investigations for the evaluation of congenital rubella syndrome, which revealed no abnormal findings. Neurological examination revealed no midline defect of the vertebral bodies. At 9 months of age, he underwent successful surgical repair of his unilateral CL on the right side . He experienced two episodes of febrile seizures at the age of 2 years with no sequelae. Electroencephalography after the seizures revealed no remarkable findings. Although genetic analysis was recommended, his parents refused to undergo chromosomal evaluation. Magnetic resonance imaging showed no other midline defects or neurological anomalies. He did not have any intellectual or psychomotor developmental delays.
At initial presentation, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/60 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. Slit lamp examination revealed iris coloboma in the inferonasal quadrant of the right eye . Fundus examination showed optic nerve and chorioretinal colobomas in the inferonasal quadrant of the right eye . Spectral domain optical coherence tomography showed preserved foveal anatomy without retinoschisis or neurosensory detachment in the right eye . No evidence of microphthalmia, scleromalacia, congenital cataract, or ocular motility disorder was found. The left eye had no remarkable findings. He was prescribed glasses based on his cycloplegic refractive errors (Right eye: − 2.00 Dsph − 2.00 Dcyl × Axis 180°; Left eye: + 1.50 Dsph − 1.00 Dcyl × Axis 180°). We recommended daily occlusion therapy in the left eye for 4 h. After 3 months, BCVA in the right eye improved to 20/30. In addition, the patient was referred to the otolaryngology department for otological and audiological assessments, which revealed no relevant abnormalities.