In this report, we describe the case of 55-year-old lady of Central African origin with primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) who underwent bilateral XEN gel surgery.
The patient was initially referred by her general ophthalmologist to a tertiary glaucoma center with intraocular pressures (IOP) of 38 mm Hg and 22 mm Hg in the right and the left eyes, respectively. She had been diagnosed with POAG several years before and had been managed with two selective laser trabeculoplasties (SLT) and maximal medical therapy including oral acetazolamide (Vifor Pharma, Bern, Switzerland), despite mediocre self-reported compliance. She had a positive family history for open-angle glaucoma in her mother. At the time of presentation, her best-corrected visual acuity was 10/10 in both eyes on a decimal chart (6/6 Snellen) in slightly myopic eyes (−0.75 D and −1.25 D spherical equivalent in the right and the left eyes, respectively). Slit lamp examination revealed a deep and quiet AC and a clear crystalline lens. Cup/disk ratio was 0.8 in the right eye with an inferior notch and 0.7 in the left eye with a superior notch. Gonioscopy showed bilaterally open angles. Pachymetry was 580 μm and 585 μm in the right and the left eyes, respectively. Automated visual field examination (Octopus, Haag Streit, Koeniz, Switzerland) showed bilateral nasal quadrantanopsia. Optical coherence tomography imaging (Spectralis OCT, Heidelberg Engineering AG, Germany) of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) showed generally reduced RNFL thicknesses bilaterally, with complete atrophy of the RNFL inferiorly in the left eye. Brain MRI imaging was unremarkable.
Bilateral mitomycin C-augmented XEN gel stent implantation was organized with a target IOP ≤18 mm Hg. Surgeries were performed following standard protocols described in the literature. No intraoperative complications were noted, and the patient received a standard postoperative treatment of topical combined tobramycin and dexamethasone (Novartis Pharma, Basel, Switzerland) in decreasing regime. The right eye recovered uneventfully, with IOP normalizing between 12 mm Hg and 16 mm Hg at 3 months, with no additional therapy. The left eye developed a 2-mm hyphema on the first day following surgery, associated with dense RBC in the AC and corneal edema. The initial intraocular pressure was 2 mm Hg, which gradually improved with scopolamine (OmniVision Pharma, Puchheim, Germany) to 9 mm Hg at day 3. After 8 days, the hyphema had completely resolved and IOP was stable at 12 mm Hg. After 1 month, the patient presented to her postoperative follow-up with an IOP of 50 mm Hg in the left eye. On examination, the filtration bleb was shallow but diffuse, the iridocorneal angle was open, the XEN gel stent was well-positioned, and no clear obstruction was visible on its intraocular tip.
Intraocular pressure was reduced using topical and intravenous medications, and an emergency revision procedure was organized in theater. The absence of filtration through the stent was confirmed intraoperatively and the blocked tube was removed. It was sent for macroscopic analysis to confirm the cause of the obstruction and was replaced by a new XEN gel implant. The patient made good recovery without any postoperative complications, and at 1-month, her IOP was stable at 17 mm Hg.
The macroscopic examination confirmed obstruction of the XEN gel stent on its AC extremity, with translucent cell fragments . No fibrin, blood clot, or other type of tissue could be identified within the obstructed tube.