The patient was a six-month-old female with a red patch on her back found more than 20 days after birth. Later, a gradually enlarged mass was found over the surrounding skin, which slowly increased in size as the child grew, measuring approximately 11 cm × 6 cm . No urinary dribbling, lower extremity deformity or scoliosis, anorectal malformation or sphincter dysfunction was observed. The infant was uncooperative for neurological examination and no signs of lower limb paresis or paralysis were found. Ultrasonography revealed an infantile hemangioma. Complete blood count showed white blood cell, red blood cell, hemoglobin, and platelet levels of 7.62 × 109/L, 3.98 × 1012/L, 112 g/L, and 436 × 109/L, respectively. On laboratory tests, no significant abnormality was found. A small portion of the tumor was taken for histopathological examination, and lipofibromatosis was suspected. Upon consulting at the pathology department of another hospital, fibrous hamartoma of infancy was suspected. The mass was subsequently excised completely under general anesthesia with preoperative blood preparation . A fusiform incision was made 0.5 cm along the outer edge of the tumor, after which, both sides of the incision were widely free to the outer edge and sutured layer by layer. On pathological examination, spindle cell tumor was confirmed. The tumor consisted of adipose tissue and fusiform fibroblasts, which tended to be lipofibromatosis (Observed under the microscope OLYMPUS CX31, Olympus Corporation, Japan; photographed by the software Oplenic Pro, Hangzhou Chroma Optronics CO., LTD, China). Immunohistochemistry results included the following: CD99 (focal +), smooth muscle actin (SMA) (-), ki67 (+5-15%), CD34 (++++) , CD31 (-), ERG (-), SOX10(-), S-100 (-) , BCL2 (-), P1H3 (+8%), P53 (-), Desmin (-) Myogenin (-), MyoD1 (-), and pan-TRK (-) (Observed under the microscope Pannoramic MIDI, 3DHISTECH Ltd, Hungary; photographed by the software Pannoramic Scanner, 3DHISTECH Ltd, Hungary). Genetic testing showed no positive mutations in exons 18, 19, 20, and 21 of the EGFR gene. The author detected the NTRK1 gene by FISH and found no fusion or rearrangement of the NTRK1 gene . (Observed under the microscope Pannoramic MIDI, 3DHISTECH Ltd, Hungary; photographed by the software Pannoramic Scanner, 3DHISTECH Ltd, Hungary).The patient was eventually diagnosed with lipofibromatosis. One year later, the patient was reassessed, and no signs of recurrence were found , with scarring of the incision remnants. The scar will be repaired after the child grows up, and follow-up is continuing.