The 70-year-old female was electively admitted to our institution for an open pancreaticoduodenectomy for the treatment pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The patient had the chief complaint of painless jaundice.
The jaundice had arisen insidiously over a 6-mo period. It was associated with weight loss and poor appetite. Extensive investigations had been performed, including computed tomography of the chest, abdomen and pelvis, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic ultrasound, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, and positive emission topography scan. She had also had a diagnostic laparoscopy.
The patient’s only past medical history included an open appendectomy for appendicitis.
As per unit and hospital protocol, immediately post-operation, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with nasojejunal (NJ) feeding tube. EN commenced 6 h post-operation at 30 mL/h. She required no vasopressor support and on day 1 had the feed rate increased. She was transferred to the surgical ward and the only concern in the immediate post-operative period was high nasogastric (NG) output. This initially improved, and slowly oral intake was introduced. She was prescribed an osmotic laxative at this time.
On day 5, the patient developed nausea and vomiting, with increasing pain in her central abdomen. Clinically, she had a mild tachycardia and central abdominal tenderness. The initial differential diagnosis of the presentation was postoperative anastomotic leak, particularly supported by the sudden deterioration in clinical picture and timing of the deterioration. Other differentials included postoperative collection and small bowel obstruction, potentially caused by internal hernia. To investigate, a computed tomography was organized; the finding was a large volume of fluid in distal thoracic esophagus and stomach. The tip of the NJ feeding tube was located appropriately within the efferent small bowel loop. There were also features of proximal to mid small bowel obstruction with faecalisation . The transition point was not clearly defined . Adhesions were postulated as a possible cause.