A 30-year-old female presented with “39 (6/7) wk of menopause and 6 h of irregular abdominal pain”.
Her abdominal pain occurred at intervals of 15 to 30 min and lasted for 30 s. She was admitted to the obstetric department of our hospital as an emergency case.
The patient denied a history of other diseases.
The pregnant woman was previously healthy and denied a family history of hereditary diseases.
Measurements of fundal height, abdominal circumference, fetal heart rate, and external pelvis were normal. The position of the fetus was Left Occiput Anterior (LOA). No dystocia of the head was noted. An internal examination revealed no abnormalities.
The pregnant woman was admitted to the operating room as an emergency due to intrauterine distress before her laboratory results were available. Intraoperatively, laboratory tests showed that the white blood cell count was 11.3 × 109/L ↑, the prothrombin time (PT) was 33.7 s ↑, the international prothrombin standard was 2.79 ↑, partial thromboplastin time was 60.4 s ↑, partial thromboplastin ratio was 2.06 ↑, PT was 45.2 s ↑, prothrombin activity was 22% ↓ and antithrombin was 17% ↓, fibrinogen assay was 0.6 g/L ↓, fibrin (pro) degradation product was 116.4 μg/mL ↑, uric acid was 615 μmol/L ↑, creatinine was 172 μmol/L ↑, glutathione aminotransferase was 705 U/L ↑, glutathione aminotransferase was 323 U/L ↑, total bilirubin was 89.51 μmol/L ↑, direct bilirubin was 70.25 μmol/L ↑ and indirect bilirubin was 19.26 μmol/L ↑.
Ultrasound examination showed ascites and bright liver. Obstetric three-dimensional color ultrasound showed the following: The fetal position was cephalic, the fetal heart rate was 171 bpm, fetal movements were palpable, the biparietal diameter was 9.1 cm, the head circumference was 32.0 cm, the abdominal circumference was 33.1 cm, femoral length was 6.8 cm, the placenta was in the fundus with a maturity of II, the amniotic index was 17.41 cm, umbilical artery S/D was 2.4, placental entrance and the inferior border was indistinct. The results of the non-stress test after admission showed a non-responsive type, a flat baseline, no fetal movements, and no fetal heart fluctuations.
We analyzed genomic DNA obtained from the blood sample to check for mutations in the fibrinogen gene. Both the mother and the newborn had abnormal coagulation values, indicating that the disease was inherited in the family. Genotype analysis confirmed the diagnosis of hypofibrinogenemia by identifying a homozygous mutation in fibrinogen alpha chain gene (FGA) (p.R350H). In addition, genetic testing was performed on the patient’s parents and daughter, and the results confirmed that both the father and daughter were disease-causing gene carriers . We have studied the clinical symptoms, fibrinogen results, genetic analysis, treatment, and clinical outcomes of pregnant women with CD over the past 30 years . In addition, we reviewed the CD-related gene mutation sites mentioned above .