A healthy 41-year-old woman was referred to our center after the 22-week gestational ultrasound revealed short ribs and a possible craniosynostosis in the fetus on the second trimester ultrasound. After detailed genetic counselling, an amniocentesis was performed at 24 weeks to investigate the etiology. Array CGH was normal without any unbalanced chromosomal rearrangement, and so were FGFR2 and FGFR3 recurrent variant screening (to rule out FGFR related craniosynostosis syndromes), and the 7-dehydrocholesterol level (to rule out Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome). At 26 weeks, computed tomography confirmed short ribs with irregular ends but no craniosynostosis and overall renal cortex echogenicity was noted on ultrasound . The association of bone and renal abnormalities led to an initial diagnosis of a skeletal ciliopathy spectrum disorder such as Jeune syndrome (asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy). Pregnancy was then complicated by hydramnios requiring amniotic fluid drainage at 33 weeks, which triggered fetal bradycardia and the need for a caesarean delivery. At birth, the new-born male measured in the low normal range for gestational age with a weight of 1800 g (32nd centile), length of 43 cm (39th centile), and an occipitofrontal circumference of 30 cm (26th centile) without craniosynostosis. Soon after birth, he developed hypotonia and respiratory distress requiring oxygen and non-invasive ventilation. Except for a bell-shaped chest, the rest of his clinical examination was unremarkable. A chest X-ray showed a narrowed thoracic cage with short ribs and multiple rib fractures. Subsequently, a skeletal survey revealed diffuse osteopenia with coarse trabecular markings, subperiosteal bone resorption, cortical dualization and metaphyseal corner fractures . The initial laboratory evaluation revealed severe hypercalcemia (ionized calcemia: 1.66 mmol/l; reference range: 1.17–1.27), a slightly low phosphate level (1 mmol/l; reference range: 1–1.95), normal alkaline phosphatase levels (387 IU/l; reference range: 122–469), abnormal urinary calcium (calcium-to-creatinine ratio: 0.78 mmol/l; reference range: 0.2–2.0), and an increased PTH level (325 pg/ml; reference range: 15–65). The diagnosis of NSHPT was then suspected and confirmed by a phosphocalcic NGS panel which revealed the pathogenic heterozygous (PM1, PM2, PM5, PP2, PP3, PP5) variant c.554G>A p.(Arg185Gln) in the CASR gene (NM_000388.3).
Calcium metabolism tests and genetic screening were then requested from both asymptomatic parents. These analyses revealed hypercalcemia (total serum calcium: 3.32 mmol/l, reference range: 2.2–2.6 mmol/l), low phosphate levels (0.59 mmol/l, reference range: 0.84–1.4 mmol/l), low calcium-to-creatinine ratio (0.16 mmol/mmol, reference range: 0.2–0.6 mmol/mmol) and hyperparathyroidism (PTH: 42 pg/ml, reference range: 15–65) in the father who harbored the same heterozygous CASR variant. Mineral homeostasis (25-hydroxyvitamin D level: 24 ng/ml) and CASR sequencing were normal in the mother. The family history revealed that the paternal grandmother also had FHH discovered as a result of recurrent urinary lithiasis . Similarly, FHH affected various members of the paternal branch.
Initial therapy included hyperhydration, phosphate supplementation and a low-calcium milk formula. Hypercalcemia did not improve. Therefore, treatment with pamidronate (0.5 mg/kg intravenous on days 9 and 14) was started. After a moderate transient response to pamidronate, serum calcium levels subsequently increased and were associated with very high PTH levels (1671 pg/ml). Clinically, the patient had persistent restrictive lung disease caused by significant rib fractures requiring oxygen and analgesics. Therefore, after confirmation of the genetic diagnosis of NSHPT treatment with calcimimetics (cinacalcet) was initiated on day 22 at 0.5 mg/kg PO daily and progressively increased to 3 mg/kg in 2 doses. The cinacalcet dose titration normalized the PTH in 25 days but serum calcium remained at approximately 3 mmol/l .
Hyperparathyroidism control provided significant improvement in clinical signs. The patient was discharged on day 73, and oxygen therapy could be discontinued at 6 months of age. Psychomotor development and growth were normal. At 6 months of age, X-rays showed complete normalization of bone abnormalities and ultrasound revealed nephrocalcinosis. At 11 months of age, parathyroid gland ultrasound showed no abnormality.