A 42-year-old woman fell from a height of 15 m. During pre-hospital evaluation, her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 14, the right lower extremity was deformed, and the radial artery pulse was weakly palpable. On arrival at our institution, her GCS score was 13, blood pressure was 60/30 mmHg, heart rate was 140 bpm, and respiratory rate was 50 breaths per minute. As part of initial resuscitation, resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) was performed to prevent further hemodynamic deterioration due to lower extremity and pelvic traumas. During catheterization, however, her systolic blood pressure decreased to 30 mmHg, and she deteriorated to near imminent cardiac arrest.
To prevent the aggravation of hypotension and risk of cardiac arrest, we performed RT and cross-clamping of the descending aorta through the left 4th intercostal space in the supine position. At the time of RT, a small hemopneumothorax and multiple rib fractures were observed. Hemopericardium or mediastinal hematoma was not identified. Her systolic blood pressure increased to approximately 90 mmHg after cross-clamping of the aorta, and cardiac arrest was averted; therefore, REBOA was completed, and direct aortic clamping was converted to balloon occlusion of the aorta to perform contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) under controlled balloon occlusion of the aorta.
Contrast-enhanced CT showed bilateral pneumothorax, pulmonary contusion, bilateral multiple rib fractures, pelvic fracture, and right femoral diaphyseal fracture. Extravasation of contrast media from the descending aorta was also observed . Based on the initial radiological findings of the left intrapleural cavity and mediastinum, avulsion of one or more aortic branches due to cross-clamping of the aorta during RT was suspected. Although her hemodynamic status improved after transcatheter arterial embolization of the aortic branches with coils, she developed hypovolemic shock after 6 h despite continuous blood transfusion. Repeat CT showed extravasation adjacent to the descending aorta. Therefore, we decided to perform TEVAR for controlling the hemorrhage occurring at the site of avulsion of the aortic branches. The stent-graft (Conformable GORE TAG 21 × 100 mm, Gore Medical, Newark, DE, USA) was deployed to adequately cover the avulsion of the aortic branches, and extravasation from the aorta eventually disappeared . Complications of TEVAR, including paraplegia and other thrombo-ischemic events, did not occur. She was discharged on the 59th hospital day.