A 65 years old right-handed woman, came to neurosurgery for consultation due to progressive bilateral visual loss in her temporal fields. This had occurred over 10 months, and 2 weeks prior to her admission she reported sudden loss of consciousness, prompting her admission to the hospital. On examination, she was alert and oriented x 3, she had a normal cranial nerve examination except for decrease visual acuity (20/200 in her left eye, 20/80 in her right eye), bitemporal hemianopia and mild atrophy of the optic disk in the left eye. Gait, motor and sensory examination was normal.
Laboratory studies showed a LH at 0.22 IU/L (reference value in Postmenopausal females 15.0–62.0 mIU/mL)and prolactin at 53 ng/mL (reference value in non-pregnant females 2–29 ng/mL)0.7. A contrast enhanced brain MRI was obtained and revealed a sellar lesion which was hypointense in T1 but hyperintense in T2 sequences with enhancement of the periphery. The lesion extended into the sphenoid sinus and parasellar space without encasement of the carotids and into the suprasellar cistern abutting the optic chiasm. The patient underwent endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery for resection of the sellar lesion . Intraoperatively, the lesion appeared reddish in color and it was of soft consistency. Moderately bleeding was encountered during resection and a sample was taken for pathology. At the end of the tumor removal, the scaffold was implanted to close the bone defect in the sphenoid sinus . Due to the fact that the graft could be molded into shape, it was easily set and allowed to cover the entire size of the defect. A standard fat graft was then placed in the sphenoid sinus covering the outer membrane of the chitosan graft. Finally, fibrin sealant was used, and a nasal packing was inserted in both nostrils.
The patient had an unremarkable postoperative period and after a few days the patient was discharged without evidence of CSF leak or complications. After one month the patient showed complete recovery of her visual acuity and visual fields. At follow up, the patient underwent a postoperative brain MRI illustrating gross total resection and good closure of the sellar floor. There were no signs of rejection or inflammation in the area where the chitosan scaffold was implanted.