The patient’s mother was a 31-year-old, gravida 1 para 0 woman with no significant medical history who was followed for prenatal management of mono-di twin pregnancy. Routine ultrasound at 13 weeks gestation was significant for a two-vessel umbilical cord and suspected small left ventricle and VSD in Twin A. Repeat ultrasounds at 15 and 18 weeks gestation identified several pertinent findings for Twin A, including sIUGR, missing right umbilical artery, and complex cardiac anomaly. In particular, Twin A’s heart was noted to have a conoventricular-type VSD with the overriding aorta and right ventricle larger than the left ventricle. Fetal biometry identified 28% weight discordance at week 15. However, there were no abnormal umbilical dopplers in either infant. Both fetuses presented with visible bladders, without evidence of fetal hydrops or other indicators for twin–twin transfusion syndrome. Additionally, weight discordance improved somewhat over the course of gestation. First-trimester screening showed decreased risk (1:>10,000) of trisomies 13, 18, and 21.
With multiple anomalies in one of the twins, the family was referred for prenatal genetic counseling. The mother’s family history was significant for unilateral renal agenesis (in the mother’s mother and maternal aunt), learning disability (mother’s maternal half-brother), and bipolar disorder (mother’s maternal cousin). The father’s family history was also notable for unilateral renal agenesis (in the father’s paternal grandmother) and bipolar disorder (father’s maternal aunt). After discussion, the family opted to pursue amniocentesis for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray testing, alpha-fetoprotein level, and carrier screening for 421 autosomal recessive and X-linked disorders (Natera Horizon). SNP microarray found an interstitial duplication of unknown significance in the long arm of chromosome 15 (arr[hg19] 15q26.3(99282850_99627413)x3, ~345 kb) in both twins . This duplication partially overlaps the IGF1R gene (OMIM*147370), from exons 3 to 21. Further testing of both parents found that the duplication was maternally inherited. Notably, the mother was negative for any history of cardiac or renal disease but had not had ultrasounds.
Delivery was performed by the primary cesarian section at 35 weeks due to premature rupture of membranes. Delivery was otherwise uncomplicated; APGAR scores were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively, for both twins. At birth, Twin A weighed 2.04 kg, whereas Twin B weighed 2.69 kg. Twin A was transferred to the pediatric cardiac intensive care unit for initiation of prostaglandin treatment, whereas Twin B was transferred to the newborn nursery. A postnatal echocardiogram confirmed cardiac abnormalities for Twin A, including transverse aortic arch and isthmus hypoplasia, bicommissural stenotic aortic valve, and large posterior malalignment VSD but normal ventricular size and function. Twin B presented with no cardiac anomalies. Abdominal ultrasounds with two functional kidneys were normal in both. On examination, both infants presented with brachyclinodactyly of the fifth finger and microretrognathia, though this was more pronounced in Twin A and accompanied by a sloping forehead. Twin A additionally presented with the widened distance between the first and second toes bilaterally. Other features demonstrated typical variation.