A 27-year-old woman visited our gynecology department because of abdominal pain and genital bleeding. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a cystic mass in the left retrorectal area, and she was referred to our department for detailed examinations and treatment. Her medical history was unremarkable. Her laboratory results, including serum tumor biomarkers, such as α-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinogenic embryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), were within normal limits. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 3-cm-sized multilocular cystic mass in the anterior sacrum on the left dorsal side of the rectum. The mass showed a gradual contrast effect on the margin and was suspected to have a solid component. No obvious calcification was observed . MRI showed no obvious fat in the area . Fluorodeoxyglucose-position emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed no abnormal uptake. Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no abnormalities in the rectal mucosa. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a 3-cm-sized extraintestinal cyst near the rectum. No obvious calcification was found inside .
With the above tests, it was difficult to confirm the preoperative diagnosis of the presacral cystic mass. Teratoma, tailgut cyst, dermoid cyst, epidermoid cyst, etc., were considered in the differential diagnosis. Because there have been reports of malignant cases, we decided to perform surgical mass removal as a diagnostic treatment.
The operation was conducted with the patient in the jack-knife position. A skin incision measuring approximately 3 cm was made from the coccyx to the anus. We made an incision in the mural fascia to reach the tumor and enable detachment without damaging the tumor. Since it was difficult to confirm the deep part of the tumor through direct visualization, we attached a GelPOINT® Path (Applied Medical, USA) placed two 10-mm trocars and a AirSEAL® (CONMED, USA) trocar in a triangular fashion to the incision and insufflated it at 12 mmHg with the AirSEAL® System to remove the tumor endoscopically while confirming the boundary between the tumor and the anterior coccyx/posterior rectal wall. The operative time was 171 min, with minimal blood loss .
Histopathological examination revealed a benign mature teratoma . She did not have any complications and was discharged from our hospital 5 days after the surgery. Seven months later, she had no tumor recurrence or residual symptoms.