The patient is a 66-year-old white male with a past medical history of a traumatic brain injury with left-sided hemiplegia since childhood, hypertension, leukemia in remission since 2005, and bilateral renal artery stenosis.
The first time the patient presented to the hospital on day one complaining of generalized weakness and malaise of one week duration. Physical exam was significant for right second toe ulcer with mild erythema and purulence. He had tachycardia on presentation. Laboratory values were significant for white blood cells (WBCs) count of 24.0 and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 13.4. The patient was admitted for infected right second toe with concerns of sepsis. He was treated empirically with intravenous vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam. Blood cultures from day two grew methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) and the patient was switched to intravenous nafcillin 2 g every four hours (12g/day) on day three. Repeat blood cultures on day three grew methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) and cultures on day seven had no growth. Nafcillin was continued for two weeks following the first negative blood culture. He was discharged to a nursing facility on day 12. He completed 18 days of IV nafcillin on day 21 of his illness.
The patient was re-admitted from the nursing facility on day 20 for a large bloody bowel movement and completed IV nafcillin in the first two days of his second admission. He was worked up appropriately for lower GI bleeding with colonoscopy findings of diverticulosis and recovered with minimal intervention. A liver panel on day 21 was unremarkable: total bilirubin 0.7 mg/dl, alkaline phosphatase (ALK) 60 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 21 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 25 U/L.
He was re-admitted for the third time on day 30 of his illness from the nursing home (27 days after IV nafcillin was started and nine days after completion of IV nafcillin) for painless jaundice. Upon re-admission, his labs were remarkable for a cholestasis pattern of liver injury with total bilirubin 6.3 mg/dl (5.6 direct, 0.7 indirect), ALK 506 IU/L, AST 206 U/L, ALT 415 U/L .
At that time his home medications with potential hepatotoxicity including atorvastatin and doxazosin were held. An ultrasound of the liver and biliary tract showed hepatomegaly with normal liver echogenicity, no mass or fluid collection, patent portal and hepatic veins. It also showed cholelithiasis without sonographic signs of cholecystitis, no intrahepatic or extrahepatic biliary ductal dilation. Further workup for infectious causes of liver injury including viral hepatitis panel for hepatitis A, B, C was negative (hepatitis A IgM antibody, hepatitis C antibody, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B surface and core antibodies all were non-reactive). A serology panel for autoimmune disorders associated with possible liver injury revealed the patient to be negative for anti-nuclear, anti-mitochondrial, anti-smooth muscle, and anti-centromere antibodies. The patient was coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) negative. He does not drink alcohol, smoke cigarettes, or use any recreational drugs. The remainder of the workup was done to exclude alternative liver pathologies. Serum copper and ceruloplasmin, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) serology, alpha-1-antitripsin all were negative or unremarkable. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) demonstrated cholelithiasis without choledocholithiasis or bile duct dilation. A percutaneous liver biopsy was obtained on day 30 which demonstrated acute necro-inflammatory liver disease suspicious for drug-induced liver injury .
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) done on day 33 showed a small amount of biliary sludge that was evacuated after a stent placed in the common bile duct - there was no obstruction or inflammatory changes. A review of prior labs from his previous admission was significant for elevated eosinophil percent on day 25 with 11.7% (normal 1-8%), absolute eosinophil count of 1100 (upper limit of normal is 700) .
After admission, his liver enzymes continued to worsen, with total bilirubin peaked on day 34 with 8.2 mg/dl (7.0 direct, 1.2 indirect), ALK peaked on day 40 with 865 IU/L, AST and ALT both peaked on day 30 with 206 U/L, 415 U/L, respectively . After ERCP, his liver function tests continued to worsen; the first day total bilirubin started to drop (day 37) was four days after ERCP was done. Throughout his hospital stay, the patient was monitored for signs of encephalopathy including asterixis and mental status changes, which he showed none. In addition to that, international normalized ratio (INR)/prothrombin time test (PT) was monitored daily for coagulopathy but his INR/PT remained within normal limits during his hospitalization. His liver panel steadily declined while he remained in the hospital with supportive treatment only. At time of discharge on day 42, liver lab values were total bilirubin 3.0 mg/dl, ALK 710 IU/L, AST 56 U/L, ALT 164 U/L . See Table for normal laboratory reference ranges.