A 60-year-old Chinese male has developed slow response, abnormal behavior and sleep disorder for 1 month. At first, after admitted to the hospital in his hometown and given only sodium supplement and support treatment, his symptoms disappeared but quickly reoccurred. After that, his symptoms became more and more serious and he gradually developed seizures and irritability. He demonstrated confusion, memory loss, insomnia and abnormal behavior when transferred to our hospital in April 2020.
He had no particular previous medical history except for typhia 40 years ago and recovered with no sequel. Neurological exam revealed poor mental state, slow response and damaged memory, attention, calculation and orientation. Cranial nerves, cerebellar function, motor system, sensory system, deep tendon reflexes and pathological reflexes remained normal.
Serum sodium was 119 mmol/L (reference range: 135 ~ 153 mmol/mL) and chlorine was 81 mmol/L (reference range: 90 ~ 110 mmol/L) at first admission. Serum procalcitonin was 0.048 ng/mL (reference range: < 0.046 ng/mL), C reaction protein was 8.05 mg/L (reference range: < 5 mg/L). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) electrophoresis IgG index was 0.71 (reference range: 0.3 ~ 0.7). Intracranial pressure was 150mmH2O. CSF routine biochemistry for protein content and glucose were normal and infectious test for virus, including herpes simplex virus, tuberculosis, fungal and Cryptococcus were negative. CSF cytology and cytometry were negative for malignant cells. Serum AE antibody spectrum demonstrated positive anti-LGI1 IgG and anti-GABABR1 IgG using cell-based assays, while other AE-related auto-antibody, such as anti-NMDAR, anti-AMPAR1, anti-AMPAR2, anti-CASPR2 were negative . Mini mental state examination score was 15. Electroencephalogram (EEG) indicated moderate diffusion abnormality . Brain enhanced MRI scan was normal. Tests for screening malignancy, including tumor markers and an ultrasound of the liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas, kidney, testicle were normal. Chest enhanced CT scan revealed mild inflammation in left lower lobe.
For treatment of AE with coexistent anti-LGI1 and anti-GABABR1, he received 1 g and 0.5 g intravenous methylprednisolone separately, 3 days for each dosage, and then remained on an oral steroid taper for half year. After intravenous and oral sodium supplement, blood sodium and chlorine gradually increased to normal . His symptoms improved greatly and EEG recovered to normal.