A 65-year-old male patient was referred to our hospital due to interventricular septal perforation following myocardial infarction. The patient was presented to the previous hospital with chest pain. Despite undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and attempted thrombus aspiration, reperfusion could not be achieved (See Fig. ). The patient’s condition became unstable, and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed interventricular septal rupture and left-to-right ventricle shunt. Consequently, the patient was transferred to our hospital. Upon arrival, the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed QS wave on V1-V3 and persistent ST elevation, along with acute kidney injury (AKI) characterized by serum creatinine levels 4–5 times higher than baseline. TTE showed an ejection fraction (EF) of 50%, a mosaic flow near the apical septum, leading to the diagnosis of ventricular septal perforation (VSP), with an akinesia of the anterior left ventricular wall. The patient opted for emergency surgery. The initial procedure involved general anesthesia and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) with drainage from the right atrium and a venting tube in the left ventricle (LV). Cardiac arrest was induced through mild hypothermia using antegrade and retrograde cold blood cardioplegia.
Briefly, a median sternotomy was performed, the pericardium was opened, and the heart was exposed and examined. The right chamber appeared enlarged, and the apex displayed pallor with a wide infarct area. An incision was made in the infarcted region of the LV myocardium, parallel to the interventricular septum, extending approximately 7 cm toward the apex, the VSP then been located . The double patch technique, as previously described by Takahashi et al. , was employed using bovine pericardial patches. The bovine patch was cut with a diameter 2 cm larger than the VSP for the right ventricle (RV) patch (R-patch), while the left ventricle (LV) patch (L-patch) was sized adequately to exclude the VSP, the infarcted area of the LV, and the LV incision. After confirming hemostasis, the heart was closed, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) (See Fig. ).
The patient remained in the ICU for 9 days. Dialysis was required initially due to worsening kidney injury from the preoperative AKI, but the patient’s condition stabilized, and continuous dialysis was no longer necessary. TTE performed 2 weeks after surgery indicated a shunt, but no signs of heart failure were observed. Thus, the patient received medication and was discharged 23 days after the surgery.
As an outpatient, the patient returned to the hospital after 22 days with chest discomfort. Mild pleural effusion was confirmed, and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed a left-to-right shunt through the previous patch. Following approximately 6 days of medication administration in the hospital, the patient’s condition stabilized, and discharge was granted. However, the patient returned again after 2 weeks of being discharged, presenting with general malaise and decreased kidney function. TTE showed blood flow from the left to right ventricle, with EF of 55% and Qp/Qs = 1.7. Cardiac computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a midventricular perforation measuring approximately 12 mm in diameter, leading to the decision to proceed with VSP repair surgery (See Fig. ).
The second surgery was performed on the 15th day after initiating medication in the hospital. A median incision was made, carefully exposing the heart, and establishing a CPB machine. The second surgery employed a double patch technique. Briefly, trans epicardial echocardiogram was performed to locate the VSP. The RV was accessed near the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) through a 4 cm incision toward the apex, positioned 1 cm laterally to the left anterior descending artery (LAD). As the distal LAD had already been damaged from the previous myocardial infarction, the RV was cautiously dissected to avoid injury to the first diagonal branch of LAD. The ruptured wall was confirmed, and RVOT was observed, with trabeculae being cut to enhance visibility . A bovine pericardium patch, measuring 3 cm in diameter and circular in shape, was prepared. The thread was passed from the LV lumen to the LV free wall and from the interventricular septal wall to the RV lumen using 3 − 0 MH sutures. The patch was then pulled into the LV chamber by pulling the thread, and a single ligation was used for suturing, as shown in Fig. Another patch was prepared in a similar manner, with the thread applied from the opposite side and sutured with continuous sutures, securing it to the front side of the interventricular septum. A thread was passed from the LV free wall, near the previous suture, to the RV free wall, closing the RV with teflon felt and tying it with a mattress suture. An additional continuous suture was applied externally between the LV teflon felt and RV teflon felt to ensure closure. A pacing lead was placed in the right atrium and right ventricle, and an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted through the right common femoral artery. After confirming hemostasis, the chest was closed.
The patient remained in the ICU for 5 days, with a maximum creatinine level of 1.55, and experienced no postoperative complications. The IABP was removed 3 days after surgery, and the pacing lead was removed 4 days later. The patient was discharged 4 days after the removal of the pacing lead, displaying stability and no signs of heart failure.