It is a case report of a 13-year-old girl appeared to the outpatient department with the history of swelling over her right hand for 5 months. It was gradually progressive in nature and situated over the dorsum and medial aspect of the hand. There was no history of trauma or such type of lesion elsewhere in the body or the in the family. There were no any associated features, i.e. pain, fever, or any sign or symptoms influencing her general health. On examination, there was a swelling, which was firm in consistency and occupying the dorsal and inner side of the fifth metacarpal. Local temperature was not raised and the skin was mobile and there was no any feature suggestive of inflammatory pathology. On deep palpation, it was tender and the range of movement was restricted.
The routine hematological examination was within normal limit. The radiology revealed that there was an osteolytic fusiform expansible lesion involving to the whole distal 2/3rd of the fifth metacarpal and the articular surface too. The cortical is was paper thin, breached, inflated, and without the periosteal reaction and the tumor radiograph had “soap bubble” appearance. Hence, the provisional (clinicoradiological) diagnosis of aneurysmal bone cyst and GCT was conceded. The chest X-ray was also sought and it was within the normal limit. The core-cut biopsy sent and it conferred the diagnosis of GCT .
Our technique is free osteoarticular metatarsal transfer, described by the Maini etal. The dorsal approach was used for the enbloc resection. Incision also included the previous biopsy track. The fifth metatarsal was removed except the base of it along with the partial resection of surrounding muscles . While removing the mass in enbloc, the capsule and collateral ligament of the fifth metacarpophalangeal joint left. The fourth metatarsal (same side) was harvested from the foot along with its capsule and collateral ligament of the metatarsal-phalangeal joint. The required length of the metatarsal was measured preoperatively, and it was osteotomized out from the base , and the capsuloligamentous of the metatarsal sutured to the counter capsuloligamentous structure at the recipient site to reconstruct the metacarpal-phalangeal joint. The metatarsal was fixed with the leftover base of the metacarpal by the K-wires and the volar slab applied . At the 14thpost-operative day, the sutures removed and the exercise started gradually.
At each follow-up, the clinical and radiological assessment was done. The Union at the junction of the metatarsal and the base of the leftover metacarpal occurred in the 6weeks and no obvious changes noticed at the transferred metatarsal. Initially, the movements had both extension and flexion lag, so the meanwhile electric stimulation given. At the end of the 6months of follow-up, the movements are painless and almost up to normal except the terminally restricted at the flexion. It ranges from 0° to75° flexion at the metacarpophalangeal joint ( and ). The patient was able to grasp any object and has pretty good grip strength.
After the 2years of follow-up, after the surgery, the procedure is fulfilling our expectations and corroborates the reliability of this method. During the initial follow-up, the patient had the mild-to-moderate pain over his foot while walking and unable to dorsiflex his fourth toe. However, now, she is free from pain or any complaint such asdeformity or difficulty in walking. However, there is still slight weakness of fourth toe’s dorsiflexor. Finally, she is happy and has no any complaints.