A 68-year-old man presented to his primary care physician with a complaint of abdominal pain. He had a medical history of reflux esophagitis and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed, which showed a submucosal mass in the second portion of the duodenum with central ulceration. Upon admission, his carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 levels were within normal limits.
Dynamic CT showed a circumscribed tumor measuring 26 mm in diameter in the second portion of the duodenum with ulceration. On the arterial and portal phase contrast-enhanced CT, the mass was greatly enhanced with, persistent enhancement on the equilibrium phase . The mass was in contact with the pancreatic head, and pancreatic invasion was suspected. However, there was no dilatation of the central common bile duct and middle pancreatic duct.
The T1-weighted image showed the tumor as a hypo-intensity , and the T2-weighted image showed a tumor with modestly high intensity . The tumor showed a slightly high intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) , and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map displayed slight visual intensity.
Endoscopy showed a round, smooth, elevated mass in the second portion of the duodenum with central ulceration . Endoscopic ultrasonography of the lesion confirmed a hypoechoic mass arising from the fourth layer of the duodenal wall . A biopsy was performed from the central ulceration, but the cytological findings revealed no malignancy. Immunochemical studies were positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and negative for S100, C-Kit, and CD34.
Preoperatively, we diagnosed the tumor as a leiomyoma or gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Therefore, after informed consent was obtained, pancreatoduodenectomy (PD) was performed.
The resected specimen showed a yellowish-white tumor, 24 × 24 × 19 mm in diameter, arising from the submucosa of the duodenal wall with deep ulceration . The tumor was located at the oral site from the papilla of Vater and showed transmural growth in the duodenal wall.
The tumor was a vascular-rich tumor without capsular and deep ulceration . The lesion was shown by the nested or perivascular proliferation of mildly atypical cells with round-to-oval nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm (glomus cell), accompanied by prominent small blood vessels, hemorrhage and hyalinized stroma . The resected pancreas was free of tumor cells. No mitosis was observed. Immunochemical studies showed that the tumor was positive for SMA and collagen type IV, and negative for C-Kit, CD34, desmin, and S100. The Ki-67 labeling index was 4% in the hot spot . As a result, the tumor was diagnosed as GT arising from the duodenum. There was no evidence of malignancy.
The patient was discharged from the hospital 38 days after the surgery. No sign of recurrence was found after a year of surgery.