A 12-year-old female has presented to the clinic with the history of early-onset scoliosis and progressive deformity for 6 months. She underwent deformity correction surgery with spinal loop rectangle and sublaminar wires 4 years ago. On examination, patient was decompensating in coronal and sagittal plane. Neurological examination was within normal limits. Standing anteroposterior and lateral radiograph revealed failed implant with progression of deformity. Cobb’s angle was 64° at presentation. The patient underwent implant removal and revision deformity correction surgery with pedicle screw-rod system simultaneously. The patient-specific 3D-printed pedicle screw templates were used for safe pedicle screw placement. These templates are manufactured by 3D printing technology using CAD files but in a sequential manner . In the first step, images were acquired using multidetector computed tomography(CT) scan and a 3D image of patient’s vertebral column was created. Computer software was used to convert digital imaging and communications in medicine (DICOM) images to 3D model of spine. This software was Mimics Innovation Suite®, Materialise, Belgium (Mimics Medical and 3-Matic Medical 11). DICOM data of the patient’s CT scan were imported into Mimics Medical 19. On initial examination of 3D model, it was asserted necessary to separate the vertebral column from the residual implant. This was done initially by segmenting the bone and implant using different respective threshold values. Next, further segmentation was done manually to eliminate the artifacts caused by stainless steel spinal rectangle loop and sublaminar wires. The implant and vertebral column were then imported into 3-Matic Medical 11 software and were used as base data to manufacture pediclelocating guides for each vertebra, using various CAD tools available in the software. Biomedical engineer and surgeon together differentiated metal artifacts and bone defects so as to make templates with maximum bone contact surface possible. The final 3D-printed model of spine and the design of templates are illustrated. These templates were manufactured using polyurethane material. Hence, they could be sterilized and used intraoperatively for creating the tract for appropriate placement of pedicle screws as bony landmarks for putting pedicle screws by free-hand technique were obscured. Placement of pedicle screws was assessed postoperatively on CT scan. illustrates the pre-operative and post-operative radiographs of a patient.