41-year-old patient, in her third pregnancy, with a pregnancy of 23.6 weeks, who entered the consultation service of the Tolima Maternal and Infant Unit (UMIT) for a clinical case of six days of evolution, of abrupt onset and progressive deterioration, consisting of bilateral visual acuity decrease, predominantly on the right, accompanied by mild right temporal headache, without other neurological alterations. She had attended adequate prenatal controls without notification of previous symptoms, and fetal growth within expected parameters. The UMIT is a private institution of high complexity, which attends patients of the contributory regime of workers and the regime subsidized by the State in the General System of Social Security in Health (SGSSS), located in the central region of the country.

On physical examination, visual acuity of 20/400 in both eyes was observed, which did not improve with PH (pinhole), intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes (12 mm/Hg), confrontation perimetry with nasal field cut in the right eye (homonymous bitemporal hemianopsia), Marcus gun positive in the right eye, fundoscopy without papilla edema with pulses present, and normoreactive pupils. Initial suspicion of compressive optic neuropathy. A simple MRI of the sella turcica, brain and orbits was performed, with a relevant and consistent finding of a supraselar lesion that compressed and displaced the optic chiasm, with hemorrhage of the right optic tract. Craniofaryngioma was considered as the first diagnostic possibility. Due to the hemorrhage of the optic tract, cavernoma was ruled out as a possible differential diagnosis; an MRI with angiography was performed, in which no alterations in cranial arterial structures were observed.

As part of the evaluation for suspected craniopharyngioma, secondary endocrine disorders were ruled out, and a complete hormone profile was performed with normal results except for slightly elevated cortisol (23 [normal values-NV: 5.27-22.45]).

A medical board of specialists in neurosurgery, perinatology and ophthalmology recommended that no contrast study be performed, given that at that point in the pregnancy, it would not change the expectant management. The pregnancy was ended at week 38, with outpatient follow-up and surgical intervention was defined for the postpartum period. During the pregnancy, there was no progressive deterioration of visual acuity or visual fields. The baby was delivered by cesarean section, without complications, on the recommendation of neurosurgery and perinatology due to the risk of increased intracranial pressure during valsalva maneuvers. A live male newborn was obtained (weight 3,115 g, height 50 cm).

At the end of her puerperium, the patient was evaluated by a neurosurgeon who decided to continue expectant management with ophthalmological follow-up, because the tumour lesion was in close contact with the optic chiasm. During the five-month follow-up, the lesion persisted with a decrease in bilateral visual acuity.