Three years ago, an 11-year-old girl presented to the hospital with pain in the right jaw after becoming aware of a mass in her right cheek. After detailed examination, the patient was diagnosed with ASPS with primary tumor in the right cheek and multiple lung metastases, and chemotherapeutic treatment was initiated. After receiving 1 cycle of VAC therapy (vincristine [2 mg], actinomycin D [0.045 mg/kg], and cyclophosphamide [1.2 g/m2]), the patient developed grade 4 neutropenia. After this treatment, the patient received 1 cycle of the treatment regimen prescribed for rhabdomyosarcoma (vincristine [2 mg], pirarubicin [60 mg/m2], cyclophosphamide [1.2 g/m2], cisplatin [20 mg/m2]) and 1 cycle of ifosfamide (1800 mg/m2), etoposide (100 mg/m2), actinomycin D (0.045 mg/kg), and vincristine (2 mg); however, the development of severe neutropenia made it difficult to continue administration of these drugs. The patient was then treated with oral administration of 800 mg/day of pazopanib for 1 year, and clinical benefit was achieved. Upon stabilization of the disease, oral administration of pazopanib was discontinued; however, 1 year later, fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation was observed in the right front of the skull (maximum standardized uptake value [SUV-max], 2.8) and in the left breast (SUV-max, 2.4) using fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography.
An elastic, soft tumor, approximately 3 cm in size, was palpated in the lower lateral region of the left breast. Ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic, internally heterogeneous mass measuring 22.4 × 16.2 × 21.1 mm with a rich blood supply , while magnetic resonance imaging showed a 3-cm sized tumor that was larger than the one found on prior imaging . Examination of a core-needle biopsy specimen from the same site showed proliferating tumor cells with abundant foamy cytoplasm, clear nucleoli, and oval nuclei . The tumor cells tested positive for AE1/AE3, CAM 5.2, vimentin, S-100, α-actin, desmin, and HMB 45. The specimen showed negative periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining after diastase digestion ; furthermore, the specimen then tested positive for transcription factor E3, resulting in a pathological diagnosis of ASPS . Based on the above information, we established a diagnosis of ASPS with left mammary, lung, and cranial metastases. Due to chemoresistance, surgical excision was selected as the mode of treatment; resection of the cranial bone showing metastasis was performed first and partial mastectomy of the left breast was performed in two stages. The mammary tumor was 25 mm in size, and the cut surface was solid with a reddish gray color . Histological findings similar to those of the needle biopsy specimen were also obtained in the final pathological diagnosis and resection margins were negative. Postoperative conditions were good, and we are currently monitoring the patient through regular follow-ups (visual palpation every 3 months and semi-annual mammary gland ultrasonography).