A 25-year-old female Nigerian patient presented with chief complaints of recurrent fever of 1 month duration and bilateral neck swelling. Fever was described as low grade, continuous, associated with chills and rigor, and relieved only by the use of paracetamol and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). She also noticed bilateral anterior neck swellings about 2 weeks prior to presentation. Swelling was gradual in onset, not painful, and about the size of a peanut when first noticed with no significant increase in size afterwards. Swelling remained the same with swallowing and without any pressure symptoms. She denied any history of cough or contact with a person with chronic cough, and had no history of hoarseness, dysphagia, odynophagia, or stridor. There were other associated symptoms of night sweats, recurrent headaches, nausea, anorexia, and weight loss of about 5 kg at the time of presentation.
Prior to her visit at our outpatient department, she has had multiple medical consultations and multiple courses of antimalarial given over the 1 month period preceding her visit. However, her symptoms were persistent with no resolution. She had no significant past medical or surgical history. History of medications used prior to presentation included three courses (at varying points of illness) of artemether and lumefantrine combination, oral (PO) amoxicillin, PO clotrimazole, PO cotrimoxazole, and PO cefuroxime.
Physical examination findings revealed a young woman who was febrile with bilateral neck lump located at the bases of both the right and left anterior triangles of the neck, both measuring about 2 cm by 4 cm. Lumps were mildly tender and attached to underlying structure but not to the overlying skin. Vital signs at presentation: temperature 37.8 °C, pulse rate 96 beats per minute, blood pressure: 112/78 mmHg. There were no significant neurological, respiratory, cardiovascular, or abdominal findings.
Preliminary laboratory investigations were essentially normal aside from an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) value.
Complete blood count:
An assessment of tuberculous adenitis was made to keep in view T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
The following further investigations were done:
Mantoux test—no induration after 72 hours. Chest X-ray—normal radiograph.
Neck ultrasonography scan (USS): bilateral septated complex cystic masses measuring 3.86 by 2.31 cm and 3.19 cm by 1.31 cm in the right and left lateral region close to the cervical vascular bundles.
The patient was referred to a surgeon for further review, evaluation, and possible biopsy of the neck masses. A fine needle aspiration biopsy was opted for and done due to the peculiarity/difficult anatomy of neurovasculature in the neck region.
Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC): smear of aspirates showed sheets of small- to medium-sized lymphocytes, neutrophils, and few immunoblasts. Also seen are macrophages that are entrapped within fibrillary strands. No atypical cell was seen.
On the basis of these findings, an assessment of acute bacterial lymphadenitis was made and the patient was started on a course of PO levofloxacin for 2 weeks. The enlarged lymph nodes gradually regressed over the course of treatment, and on subsequent follow-up, the patient became symptom-free and has remained so.