A 30 year old primagravid woman at 17 weeks gestation was found on routine prenatal ultrasound to have a complex right ovarian mass. She underwent surgery and was found to have a ruptured appendiceal mucinous neoplasm with a large volume pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome. The right ovary and appendix were removed and an omental biopsy was performed. The final pathology confirmed a well-differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma of appendiceal origin. She recovered without incident from this surgery and was referred for assessment to the Washington Hospital Center at 26 weeks gestation. In consultation with the patient and her obstetrician it was decided to preserve the pregnancy and schedule an early vaginal delivery at 35 weeks gestation.
Following an uncomplicated vaginal delivery of a healthy baby, she underwent a staging CT. It showed no evidence of metastases within the liver parenchyma or outside of the peritoneal cavity. A large volume of mucinous cancer was imaged beneath right and left hemidiaphragm and in the pelvis. Small bowel except for the terminal ileum was spared. Preoperative tumor markers revealed an elevated CEA at 68.2 ng/mL (normal 0–5 ng/mL), CA-125 of 177 units/mL (normal 0–35 units/mL) and CA 19-9 of 361 units/mL (normal 0–37 units/mL).
At 2 1/2 weeks after delivery, the patient underwent an abdominal exploration followed by cytoreductive surgery. She had thick, densely packed tumor covering most of the parietal peritoneal surface, with an especially large volume of disease in the lesser omentum, omental bursa and surrounding the porta hepatis. The stomach and the small bowel except for the terminal ileum were spared. An extensive cytoreduction surgery was performed including total anterior parietal peritonectomy and resection of tumor in the abdominal wall scar, greater and lesser omentectomy with stripping of the omental bursa, right and left upper quadrant peritonectomies including total diaphragm stripping bilaterally, splenectomy, electroevaporation of tumor on liver capsule, cholecystectomy, and a right hemicolectomy including the distal 15 cm of terminal ileum. A total pelvic peritonectomy with abdominal hysterectomy, left salpingo-oophorectomy and rectosigmoid colon resection was performed. The peritoneal cancer index score was 28 (out of a maximum of 39), and the cytoreduction was scored as complete (residual tumor less than 2.5 mm) . Intraoperative intraperitoneal heated chemotherapy was administered through the open coliseum technique, with 15 mg/m2 mitomycin C at 41.5°C for 90 minutes. A Tenckhoff catheter and Jackson-Pratt drains were inserted for early postoperative intraperitoneal 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy . Following completion of the hyperthermic intraoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy an ileocolic and colorectal anastomosis was performed. The total operating time was 9 hours, and the blood loss was estimated at 350 mL, with 2 units of packed red blood cells and 4 units of fresh frozen plasma administered during the operation.
On postoperative day 1 through 5, 900 mg intraperitoneal 5-fluorouracil in 1.5% dextrose peritoneal dialysis solution was administered daily for 23 hours. The patient developed uncomplicated neutropenia on postoperative day 16, with neutrophil count of 0.9 × 103/uL and a total leukocyte count of 1.3 × 103/uL, which was treated successfully with granulocyte colony stimulating factor. On postoperative day 18 she was diagnosed with a left lower extremity deep venous thrombosis and was treated with intravenous heparin which was converted to warfarin prior to discharge from the hospital. She had a postoperative ileus requiring nasogastric drainage for 2 weeks and received total parenteral nutrition during this time. She was discharged in good condition on postoperative day 24.
Three weeks following surgery her tumor marker levels decreased with CEA at 0.5 ng/mL, CA 125 at 92.1 units/mL, and CA 19-9 at 10.6 units/mL. CA 125 normalized by 2 months post-operatively.
After recovery from surgery, she was treated with the Xelox regimen (Xeloda 1000 mg/m2 bid for 14 days then 7 day rest and oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 intravenous over 90 minutes on day 1) for 8 cycles over 24 weeks.
In follow-up at five years after, the patient and her child are in good condition. She has had two episodes of transient small bowel obstruction treated conservatively. On her most recent clinical, radiologic and biochemical assessment at 5 years after her initial diagnosis she remains disease-free.