In April 2015, a 23-year-old male was referred to our Faculty (Oral and Maxillofacial disease department of Mashhad university of Medical sciences). His chief complaint was an ulcer of the uvulae from three months ago, oropharyngeal dysphagia, pharyngitis, and mild fever with unintentional 20-pound weight loss over the course of 4 months. Also he was on a mechanical soft diet. Over the past four years, he had severe episodes of Pharyngitis without response to the usual administered drugs, as well as a history of severe dental infection involving the brain. He did not have any systemic disorders and no history of smoking, abusing drugs or drinking alcohol. He was a construction worker and often dealt with rock wool. Upon physical examination, two painful destructive ulcers were observed. One of them was about 2cm × 1 cm, extending from the soft palate to hard palate, exposing the underlying bone and another one was destructing the uvulae . The ulcers were covered with a thick fibrinoleukocyter membrane with erythematous borders. He had no history of such lesions. His oral hygiene was in good condition. Cervical lymph nodes were not appreciable. Disseminated hypopigmented maculopapular rash throughout the skin, from nine years ago, was also observed. Examination of vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 110/70 mm Hg, a heart rate of 80 beats per minute, and a body temperature of 100°F. The rest of his physical examination did not raise any concerns.
The patient had been initially admitted to the Ear, Nose and Throat department two months ago. Due to suspicion of an infective condition (Trench mouth), some antibiotics such as Ceftriaxone, Metronidazole and Clindamycin were administered for about one month but without significant improvement.
Because of the negative response to the drugs mentioned above the suspicion of an immunosuppressive condition was raised. Therefore, the patient was admitted to the allergy and immunology department. After consultation with an infectious disease specialist, the administered antibiotics were altered to Ceftazidime, Vancomycin, and Metronidazole. However, despite taking these remedies for about three weeks, no improvement was observed. Along with these treatments, some laboratory tests and paraclinical modalities had been requested below:
The blood test only showed Neutrophilia (about 80% of the white blood cell count) and Lymphocytopenia. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was high and C-reactive protein was positive. Serum chemistry parameters were in normal range. All of the virology, microbiology and parasitology tests; such as Anti-HIV, Tuberculin skin testing, etc.; were negative. He had a high Lactate dehydrogenase level of about 595 IU/L. Given the patient's fevers, history of recurrent upper respiratory tract infection with depigmented skin rashes, Infectious mononucleosis was a concern when white blood cell morphology was studied and viral type Lympho-Mono were seen. Also viral capsid antigen (VCA)-IgM and VCA-IgG were dramatically high in the patient’s serum. The results of nitro blue Tetrazolium test NBT and Dihydrorhodamine Flow cytometric Assay (DHR) and other immunological laboratory findings were in normal ranges, except for high IgE (2375 µ/dl) and a slightly low IgM (25 mg/dl). Consequently Immunodeficiency and autoimmune disease were not confirmed. Paraclinical modalities such as Abdominal, Inguinal and Neck ultrasonography, Chest X-ray, Posterior-Anterior Skull X-ray were requested and no abnormalities were observed, except for multiple reactive lymph nodes up to 12 millimeters in size at the anterior cervical lymph node chain, which were detected by ultrasonography. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head and neck with contrast medium revealed nothing of note. In addition, biopsy from palatal ulcers with fungal culture revealed a non-specific ulcer with extensive necrosis and bacterial colonies, fibrin deposition and vasculitis. Dysplasia, malignancy any fungal elements were not evident.
A biopsy of the palatal ulcers was repeated and the histopathological examination of the specimen showed very dense lymphocyte infiltration. In the background of the tissue, lymphoid cell with atypia, irregular and prominent nuclei were seen. The benign inflammatory cell infiltration with geographic necrosis in the background was evident . After consultation, the patient was referred to our Faculty and two clinical provisional diagnoses were made: The first one was a Lymphoproliferative disease such as Non-Hodgkin lymphoma and the second one was necrotizing stomatitis accompagnied by immunocompromised conditions and viral infections like EBV, cytomegaloviruses (CMV) and Herpes simplex viruses (HSV). Hence immunohistochemical analysis of paraffin blocks was requested. CD3 was expressed in some background lymphoid cells, CD56 was positive in some lymphoid cells, CD20 was positive in some background lymphocytes, and the Ki-67 marker was positive in 60% of background of Lymphoid cells. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) was negative and finally the diagnosis of ENKL was confirmed . Clinical staging of the lymphoma according to the Ann Arbor classification was determined as stage IE (4). The patient was referred to the oncologist and a CHOP regimen of chemotherapy was administered every three weeks. After the third cycle of CHOP therapy, the patient unfortunately died due to sepsis and infection (about 3 months after treatment).