A 67-year-old male subject with severe hemithorax pain and dyspnea, along with disseminated pain and muscle weakness in the right shoulder and down the arm, was referred to our institution. Pulmonary evaluation revealed coarse as well as dull breathing sounds. Laboratory data showed normocytic normochromic anemia, whereas white blood cells, platelets, liver and renal functions, calcium, phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were all within normal levels and there were no signs of organomegaly or lymphadenopathy. The chest x-ray showed collapse of the right upper lobe. The patient was further evaluated for suspected bronchogenic cancer with brachial plexus involvement. Histopathological analysis showed poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma.
CT of the chest, upper abdomen and brain was performed with contrast and revealed some pulmonary nodules with hilar mass, resorptive atelectasis and obstructive pneumonia, along with destruction of the adjacent rib vertebra and extension to the spinal canal; there were no signs of brain involvement . MRI on the chest also demonstrated destruction of vertebrae and invasion into the spinal canal, thereby compressing the spinal cord . MRI on the spine confirmed the presence of a lytic lesion in the T4 vertebral body .
Three hours after administration of 750 MBq (20 mCi) technetium-99m methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m MDP) by injection, WBBS was performed using a rotating digital gamma camera (ADAC Pegasys) equipped with a low-energy all-purpose parallel whole collimator, with a 20% window centered at 140 keV to provide energy discrimination. SPECT images were obtained in a 128 × 128 matrix, in 64 steps, with 40 s per step. The images were reconstructed and displayed on all three axes: vertical long axis, horizontal long axis and axial short axis. We found an area of diminished radiotracer uptake in the T3-T5 vertebrae and in the posterior arch of the third to fifth right ribs .
The patient was further evaluated for induction chemoradiotherapy and was subsequently subjected to a palliative en-bloc surgical operation with a posterior approach .