A 28-year-old fit male soldier was brought by his family to Emergency Department (ED) with a history of severe headache, neck pain, nausea, and vomiting, which were associated with behavioral changes in the past 2 days. His symptoms started 2 months ago after lifting a heavy object when he developed neck pain associated with a severe headache that increased in severity over time. He has visited the ED twice before this time, and he was only investigated by a cervical spine X-ray with no brain images; then, he was discharged on analgesia and an outpatient department clinic appointment. As his symptoms did not improve with time, he went to an uncertified chiropractor for neck pain, asking for a neck therapy session, after which his symptoms increased in severity. As the headache became unbearable after the therapy session, he went to a hospital and did a brain computerized tomography (CT) which showed bilateral SDH [ and ]. There was no history of trauma, loss of consciousness, or seizure. He was not on any chronic medications, anticoagulants, or antiplatelets. The patient had a negative history of bleeding tendency, no constitutional symptoms, and an unremarkable systemic review. He was a nonsmoker with no history of alcohol or drug abuse. He had a negative family history of a brain aneurysm and bleeding disorders. On assessment, he was vitally stable, afebrile, conscious, alert, and oriented; however, he looked depressed and agitated. He had an abnormal involuntary repetitive extension movement involving his little fingers bilaterally that started 2 days ago. The rest of the neurological examination was unremarkable. All laboratory investigations were normal. CT angiography, magnetic resonance angiography, and whole spine magnetic resonance imaging did not reveal any identifiable cause that would explain the SDH [, and ]. The patient underwent bilateral mini craniotomies with bilateral subdural drains . A specimen of the SDH external membrane was sent for a histopathology examination, which revealed typical histological findings of the external membrane of the hematoma. The surgery went successfully with no complications or abnormal bleeding. His symptoms improved immediately after the surgery. During his hospital stay, further blood investigations (Blood smear,
Factor VIII and XIII, and vWF cofactor and Antigen) were done and came within normal ranges. The psychiatry team was consulted, and he was diagnosed with major depressive disorder. Eventually, the patient was discharged home in stable condition and completely resolved symptoms on the 6th-day post-surgery. After 8 months, a follow-up brain CT scan was done, and it showed an interval resolution of the bilateral SDH with no signs of recurrence . The patient had no recurrence of the clinical symptoms and was discharged from the clinic.