A 17-year-old female patient was admitted to our outpatient clinic with pain located over the right thenar eminence since 6 months. The pain became worse when grasping objects. No history of trauma could be elicited. Clinical examination revealed free range of motion of the wrist joint and unremarkable peripheral blood flow and motor function without paresthesia of the fingers. Nevertheless, a pulsating vessel could be felt over the thenar eminence . The patient described pain when pressure was applied directly onto the vessel. Sonography showed a subcutaneously located vessel with arterial perfusion pattern . A magnetic resonance angiography was performed revealing a large calibered SPBRA with a superficial course and the absence of the superficial palmar arch . Splinting for 2 weeks did not cause symptom relief. Since the pain persisted for another 2 months, an operative procedure consisting of arterial transposition was suggested.
Due to the absence of information about a superficial course of the SPBRA causing pain in the literature, we have specifically tailored the following approach: an incision was made along the thenar crease. Following elevation of the skin flap, the macroscopically unremarkably appearing SPBRA could be located within the subcutaneous tissue over the abductor pollicis brevis muscle . The muscle was tunneled using a curved clamp and carefully dissected using cautery. Thereafter, the artery was transposed beneath the muscle. The muscle was re-approximated using interrupted absorbable sutures without compressing the SPBRA .
Postoperatively, a splint with adduction of the thumb was applied. The postoperative course was uneventful. The skin sutures and the splint were removed after 2 and 4 weeks, respectively. At latest follow-up, 1 year following the surgical procedure, the patient was free of symptoms with free range of motion of the thumb joint and no signs of weakness of the M. abductor pollicis brevis. Sonography showed a patent vessel beneath the abductor pollicis brevis muscle.