A 26-year-old female patient came to our hospital with history of pain and black discoloration of index and little fingers of right hand for last 1 month with history of intermittent claudication of right arm for which she had difficulty in doing her household work. Patient was not a known diabetic or hypertensive. There was no history of fever, joint pain, oral ulcer, photosensitive rashes, Raynaud's phenomenon, chest pain, palpitation, trauma, pain abdomen, pedal swelling, headache, visual abnormalities, chronic drug intake, or addiction. Past and family history was noncontributory. Patient was unmarried.
On examination, pulse rate was 88 beats/min, regular with brachial and radial pulse on right side found to be feeble compared to left side. Lower limb peripheral pulses were normal and equally palpable both side. Blood pressure was 94/68 mmHg in the right arm, 124/78 mmHg on left arm, and 138/84 and 144/80 mmHg in right and left leg, respectively. There was a bruit audible over infraclavicular region on the right side without any renal or abdominal bruit. Local examination of left hand showed, there was a dry gangrene with a clear cut line of demarcation between normal and gangrenous tissue . Other systemic examination was absolutely normal.
Further investigational workup revealed patient's hemoglobin was 10.4 g/dL, total leukocyte count of 8,600/mm3 with normal differential count and platelet count. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 104 mm/h withhigh sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP) was 8 mg/L. Patient had fasting and postprandial blood glucose of 98 and 116 mg/dL, respectively. Liver, renal function, and coagulation profile were normal with lipid profile study showed total cholesterol of 98 mg/dL, triglyceride of 123 mg/dL, and low density lipoprotein (LDL) of 45 mg/dL. Antinuclear antibody (ANA), perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA), cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA), anti-β2 GP1antibody, anticardiolipin antibody, lupus anticoagulant, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C virus, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status were negative. Cardiac evaluation with electrocardiogram and two-dimesnional (2D) echocardiography was absolutely normal. Carotid Doppler study showed narrowing of lumen of bilateral internal carotid artery with normal carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT) without any evidence of plaque.
Invasive peripheral conventional angiography revealed stenosis in the left subclavian artery proximal to the origin of the vertebral artery and right common carotid artery [Figure –]. According to angiographic classification, patient had type I TA. Bilateral renal, common iliac artery showed normal pattern [Figure and ].
Patient was put on prednisolone 1mg/kg body weight and wound debridement done under surgical department. Patient discharged thereafter, and put on follow-up in outpatient door. Patient showed dramatic improvement in symptoms in late visit.