A 90-year-old woman visited our hospital due to a large area of erythema and localized skin ulceration with hemorrhage of her right breast. Her breast symptoms arose 5 years ago and had been worsening. She could not visit a hospital because she expected for naturally healing and feared noticing cancer and death. She had a history of atrial fibrillation and cerebral infarction 2 months earlier, then her breast lesion was found out. The area of erythema was 15 × 15 cm2. Her nipple and alveolar complex were destroyed and had an uncertain shape. Her skin erythema was soft, and no tumor was palpable . Her quality of life had got worse by hemorrhage and exudate from the tumor, and she felt strong anxiety about getting more worse and death from the cancer.
A punch biopsy indicated mammary Paget’s disease. Computed tomography showed that the tumor was only on the surface of the breast, with no metastasis including of the axillar lymph nodes. There was no underlying tumor in the breast .
Even though our patient was a very elderly woman with comorbidities and her prognosis was relatively good, her symptoms were intolerable. By the request of her and her family, we decided to perform surgery to eliminate the area of erythema after receiving sufficient informed consent. The surgical treatment was performed by two teams that included surgeons and dermatologists. We drew a resection line 1 cm from the skin erythema. Dermatologists were on standby in case a skin graft was needed. We performed muscle-sparing mastectomy with sampling of an axillar lymph node. We added two stress-relaxation sutures to avoid diastasis because the excision area was very large and the tension of the skin flap was strong . Fortunately, a skin graft was not necessary and her postoperative course was good. The skin flap did not develop major complications such as necrosis, seroma, wound infection, and highly disturbance of moving the right upper limb. We removed the stress-relaxation sutures 7 days after surgery.
A histological examination revealed mammary Paget’s disease without invasion to underlying tissues , no evidence of a residual tumor of the entire stumps, and no metastasis in the lymph node. Although she felt a little tightness of the surgical site, paresthesia of the chest wall, and a sense of breast loss, her quality of life improved after surgery by being freed from symptoms and anxiety related to malignancy. It was a great value for her, even if she suffered from these complications.