On March 14, 2022, a 7-year-old girl was admitted to Wuhan Children's Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology due to noticeable behavioral changes occurring over the past months. These changes included episodes of eye rolling, mouth twitching, and pronounced mouth breathing, lasting approximately 3-5 minutes, particularly when fatigued, happening about 4-5 times per day. Shortly after these episodes, the child would suddenly rise and move about in a seated position, engaging in self-talk and hand-and-foot movements for several hours. The child had been diagnosed with epilepsy at the age of 1, effectively managed with oral levetiracetam. In March 2021, the patient developed intermittent fever and a decrease in blood cell counts. After a thorough examination, the patient was diagnosed with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), a genetic condition marked by bone marrow failure and an elevated risk of hematological malignancies. Using whole-exome sequencing, we identified a homozygous splice site variant and this c.258 + 2T>C variant at the 5’ splice site (ss) is associated with aberrant pre-mRNA splicing due to the usage of an upstream cryptic 5’ss at positions c.251-252, eventually resulting in an 8-bp deletion and frameshift (84Cfs3) . In November 2021, the patient underwent HSCT from an unrelated HLA9/10-compatible donor at the Department of Pediatrics, Union Hospital Affiliated to Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. There were no signs of acute or chronic graft-versus-host disease after HSCT. There was no significant personal history of trauma, infections, tuberculosis exposure, toxin exposure, allergies, or familial metabolic diseases. Upon admission, the patient exhibited stable vital signs, appropriate responsiveness, and normal brain function. Physical examinations revealed a supple neck with non-palpable superficial lymph nodes. Assessments of the heart, lungs, abdomen, and limb muscle strength were normal. Kernig’s and Brudzinski signs were negative, and the heel-knee-shin test showed stability. Imaging tests, including diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head, computed tomography scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, superficial lymph node ultrasound, and positron emission tomography-computed tomography, showed no significant abnormalities. The EEG indicated a dominant rhythm without prominence, increased slow wave activity during wakefulness, and occasional paroxysmal multi-spike slow waves during sleep . Integrated sensory and cognitive assessments reported mild proprioceptive and body coordination issues. The self-rating anxiety scale, self-rating depression scale, children’s psychological counseling test report, and China-Wechsler children’s intelligence scale all exhibited normal results. Laboratory tests, including blood counts, blood coagulation, urine and stool routines, liver and kidney function, thyroid function, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, electrolyte levels, myocardial enzymes, blood ammonia, lactic acid, blood glucose, anti-nuclear antibodies, and anti-extractable nuclear antigen antibodies, all returned within normal ranges. Lymphocyte subsets detection displayed abnormalities . The patient tested positive for Epstein-Barr virus core antigen, Epstein-Barr virus capsid antigen, cytomegalovirus antibodies, and herpes simplex virus I and II immunoglobulin G (IgG). However, fungal glucan, galactomannan tests, pre-transfusion infectious disease screening, tuberculosis microarray, and parvovirus B-19 yielded negative results. Routine cerebrospinal fluid biochemistry, exfoliative cytology, bacterial cultures, and smears (for common bacteria, cryptococci, and fungi) were all unremarkable. Moreover, 12 cerebrospinal fluid AE antibodies, along with oligoclonal bands and myelin basic protein, tested negative . Bone marrow cytology and immunophenotypes were generally normal. Double immunofluorescence cell staining revealed elevated anti-mGluR5 antibody levels in the serum (1:1000) . A final diagnosis of anti-mGluR5 AE was established. The patient received treatment with intravenous gamma globulin (400 mg/kg daily for 5 consecutive days) and methylprednisolone (20 mg/kg daily for 5 consecutive days), followed by oral prednisone. During hormonal shock therapy, omeprazole was administered for gastric protection, along with calcium and potassium supplementation. Levetiracetam and trihexyphenidyl were concurrently prescribed for epilepsy and dystonia, respectively. The abnormal behaviors notably improved after treatment, and EEG results improved . A re-examination in January 2023 revealed the absence of an SBDS gene mutation in peripheral blood. The patient remained symptom-free at the last follow-up in August 2023.