A 77-year-old women, gravida 4, parity 4, presented with a 7-month history of vaginal bleeding. She had a clinical history of total abdominal hysterectomy due to multiple uterine leiomyomas 40 years ago and she had vaginal vault prolapse for 13 years with no history of pessary use. Her medical history included hypertension and ischemic heart disease. Physical examination revealed manually reducible stage 4 vaginal vault prolapse according to the POP quantification system , with an infiltrating 1-2 cm mass between the upper and middle third of the posterior vaginal wall. There was no parametrial invasion, pelvic wall involvement, or inguinal lymph node metastases .
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed tricompartmental (cystocele, enterocele, and vaginal vault) POP, but no visible tumor . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed high F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the primary vaginal mass (SUVmax, 16.37) without any evidence of metastases to the lymph nodes or other organs . Incisional biopsy from the lesion was reported as squamous cell carcinoma of the vagina.
She had primary vaginal cancer staged as FIGO stage II, and definitive CRT was planned . External beam radiotherapy (EBRT) was given in 28 fractions of 1.8 Gy via intensity-modulated RT (IMRT) technique, with concurrent 6 cycles of 40 mg/m2 weekly cisplatin . The primary clinical target volume (CTV) included gross tumor volume (GTV), which was expanded by 1-2 cm margin, entire length of the vagina, and paravaginal tissue. The lymphatic CTV contained the external iliac, internal iliac, presacral, obturator, and inguinal lymph node regions. The CTV was expanded by 1 cm to form planning target volume (PTV). Bladder, rectum, sigmoid colon, and bowel were delineated as organs at risks (OARs). Before EBRT, silicone ring pessary without central support diaphragm (size 3, 2.50” 64 mm) was placed into the vagina to help reposition and support the prolapsed vagina, to immobilize the radiation field, and to reduce prolapse symptoms . The pessary was left in place until EBRT was completed. At the end of the EBRT, the pessary was removed. Vaginal examination revealed a complete response . After clinical confirmation of complete response, high-dose-rate (HDR) CT-guided vaginal cuff BT was performed, with a dose of 26 Gy in 4 fractions prescribed to the full thickness of the vaginal wall . Total (EBRT + BT) biologically equivalent dose in 2 Gy fractions (EQD2) were calculated with α/β = 10 Gy for tumor and α/β = 3 Gy for late-responding tissues using the linear quadratic model . The total cumulative doses were as follows: primary CTV = 85.3 Gy, rectum D2cm3 = 69.9 Gy, sigmoid D2cm3 = 57.5 Gy, bladder D2cm3 = 76.9 Gy.
Treatment was well tolerated. During CRT, grade 3 hematologic toxicity was observed and treated with blood transfusions. Grade 2 dermatitis in the vulva was observed at the end of treatment and was treated with topical agents . The patient had no severe complaints other than mild vaginal pain. At 3-months follow-up, although vaginal examination showed complete response , PET/CT revealed high F-18 FDG uptake in the region of primary vaginal mass (SUVmax, 5.7) compatible with partial response . A biopsy was performed to exclude recurrence or residual disease and the complete response was confirmed. She is still alive without disease at 10-months follow-up. However, the patient experienced symptoms like vaginal dryness, itching, and burning possibly due to POP and vaginal atrophy. She refused to undergo prolapse surgery consisting of sacrocolpopexy. Ring pessary was placed again into her vagina, and topical estrogen cream was prescribed to alleviate her complaints and to maintain a healthy vaginal epithelium.