On March 11, 2020, a 68-year-old woman attended the Tianjin Taida Hospital surgical Clinic mainly because of intermittent cough for > 1 month. She had a 2-year history of hypertension controlled by medication, and no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. She had an intermittent cough with white sticky sputum, without any other symptoms or signs. On the same day, the patient was referred to the Fifth Central Hospital of Tianjin. Here vital signs were: body temperature 36.2 °C, pulse 86 beats/min, respiration rate 18 breaths/min, blood pressure 142/85 mmHg, and she was fully conscious. There was no visible enlargement of her superficial lymph nodes. She had no cyanosis, percussion pain in the sternum, or abnormal respiratory movements. She had coarse breath sounds in both lungs, no pleural friction sounds, and audible inspiratory crackles in the left lung. Heart sounds were strong and regular, with no pathological murmurs in any valve auscultation area. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 8 ng/ml (normal range 0–5 ng/ml) and non-small cell lung cancer associated antigenCYF21–1 was 13.31 ng/ml (normal range 0.1–3.3 ng/ml). Other biochemical indicators were within the normal range.
The patient underwent a series of imaging examinations . Chest radiography on March 11, 2020 showed several nodules in the upper and lower segments of the left lung . Chest computed tomography (CT) on March 12, 2020 showed multiple solid nodules in the upper and lower left lung . The nodules had irregular outlines, with a maximum diameter of 65 mm, and some had a central cavity. A diagnosis of lymphoma was considered. Enhanced chest CT on March 16, 2020 showed multiple “cauliflower like”, soft tissue masses in the left lung, partially fused, with a maximum diameter of 71.3 mm and a CT value of ~ 36 HU. Enhanced CT showed enhancement with a maximum value of 60 Hu. The boundary between the mass and pleura was not clear, and the mass could not be separated from the pleura. There was irregular thickening of the pleura and no enlargement of lymph nodes. A malignant tumor could not be excluded.
To clarify the pathological diagnosis, the patient underwent ultrasound-guided percutaneous needle biopsy of the left lung under local anesthesia on March 16, 2020. After consultation with our own and other hospitals(diagnostics were performed by Tianjin Fifth Central Hospital, Tianjin Cancer Hospital and Peking Union Medical College Hospital), the biopsy specimen was finally diagnosed as BA according to histomorphology and immunophenotype.
Wedge resection with safe margins may be the best treatment option for BA patients. However, if the lung is full of diffuse nodules, the whole lung may need to be removed, which seriously affects quality of life. Our patient was treated conservatively and followed up regularly. She was discharged on March 28, 2020.Her symptoms were managed through regular normal activities of daily living, strengthening respiratory protection, avoiding respiratory infection, and drug treatment to relieve dyspnea and cough.
To clarify the diagnosis, a double needle lung biopsy specimen was removed, 15 mm long, 1 mm in diameter. It was solid and gray white. Microscopically, there were irregular adenoid structures in a background of fibrosis and inflammation . The lesion had a two-layer cellular structure consisting of a basal and luminal layer, and had a lack of papillary structures. The micropapillae occasionally formed by non-ciliated cells germinated and burrowed into the alveolar cavity. The luminal layer was composed of type II alveolar cells and club cells. However, ciliated columnar cells and mucous cells in some flat areas could still be identified .The appearance was similar to adenocarcinoma in some areas, with alveolar destruction and stromal widening. Through careful observation, we found that the main reason for the stromal widening was edema and inflammatory infiltration. Unlike adenocarcinoma, there was a lack of thick collagen fibers . Tumor cells lacked atypia, mitosis and necrosis. A layer of material resembling the basement membrane surrounded the basal layer. The most important feature was a continuous layer of basal cells around the luminal layer.
Immunohistochemical staining for p63, p40 and cytokeratin (CK)5/6 clearly showed the continuity of the basal cells . The luminal cells and some basal cells stained positive for thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1. The luminal cells expressed immunological markers of the terminal bronchioles (CKpan, CK7, Napsin A and CEA). A small number of mucous cells stained positive for periodic acid Schiff. The tumor showed a < 10% Ki-67 proliferation index . Finally, the case was pathologically diagnosed as BA of distal type.