A 47-year-old woman presented with complex bilateral renal stones and was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment due to failure of conventional PCNL performed at another hospital. Initially, we performed mini-ECIRS for the right renal stone, which was later identified as calcium oxalate, without any complications and residual stones.
Three months after the first mini-ECIRS, she underwent a second mini-ECIRS for the left renal stone. Laboratory studies showed normal values of serum inflammatory markers, liver and renal function, mineral markers, and urinary parameters. Multi-slice computed tomography and kidney-ureter-bladder radiography revealed a stone (size, 6.5 × 2.2 × 2.4 cm3) with left calyceal fragment . Mini-ECIRS was performed in the prone position, and supra-12th rib access was obtained with a single pass of the 16.5/17.5-Fr metal sheath with a 12-Fr nephroscope under combined US and ureteroscopy guidance. During puncture, we identified the pleural space and pleural line under US to avoid penetration. After puncture, we checked intraoperative fluoroscopy to evaluate potential chest complications. Using the holmium YAG-laser through the rigid nephroscope, all parts of the collecting system and a part of the main stone were cleared. Finally, an ureteral stent without a nephrostomy tube was placed after the procedure. The operative time was 3 h, with no intraoperative complications and an estimated blood loss of <100 cc.
On POD 1, the patient developed shortness of breath. Tachypnea with normal vital signs was noted with deteriorating breath sounds on the left side. Chest radiography confirmed left pleural collection . Her hemoglobin level, which was 12.0 g/dL at discharge, had dropped to 11.0 g/dL. On consultation with the thoracic surgeon, she was conservatively managed without any treatment for several days. On POD 5, a 16-Fr tube was placed for left intercostal drainage under local anesthesia with ultrasonography guidance by the standard technique because of the aggravation of hemothorax . A small volume of old blood was drained without improved expansion of the left lower and middle lobes . On POD 9, VATD was performed for the hemothorax. During intraoperative monitoring, some abscesses were observed in the hemothorax, which appeared to be empyema; moreover, a scar hole that had been punctured through the pleural cavity during mini-ECIRS was identified . Thereafter, blood clot evacuation, decortication, and ablation were performed by VATD. At the end of the procedure, the 20-Fr chest tubes were retained . On POD 14, she was discharged after retrieval of the chest tube. Follow-up evaluation showed satisfactory expansion of the left lung with complete resolution of all chest symptoms .