A 75-year-old man with body mass index of 30.5 kg/m2, severe OSA (apnea-hypopnea index [AHI] of 72 events/h) and Epworth Sleepiness Scale of 7 was referred for UAS therapy. He had difficulty adhering to CPAP treatment, which he was unable to tolerate due to sleep disruption. Past medical history was significant for cardiovascular disease, including congestive heart failure due to ischemic cardiomyopathy with impaired left ventricular function and ejection fraction of 35% by echocardiography. In addition, he had persistent atrial fibrillation and had received an implantable defibrillator 4 years previously, following atrioventricular node ablation. His functional status was New York Heart Association Class III. His preoperative AHI (72 events/h) was outside of the standard recommendations for UAS. However, given his failure to adhere to conservative measures, cardiovascular risk of untreated sleep apnea, and anatomic candidacy for UAS on drug-induced sleep endoscopy, he was deemed to be an appropriate candidate for UAS in an off-label indication outside of standard criteria. He underwent uncomplicated implantation.2

Three months postoperatively, the patient and his bed partner reported no sleep apnea events. He described his sleep as “more refreshing” and reported overall improvement in quality of sleep and daytime fatigue. His body mass index had not changed. Polysomnography showed a titrated AHI of 0 events/h at 1.8 V and 4% oxygen desaturation index of 1.5. He further titrated his device to 2 V at a bipolar (+-+) configuration and had a repeat 2-night home sleep study 2 months later showing 4% respiratory event index of 3.9 and 2.3 events/h on respective nights. At 1-year follow-up, the patient reported continuous improvement in quality of sleep with usage of the device at 2 V. Cardiac evaluation revealed that ejection fraction had increased to 47% since implantation and chronic anemia had resolved. Functional class had improved to New York Heart Association Class I. No interval change in his medical management had occurred.