A 52-year-old male patient was admitted due to 3 wk of intermittent chest distress accompanied by palpitation, but no chest pain, abdominal pain, dizzy and amaurosis.
Coronary computed tomography angiography performed using iohexol before admission showed local severe stenosis at the proximal and middle of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and moderate stenosis at the middle of right coronary artery (RCA). The total coronary artery calcification score was 1009.9. The patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
He had a prior history of cigarette smoking, arterial hypertension, old cerebral infarction, hyperlipidemia and hyperuricemia. He had been prescribed levamlodipine besylate, bisoprolol fumarate and atorvastatin for 4 years. He denied a history of alcohol consumption, type 2 diabetes mellitus, arrhythmia, chronic constipation, chronic abdominal pain, abdominal surgery and trauma, and other drug use.
He had no family history of cardiovascular and digestive system diseases.
The patient’s clinical condition was relatively good with normal blood pressure of 125/72 mmHg and heart rate of 67 bpm. There were no abnormal physical findings.
The basic laboratory values were normal with the exception of elevated plasma D-dimer of 3.14 µg/mL (normal range: 0-0.55 µg/mL). Blood leucocyte count was 8620/µL (normal range: 3500-9500/µL), hemoglobin was 151 g/dL (normal range: 130-175 g/dL) and platelet count was 311000/µL (normal range: 125000-350000/µL). Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 0.52 mg/L (normal range: 0-8 mg/L).
The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiography and abdominal ultrasonography were normal. On the second day of admission, coronary angiography (CAG) was performed via right radial artery access and revealed diffuse stenosis of 50%-70% from the proximal to middle segment of the LAD and localized stenosis of 50%-70% at the middle segment of the RCA . A total of 60 mL of iohexol (Omnipaque 300), a low-osmolar nonionic iodinated contrast agent, was administered during the procedure. The patient was also given local anesthetic (1% lignocaine) prior to CAG and standard 3000 IU heparin intra-arterially during CAG, which were completed uneventfully. We did not perform any coronary intervention according to the CAG results. Vital signs during and immediately after CAG were normal.
At 3 h post-CAG, the patient complained of epigastric pain and nausea without chest pain, chest tightness, vomiting, rash and pruritus. Vital signs were totally stable (temperature, 36.5℃; blood pressure, 118/62 mmHg; heart rate, 54 bpm; respiratory rate, 12 breaths/min; O2 saturation, 98% in room air). Abdominal examination showed normal bowel sounds and upper abdominal tenderness but without any peritoneal signs. ECG remained normal without any change. The patient was administered oral pantoprazole and an intramuscular injection of anisodamine in a 10-mg dose. However, his abdominal pain gradually worsened. His hemodynamic and respiratory parameters were still within the normal range without any signs of hypoperfusion. His laboratory results after CAG revealed leukocytosis (19710/µL) with neutrophilia (17580/µL, normal range: 1800-6300/µL). Hemoglobin of 14.6 g/dL, platelets of 272000/µL and CRP of 0.71 mg/L remained normal. Myocardial enzymes, amylase, lipase and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were also normal. Fecal occult blood test was positive. An emergency abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a thickened colonic wall corresponding to the ascending and right transverse colon segments, without obvious stenosis and without dilation of the proximal segments, accompanied by multiple exudative changes indicating inflammatory lesions. The patient was started on water deprivation, abrosia, intravenous levofloxacin 500 mg associated with rehydration by intravenously administered crystalloids. Antiplatelet drugs were stopped.
On the 2nd day after CAG, the patient complained that abdominal pain transferred to the right epigastric and subxiphoid without fever, diarrhea and vomiting. His vital signs were still stable. Physical examination showed tenderness, tension and rebound pain in the right upper abdomen and below the xiphoid. Antibiotics were replaced with latamoxef (4 g/d). On the 3rd day after CAG, an abdominal CT scan with intravenous iodixanol of 100 mL demonstrated that thickening, edema of the ascending and right transverse colonic wall and the inflammatory exudate became more serious . There was no thrombus in the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries and veins . Laboratory studies revealed leukocytosis (17810/µL) with neutrophilia (14230/µL), elevated CRP (68.79 mg/dL) at 8-times the upper limit of normal and elevated D-dimer (4.3 µg/mL). Fecal occult blood test was still positive.