An 81-year-old female patient presented to our emergency department with acute onset of hematemesis and melena. On admission, the patient appeared to have a poor general health condition and was hemodynamically compromised. Her initial laboratory exams revealed a hemoglobin concentration of 7.7 mg/dl without leukocytosis or C-reactive protein (CRP) elevation. The patient had a history of a 6.5 cm gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) of the cardia, for which she initially received downsizing treatment with imatinib 400 mg/d, followed by surgical resection of the gastroesophageal junction and reconstruction with a jejunal interposition (Merendino procedure) 4 years earlier . Histopathological studies of the tumor revealed a T3-tumor with a positive c-Kit mutation in exon-11 and a Ki-67 proliferation rate of 15%. The risk for disease progression based on Miettinen's criteria was determined as high (size > 5 cm; mitosis rate > 5/HPF), and the patient was subsequently placed on 1st line adjuvant therapy with imatinib 400 mg/d . After two years on 1st line treatment, the patient developed hepatic and peritoneal metastasis and was placed on sunitinib as 2nd line therapy for metastatic GIST. Treatment with a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) was suspended for an unknown reason two years prior to presentation.
The patient was immediately transferred to our intensive care unit, where she was intubated and received two units of packed red blood cells (pRBCs). An emergency gastroscopy was carried out, which revealed active bleeding from a vessel stump in the jejunal interposition, corresponding to a Forrest stage I b upper gastrointestinal bleed. The bleeding was successfully stopped endoscopically by local injection of adrenaline and the application of polymer powder. A CT scan of the thorax and abdomen showed no signs of active bleeding or free abdominal fluid . The known hepatic and peritoneal metastasis were described as constant in size, but increasingly necrotic compared to a previous CT scan. Due to a renewed drop in the hemoglobin concentration during the course of the day, a repeat gastroscopy was performed. This time, it showed diffuse bleeding without a circumscribed source. As a result, we acted to stabilize the coagulopathy by transfusing the patient with 9 units of pRBCs, 6 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFPs), and 6 units of platelet concentrates. In addition, the patient received 3 g of fibrinogen and 4000 IU of PPSB®, a prothrombin complex concentrate containing the coagulation factors II, VII, X, and IX.
On the second day after admission, a temporary improvement in the clinical condition of the patient was observed. It was possible to extubate the patient, who was hemodynamically stable with no signs of active bleeding. A phase of atrial fibrillation was cardioverted following treatment with a beta blocker, digoxin, and amiodarone. On the third day following her admission, the patient's condition deteriorated rapidly with the occurrence of fever, gross hematuria, and decreased oxygen saturation. A delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction was suspected, and positive Rh antibodies (anti-c antibody) were detected. Clinically as well as biochemically, the patient was suffering from a hemolysis with a decline of the hemoglobin concentration to 4.8 mg/dl and an increase of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) to 3842.0 U/l. Given the lack of a septic focus, only a marginal increase in the inflammatory parameters, and pending blood culture results, no antibiotic treatment or surgical therapy was initiated. Due to imminent respiratory failure, the patient was reintubated. Vasopressors, atropine, and crystalloid solutions were administered to treat bradycardia and shock. However, the patient died on the same evening, following an unsuccessful cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
The results of blood cultures taken on the day of the patient's death revealed gram-labile rods without bacterial growth after two days. The subsequent external analysis confirmed bacteremia with C. perfringens and the detection of the alpha toxin gene by polymerase chain reaction, but without any traces of the beta toxin, enterotoxin, epsilon toxin, or iota toxin. The autopsy of the patient revealed a 6 cm sized local recurrence of the GIST and multiple necrotic liver metastases. In addition, a diffuse spread of C. perfringens in multiple organs with advanced tissue lysis was histologically confirmed . The mucosal ulcer of the jejunal interposition was located 1.5 cm distal to the esophagojejunal anastomosis, which itself was intact. Death due to a septic-toxic shock caused by C. perfringens sepsis was determined as the cause of death. A contamination of the administered blood products with C. perfringens as the source of the infection was excluded by a subsequent analysis, which was confirmed by an external laboratory.