A 27-year-old, Caucasian female with a past medical history of tachycardia and ethanol dependence presented to the emergency department (ED) for possible psychosis in the setting of ethanol withdrawal. Two days previously, the patient was admitted to an outside hospital for management of ethanol withdrawal and was treated with intravenous fluids but not BNZs. She removed her IV and left the hospital before being formally discharged, but the family brought her to our hospital with a report of paranoia and believing people outside her home were trying to kill her. Her last known ethanol consumption was 4 days prior, and alcohol, BNZs, and barbiturates were not detected in her serum or urine. She reported at least five “heavy pours” of vodka every day, and had consumed this amount for a few years. Examination was significant for tachycardia (127–132 beats per minute), high blood pressure (ranging from 143 to 149/102 to 103 mmHg), and mild tenderness to palpation to bilateral upper abdominal quadrants. She was calm, fully oriented, and with organized thought process, but endorsed paranoia regarding family members being out to get her and hearing voices outside her head talking about her. A medical workup for delirium revealed normal complete blood count, a comprehensive metabolic panel with mildly elevated transaminases [aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 94 U/L; alanine transaminase (ALT) 72 U/L], and a noncontrast computed tomogram of the brain with mild diffuse volume loss greater than expected for her age. These abnormalities were consistent with her drinking history and not indicative of a separate process. No substances were present in urine or serum toxicology. She was negative for coronavirus (COVID), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and hepatitis panel. She expressed interest in achieving sobriety from ethanol. She was first given lorazepam 2 mg orally and started on chlordiazepoxide 25 mg twice daily because her pulse and blood pressure remained elevated. Within 2 hours of every chlordiazepoxide dose, she became acutely confused and agitated, reporting visual and auditory hallucinations and stating that there were people on the other side of the door who were coming after her. After two doses of chlordiazepoxide (total of 50 mg, which is equivalent to 2 mg lorazepam), it was discontinued and she was treated with 2 mg of intramuscular lorazepam and a subsequent dose of oral lorazepam 2 mg, which were associated with improvement of her agitation. All BNZs were subsequently held. The next day, the patient was calm, coherent, with organized thought, and no hallucinations or paranoia. She remained that way over an extended observation period of over 10 hours. She was then referred to a substance treatment program where she did not exhibit any psychosis, and did not require additional BNZ medication.
Our institutional human subjects protection program allowed submission of this case presentation (IRB number 22.1081). Additionally, written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.