We report the case of a 43-year-old black woman admitted to the surgical emergency department for abdominal pain with inability to pass gas or stool, evolving for 3 days. She came from a rural community, without a health care structure, located about 100 km from the urban center. The anamnesis found menarche at 16 years old, an irregular menstrual cycle, a previous gestation and parity about 18 years ago, and a child who died at the age of 1 year. Our patient, divorced for 15 years, had reported an abdominal mass evolving for several years (about 10 years) with chronic constipation. The date of the last menstruation was not known. Our patient concealed any notion of sexual intercourse. On admittance to the surgical emergency department, our patient had a bad general condition and clinical anemia. A physical examination of her abdomen noted a widespread distension with an irregular, polylobed mass occupying the entire umbilical region. The supraumbilical stage was tympanic to percussion with elastic resistance to palpation. The rectal examination found an empty rectum, and the mass was perceptible in Douglas’s pouch. At the vaginal pelvic examination, we found the same mass and a finger holster was clean.
An erect abdominal X-ray noted an ileocolic distension with some hydroaerial levels and a pelvic opacity . The diagnosis of AIO by a tumor was evoked, and emergency laparotomy was indicated. The biological examination noted: anemia at 10 g/dL, and slightly altered renal function (a uremia level of 12 mmol/L, a serum creatinine level of 190 μmol/L).
A nasogastric tube, a urinary catheter, and a large venous line were installed for resuscitation. A median laparotomy allowed the aspiration of 1.2 L of blood. Exploration noted a ruptured right tubal ectopic pregnancy and a polymyomatous uterus. The largest myoma previa adhered to the rectosigmoid hinge and compressed it , explaining the extrinsic obstruction of the colon. A total hysterectomy was performed. The surgical specimen containing the uterus, myomas and annex weighed 4.5 kg . The most voluminous myoma was 18 cm wide and 23 cm long. The surgical recovery was uneventful, and our patient was discharged on postoperative day 12. Our patient was informed that she could no longer have children. Our patient was very satisfied with the disappearance of this abdominal mass, which hampered her daily activities. A histologic examination confirmed a ruptured ectopic pregnancy and myofibroma without signs of malignancy.