A 3-year-old girl was transferred to our center for severe cough, shortness of breath, fatigue and fever. Physical examination revealed facial deformities and growth retardation. The patient was diagnosed with hypothyroidism, CHD and PH by examinations at the age of 11 months old. Her transcutaneous finger oxygen saturation was 70%. Echocardiography showed a 0.9cm-wide ASD, a widened pulmonary artery, and severe tricuspid regurgitation . Laboratory tests suggested that NT-proBNP was 3907pg/ml, the C-reaction protein level was 19.83mg/L, and the white blood cell was in the normal range, but the percentage of neutrophils increased to 78.7%, and (respiratory syncytial virus) RSV-IgM was positive. Liver function, kidney function, the level of autoimmune antibodies, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal. The patient was given anti-infection and cardiotonic drugs as well as respiratory support after admission.
Meanwhile, the patient underwent right heart catheterization. The results indicated that the mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP, 71mmHg) was markedly increased, the pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR, 27WU) also enlarged, and the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) is normal. Since the ASD was small and the slow flow rate could not result in the tremendous elevation in the pulmonary arterial pressure, the pathogenesis should be further investigated. No obvious abnormalities were found from the results of the pulmonary test, cardiac CTA and other routine etiological examinations in the patient. Nevertheless, the genetic inspection (the accession number for the whole-exome sequencing data is HRA005032) showed that the patient had a KMT2D (ENSMBL reference ID: NM_003482.3) exon 39 c.12209_12210del p.(Ser4070fs) mutation . Based on the genetic results and abnormal countenance, the patient was diagnosed with KS type 1. The patient developed severe PH and poor oxygenation, and she was classified into the high-risk population by risk stratification was. Therefore, she received triple targeted pulmonary vascular pressure reduction treatment, i.e., Ambrisentan (2.5mg once daily) + Tadalafil (10mg once daily) + Remodulin (continuous subcutaneous pumping). The patient was followed up regularly after discharge, but the effect was unsatisfactory. The latest echocardiography reexamination showed no change in the size of the ASD, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, and estimated pulmonary arterial systolic pressure of 96mmHg.