A 59-year-old postmenopausal female presented herself to our hospital with a mass on her right breast for 2 weeks. The patient had no history of hormonal treatment or family history of cancer. Clinical examination confirmed a nodule in the right breast, situated at 5 o’clock. Mammography revealed a spherical, well-defined nodule of 3.2*3*2.3 cm .
Core needle biopsy (CNB) revealed multiple lesions lined with layered columnar cells and abundant mucous secretion, and the diagnosis of invasive breast cancer with abundant mucous secretion was made. Then, a right lumpectomy along with ipsilateral axillary lymph node dissection was performed. Under macroscopic observation, the tumor was a well-circumscribed mass 3*3*2 cm in size. The cross-section was grayish-white with a moderate myxoid appearance. Microscopically, the tumor consisted of mucus-filled cavities of varying sizes lined with columnar cells . Tall columnar cells were rich in mucous and had nuclei at the base of the cell. Cells in some areas appeared stratified, protruding into the lumen and even forming branched papillary structures. Nests or papillary cell masses floated in the intracavity mucous lake accompanied by necrosis and inflammatory cell infiltration . Microscopically, no distinct myoepithelial layer was observed, and subsequent immunohistochemical results also confirmed the absence of myoepithelium . The cells had mild atypia, and mitotic figures were rare. No common ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) existed, and ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes showed no metastasis. The Nottingham grade was 1 (tubule formation = 3, nuclear pleomorphism = 1, and mitotic count = 1), and the pathological stage was T2N0Mx.
Based on these morphological features, a wide range of differential diagnoses included metastatic tumors from the ovaries or pancreas, mucinous carcinoma, mucoceloid lesions, encapsulated papillary carcinoma (EPC) and invasive papillary carcinoma. A broad immunohistochemical panel was performed to narrow the differential diagnosis. The neoplastic cells showed diffuse immunoreactivity for cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and a high Ki-67 index of up to 40% . There was no immunoreactivity for ER, PR, HER2, cytokeratin 20 (CK20), CA19-9, CDX-2, Villin, PAX8, GATA3, SOX10, GCDFP-15, mammaglobin, p63 or calponin. Positive immunoreactivity for CK7, negative immunoreactivity for CK20, CA19-9, CDX-2, and Villin, and metastasis from the ovary, pancreas or intestine were excluded. Positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) was performed on the patient, and no other lesions were found, confirming nonmetastatic lesions. A triple-negative immunophenotype and a relatively high Ki-67 index ruled out mucinous carcinoma and EPC, which typically express ER and PR. Mucoceloid lesions of the breast are benign lesions in which myoepithelium is present around the lumen. The absence of myoepithelium also ruled out this diagnosis . Invasive papillary carcinoma is composed of mildly dilated ducts and microcysts containing a papillary formation without intracellular and extracellular mucus. These cases are usually non-triple-negative phenotypes. Eventually, we favored the diagnosis of MCA based on the morphological and immunohistochemical findings.
Furthermore, 425 genes were sequenced using formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues and next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology. Recurrent mutations in PIK3CA, KRAS, MAP2K4, RB1, KDR, PKHD1, TERT, and TP53 were identified and are summarized in Table . The tumor mutation burden (TMB) was 9.27, and microsatellite instability high (MSI-H) was not detected. P53, RB1 and PD-L1 protein were stained according to the sequencing results. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the overexpression of p53 protein and loss of RB1 protein expression. PD-L1 (sp142) was focally positive in immune cells, and the positive rate was approximately 7% . The patient received 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy and was followed up for 108 months, with no signs of recurrence or metastasis.