Here, we report on a 53-year old man with stage IV adenocarcinoma of the lung with no predictive genetic abnormalities (no EGFR mutation, no ALK or ROS1 translocation). On his initial computed tomography (CT) scan, he presented with multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules, masses in mediastinal lymph nodes, liver, and ribs. The patient had no history of auto-immune disorders. MRI of the skull revealed 2 cerebral lesions, which were treated by irradiation with one fraction of 20 Gray and showed consecutive regression. A subsequent palliative chemotherapy with cisplatin and pemetrexed led to disease stabilization after four cycles. Pemetrexed was continued as maintenance therapy. Two months later, progression of several lesions prompted a second line therapy with the PD-1 inhibitor nivolumab. Serological testing for human immunodeficiency, hepatitis B and C virus infections were negative. Under PD-1 blockade peripheral lesions regressed and quality of life improved. Soon thereafter, however, walking ability deteriorated, and cranial MRI showed a new parieto-temporal lesion in proximity of the formerly irradiated masses . Suggestive of further metastatic spread, this new lesion was irradiated with 24 Gray over 7 days , and nivolumab continued. A few days later, the patient was admitted to the emergency department with progressive gait disturbance and speech difficulties. He had no clincial symptoms for auto-immune disorders such as a systemic lupus erythematodes or generalized vasculitis. Corticosteroid treatment was initiated and provided partial relief only. MRI demonstrated progression of the newly irradiated lesion , whereas extracerebral masses remained stable. The progressive brain lesion was surgically removed and subjected to neuropathological examination.
Histopathological analysis revealed necrotizing encephalitis with no evidence of metastatic lung cancer . The dimensions correlated with the radiographic size of the lesion (diameter approximately 3.3 cm). Staining for cytokeratins (CK22), performed on all paraffin embedded specimens was negative . A high perivascular density of CD45 positive cells was found with predominance of PD-1 positive T cells over B cells (CD20, PD-1, CD4 and CD8 staining, Fig.). Staining of CD68 demonstrated accompanying resorptive changes of the brain tissue . We also found a predominance of CD8 positive T cells over CD4 positive T cells . PD-L1 expressing cells were sparse . Further analysis of infectious diseases including Toxoplasma were negative (not shown). Parallel panel sequencing (Oncomine™ Comprehensive Cancer Panel, Thermo Fisher) was performed on the initial lung biopsy as well as on DNA extracted from the necrotizing encephalitis. Most prevalent mutations identified in the primary tumor and present in ATM, TP53, and NOTCH1 could not be detected in the brain lesion. This result confirms our histological findings, making it unlikely that tumor cells had been present in the biopsied brain region. We hypothesized that the brain lesion was the consequences of an autoimmune phenomenon during PD-1 blockade.
To evaluate for a potential autoimmune syndrome, we screened for anti-neuronal autoantibodies, as well as antinuclear antibodies (ANA). No antibodies against neuronal antigens (i.e., Hu, Yo, Ri, CV2, Ma1, Ma2/Ta, and amphiphysin, NMDA, GAD65) could be detected, but high titers of antinuclear anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La antibodies were found (>240 U/mL, reference <10 U/mL). High antibody titers against SSA/Ro (Ro52, Ro60) were already found in serum samples that were taken before the initiation of anti-PD-1 treatment. Inflammatory chemokines and cytokines in serum were measured by a flow cytometry bead assay that allows measurement of 13 inflammatory chemokines or cytokines simultaneously (both from Biolegend). Binding of chemokines/cytokines to the beads were measured by a Fortessa analyzer (BD Biosciences). Multiplex analysis of serum samples showed a measurable level of TNFα at the time point when the encephalitis was diagnosed (25.4 pg/mL). At other time points, the TNFα level was below the detection limit. Measurement of inflammatory chemokines showed an increase of blood levels upon treatment initiation with anti-PD-1 antibody including CCL11, IP-10, and MIP-3α . Only MIP-1β and IL-8 were increased at the time point of resection of the encephalitic lesion . The increase in inflammatory chemokines and also TNFα in our patient supported the presence of an inflammatory process. Moreover, when histological cerebellum sections from an unrelated healthy control individual were incubated with patient’s serum taken at the time point when the vasculitis was diagnosed, a strong staining of the endothelial layers of cerebellar vessels was found . Testing of control cerebellar sections with control serum or patient’s serum before nivolumab treatment showed no staining . However, increasing concentrations with pre-PD-1 serum from the patient led to some but overall weaker endothelial staining (not shown) indicating that the anti-vascular antibodies were present before PD-1 blockade, but the titer was lower.
The patient’s neurological symptoms rapidly improved after excision of the lesion. Nivolumab treatment was stopped and corticosteroids were tapered over the course of two months. Follow-up imaging of head and chest showed slowly progressive pulmonary lesions and a new neocortical contrast agent-enhancing lesion, which was asymptomatic at the time of imaging. This new lesion was interpreted as encephalitis, and corticosteroids were administered again. In parallel, a second line chemotherapy with docetaxel was initiated. After three cycles of chemotherapy, restaging showed a partial response of the lung lesions and a regression of the cerebral lesion.