Our patient, a 71-year-old man, was admitted to our emergency department. He initially presented to his general practitioner with dizziness and palpitations, and was urgently transferred to hospital when his Holter electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated hundreds of episodes of nsVT. The patient's past medical history demonstrated a high cardiovascular risk profile, and included diabetes mellitus and hypertension. He had also previously been diagnosed with blue toe syndrome and peripheral arterial occlusive disease, for which he had previously been administered prostavasin therapy. No cardiac disease was known so far. A clinical examination, including a cardiovascular examination, was performed and was unremarkable. No relevant laboratory abnormalities were present. Continuous ECG monitoring and a 12 channel Holter ECG were performed, to detect the origin of the arrhythmia (, ). Multiple monomorphic, nsVTs were documented. The origin of the triggering ventricular extrasystole (VES) was septal. Based on the hospital’s own localization algorithm (adapted from), the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) aortic cusp region was the most likely origin of the nsVT. In a first step an echocardiography was performed. During this exam, an episode of an nsVT was recorded, including the triggering VES. All other values during sinus rhythm (SR) were normal (except a borderline left ventricular global longitudinal peak systolic strain and an aortic sclerosis) (see , ). During coronary angiography, one-vessel disease was revealed with a 70% obstruction of the left anterior descending artery and a 90% obstruction of the first diagonal branch. Both lesions were treated using in total three drug-eluting stents. After this procedure, no residual obstruction was left. Antiarrhythmic medication was optimized by intensifying the existing bisoprolol therapy and adding magnesium. During the three-channel 24 h Holter ECG after intervention only one further nsVT was documented. After a short monitoring period, the patient was supplied with a LifeVest® and was discharged. In the follow-up, the nsVTs reappeared after 6 weeks and the patient had to be sent to a specialized centre. In total, three electrophysiological studies were performed. Two endocardial approaches failed to terminate the arrhythmia. Finally, the arrhythmogenic LVOT area was treated by an epicardial ablation and an antiarrhythmic medication with sotalol instead of bisoprolol.