A 20-year-old man presented to the outpatient department with a palpable mass in the posterior aspect of his knee for the past 3 years. The mass was painless, gradual in onset, and slowly progressed to a size of 10*9 cm when he presented to the outpatient department. The patient had difficulty in squatting for the last 3 months. On local examination, the mass was non-tender, had soft-to-firm consistency, well-defined edges, was smooth, and non-movable with no visible or palpable pulsations. The mass was non-reducible and was not fixed to the overlying skin. Overlying skin showed no signs of local inflammation. Knee flexion was slightly decreased due to the mass effect of swelling with associated discomfort. Distal pulsations were symmetric with no neural deficit.
Lateral plain radiography of the right knee showed a diffuse, non-specific soft-tissue density, with no evidence of calcifications or connection to the underlying bone. Local ultrasonography revealed a heterogeneously hypoechoic lesion of size 9.6*8.6 cm in the right popliteal fossa increased with internal vascularity and signs of inflammation. No associated knee effusion was noted. Due to financial constraints, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could not be performed. The patient was counseled about the importance of obtaining an MRI; informed consent was taken to proceed with an excisional biopsy.
An excisional biopsy was performed using a posterior approach. The mass was located between the two heads of gastrocnemius, under the superficial fascia . It was encapsulated with no major adhesions, and separation from the surrounding soft tissue was relatively easy using blunt dissection considering the proximity of the mass to nearby neurovascular structures. A solid and brownish-red mass was excised and sent to a pathologist for further histopathological examination. The mass was well circumscribed and the cut surface showed gray-white myxoid change with a yellowish fatty center with interspersed vascularity . On histopathology, spindle-shaped fibroblasts arranged in fascicular pattern showing “a tissue culture appearance.” Cells were slender, and elongated with oval nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Intervening collagenous stroma shows myxoid changes with a few blood vessels and focal inflammation .
There were no neurological or vascular complications post-operatively. Three months post-operatively, the patient showed clinical improvement in symptoms and could squat without discomfort.