A 50-year-old woman presented in the outpatient department with severe abdominal pain, especially in the left iliac region, for the past six months. The pain was dull aching in nature and continuous and used to be relieved with oral analgesics. The patient also complained of shortness of breath, which worsened in the supine position and was eased in the sitting posture. She also stated that she had lost her appetite and lost a large amount of weight. There was no history of vaginal bleeding. There was no previous medical or surgical history.
On physical examination, the patient looked cachexic with mild degree of pallor with stable vital parameters. Abdomen examination showed a mass of 20 weeks of gestation size with irregular surface, heterogeneous consistency, tender, margins well defined but the lower pole was usually not reached, with restricted mobility. Ascites was present and positive shifting dullness was noted. A vaginal examination showed nodules on the right posterior fornix, tenderness was present. Left fornix was free.
The patient was advised for contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the abdomen and pelvis, which revealed a large cystic lesion with peripheral enhancing solid areas in the pelvis in midline, probably arising from the left ovary, a possibility of malignant ovarian lesion . Another heterogeneously enhancing lesion was seen in the right adnexa. The right ovary was not seen separately from the lesion. There was a large ill-defined heterogeneously enhancing central mesenteric lesion with omental extension showing dense calcification, most likely metastatic deposit. Loculated ascites and left-sided moderate pleural effusion with few peripheral lung parenchymal nodules in the right middle and bilateral lower lobes were suggestive of stage 4A of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics system 2014.
CA-125 (cancer antigen 125) value was more than 1000 units/ml. NACT was given to the patient with paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin 675 mg/m2 (area under the curve (AUC)=5-6, calculated by Calvert’s formula). After two cycles of NACT with intervals of three weeks, CA-125 was 452 units/ml. The patient then underwent further four cycles of NACT. CA-125 was repeated, which showed normal values, and CECT was done, which revealed a complex cystic lesion in the pelvis and the infra-umbilical region at midline and para midline locations . A lesion of 2-3 cm thickness and peripherally enhancing solid mass of 8.6 x 5.8 cm in size was displacing the adjacent bowel loop. There was para midline location-significant regression in size of the mass. There was significant regression in ascites.
USG revealed a solid cystic lesion in the left adnexa measuring 5 x 4.2 x 3.6 cm; the solid component showed vascularity. Left ovary not seen separately. Findings were consistent with left ovarian complex cyst-neoplastic etiology. Omental thickening was seen in midline in the epigastric region.
The patient was taken for exploratory laparotomy. A vertical incision of 10 cm was made and the abdomen was opened in layers so as to expose the maximum area. In order to assess the extent of the primary tumor and metastatic disease, the peritoneal cavity and retroperitoneum were thoroughly inspected and palpated. All abdominal viscera were palpated and checked, and adhesions between sigmoid and left corn structures were lysed. Ureters were identified and placed away. Dissection of mass, uterus, cervix, bilateral fallopian tube, and ovaries was done by retroperitoneal approach and sent for frozen section according to which it was labeled as bilateral papillary cystadenocarcinoma. Then retroperitoneal resection was done. Bilateral pelvic lymph nodes were removed and an omentectomy was done. No para-aortic lymph nodes were identified. The bowel was inspected for injury. Drain was inserted and hemostasis was achieved. Rectus was closed with prolene 1-0. All laparotomy sponges and instruments were removed from the abdomen and counted. The abdomen was closed in layers with Vicryl 1. Skin closure was done in layers with Ethilon 2-0 mattress sutures. The patient withstood the procedure satisfactorily and was shifted to the postoperative ward. Specimens were sent for histopathology, which confirmed bilateral serous cystadenocarcinoma. The specimen is shown in Figure .
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 12 after suture removal and advised to follow up every month for the first three months and then every three months for the next one year. On her last follow-up, the patient was better clinically and had no signs of recurrence.