A 33-year-old male patient presented to a tertiary care hospital with intermittent abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation and numbness of bilateral lower limb extremities, of 3 days duration. He was conservatively managed in a surgical unit as partial intestinal obstruction and was awaiting diagnostic laparoscopy. The patient developed confusion and found to have systemic hypertension, and, therefore, was transferred to a medical ward for further management. He is a non-diabetic and did not have a previous history of hypertension. The drug history revealed usage of over-the-counter analgesics for 6 weeks.
The past medical and surgical history revealed similar neurovisceral attacks requiring five acute hospital admissions over 2 years, which ended up in questionable diagnoses. The sixth acute attack raised the suspicion of an acute porphyria. The first attack in January 2013 led to a diagnosis of appendicitis. Because the symptoms worsened following the surgery an emergency laparoscopic exploration was done. But the exploration revealed no cause to explain the worsening symptoms. The second attack was managed as sinus tachycardia and he was started on beta adrenergic blockers. The third attack which was associated with a fever was conservatively managed for a questionable renal colic. Forth attack was complicated with transient hyponatremia and transiently high serum creatinine levels. These complications were attributed to a questionable interstitial nephritis based on the fact that patient had used 50 mg of diclofenac sodium twice a day for 6 weeks, repeating the prescription given by a general practitioner. Another attack in 2015 was managed as partial intestinal obstruction and diagnostic laparoscopy was done. In all these presentations, findings from the ultra sound scans and diagnostic laparoscopy did not support a diagnosis of intra-abdominal pathology.
On examination he was thin built (BMI = 20 kg/m2) and pale. Brachial blood pressure was 160/90 mmHg. There were scars of previous appendectomy and laparoscopy surgeries on the abdominal, but, otherwise, the abdominal examination was unremarkable. Muscle power was 4/5 in all four limbs (could not move against a good resistance).
The laboratory investigations performed during this admission showed severe hyponatraemia of 115 mmol/L (136–145) with serum osmolality of 255 mOsmol/Kg (275–295) and urine osmolality of 460 mOsmol/Kg (50–1200 mOsmol/Kg). Serum creatinine concentration was 106 µmol/L (80–115) with blood urea level of 20 mg/dL (6–20). Hemoglobin concentration was 8.2 g/dL (13.5–17.5) and the red cell morphology was normochromic and normocytic. The total cholesterol level was 282 mg/dL (5th to 95th centile; 142–258) with LDL fraction of 225 mg/dL (5th to 95th centile; 78–185). Serum ferritin level was 646 ng/mL (20–250). Arterial blood gas analysis was suggestive of a metabolic acidosis. Echocardiogram showed evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy. There were no significant radiological findings in abdominal X-ray film or abdominal ultrasonography. Blood lead concentration was 3 μg/dL (< 5 μg/dL).
A urine sample collected during the acute attack was sent to the Department of Chemical Pathology for biochemical analyses. On standing the urine sample gradually turned dark brown. The Watson and Schwartz test for urinary porphobilinogen (PBG) was positive . Spectrophotometry of urine for total porphyrins showed a “Soret band”. Urine total porphyrin level, calculated using Allen corrected absorbance of the urine sample was 5505.5 nmol/L (< 300 nmol/L). Genetic studies were carried out in an overseas laboratory. The full analysis of HMBS gene was performed by PCR amplification of extracted DNA followed by exon specific primer extension analysis of all exons, exon intron boundaries and promotor regions. The gene analysis revealed a previously reported missense mutation, c.517C>T encoding p.R173W in the HMBS gene. Targeted mutation analysis was performed by PCR amplification of extracted DNA followed by allele specific primer extension analysis, in five first-degree relatives. Among these, four were heterozygous for the same HMBS gene mutation .
Since heme arginate is not available in Sri Lanka the patient was managed only symptomatically. Carbohydrate loading with intravenous dextrose and oral carbohydrates was the only feasible option. All the medications used for symptomatic management were checked for safety in acute porphyrias. Patient was discharged from the ward after symptoms gradually improved over 6 days to a degree that he can be managed as an out-patient. Response to treatment could not be assessed due to unavailability of quantitative tests to measure urinary aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and PBG in Sri Lanka. The patient was educated regarding precipitating factors of acute porphyria. A diagnostic card with information regarding medications to avoid was provided to the patient. Patient was followed up at the clinic with regular renal functions, hemoglobin and blood pressure monitoring. Follow up of the patient over 1 year following diagnosis revealed that patient suffered from two mild attacks which didn’t require in-patient management. Nerve conduction studies were not carried out because neurological symptoms were not observed in-between acute attacks.
Pre-symptomatic relatives who inherited the HMBS mutation were also advised to avoid the trigger factors of acute attacks such as certain medications, fasting, alcohol and hormones. The brother of the proband was counseled regarding the risk of his children inheriting the HMBS mutation and recommended targeted mutation analyses for both children.