A 61-year-old German woman presented to our orthopedic clinic after Felix IV fracture in revision total knee arthroplasty. Two years ago, the patient had undergone revision TKA with a rotating hinge prosthesis complicated by an intraoperative fracture of the tibial tubercle. Screw fixation had been performed, but 3 months later nonunion of the fragment had persisted, resulting in plate osteosynthesis with a one-third tubular plate. After another dislocation of the tibial tubercle, the patient presented to our clinic with anterior knee pain, loss of extension strength, and a feeling of rotational instability. On clinical examination, pressure pain of the proximal tibia, decreased extension strength to Janda 3/5, and inability to raise the extended knee were noticed. This maintained extensor function is the result of an intact medial and lateral retinaculum. The knee’s range of motion was 0–110° of flexion with preserved mediolateral and anterior/posterior stability. X-ray showed the rotation hinge prosthesis without loosening signs, the one-third tubular plate, and the dislocated tibial tubercle fragment indicating persistent Felix IV C fracture .
Reconstruction of the knee joint’s extension system was planned. After preparation of the subcutaneous tissue, the dislocated tibial tubercle appeared surrounded by extensive metallosis presumably induced by the contact between the one-third tubular plate and the tibial prosthesis. Following the removal of the plate, the fragment proved to be necrotic requiring a total extirpation instead of mobilization and refixation. Subsequently, the ventral surface of the tibial prosthesis was exposed . Reconstruction of the extension system should be performed by the implantation of MUTARS attachment tube made of polyethylene terephthalate. Since the tibial prosthesis did not offer any connecting points for the synthetic graft, cement was used as an extender to simultaneously serve as fixing point and to preserve the prosthesis from loosening. Afterwards, the tube was doubled into a laminar sheet and fixed with two cancellous bone screws in the ventral tibia . ORTHOCORD sutures were used to attach the tube to the articular capsule still beyond the patella . Extensive jet lavage was performed before wound closure. Check of patellar tracking was promising; likewise, postoperative X-ray showed regular patella position .
To support the integration of the tube in the surrounding subcutaneous tissue, knee flexion was at first limited to 30° and then escalated to 60° and 90° every 2 weeks with full weight-bearing.
Follow-up was performed after 3 and 10 months. On clinical examination , the patient showed irritant-free skin and soft tissue conditions; no redness or overheating; extension/flexion 0–0–110°; straight-leg raise completely possible; and force level 4/5 on side comparison of the knee stretchers. Active knee stretching with a flexed knee joint was possible without any problems. There was a centered patella run and no subluxation of the patella. Peripheral circulation, motor skills, and sensitivity were intact. X-ray confirmed correct implant position and central patella tracking . The patient was highly pleased by the restored extension function and significantly reduced knee pain.