A 50-year-old woman with no coronary artery disease risk factors had suffered from transient chest pain, dyspnoea, and paroxysmal neck swelling irrespective of emotional stress for ∼15 years . Since the attacks often developed after meals, especially at full stomach, she took care not to eat too much. At the age of 44, she was admitted to the emergency department for the first time due to acute pulmonary oedema following the aforementioned attacks. Urgent cardiac catheterization showed no significant coronary stenosis and typical apical LV ballooning , and finally she was diagnosed as having TTS. Later, at the age of 45 and 49, she developed the same clinical disorder. Interestingly, the LV wall motion abnormality was localized to the basal region at the second admission and diffusely at the last time (no images available). Moreover, during the second admission, acetylcholine (ACh) provocation testing for coronary spasm was performed with negative results. Although local LV asynergy disappeared spontaneously in each hospitalization, she had frequently suffered from the same attacks after meals and was referred to our hospital for further investigation. She did not have any oral medication during the TTS episodes. On admission, she had no subjective symptoms or objective signs in electrocardiogram (ECG) or echocardiographic examinations. However, abdominal ultrasonography for screening purposes detected a right adrenal mass of 35 mm × 35 mm in size and scintigraphy imaging showed high uptake of M-iodobenzylguanidine in the tumour . Furthermore, urinary catecholamine levels (especially normetanephrine) were markedly elevated . Since pheochromocytoma was highly suspected from these data, we paid attention not to perform any contrast studies that could cause adrenal crisis. This tumour was urgently removed surgically and histological diagnosis of norepinephrine-secreting pheochromocytoma was made . Ten days after the operation, when urinary catecholamine levels were normalized , we performed cardiac catheterization and ACh provocation testing. As shown in , intracoronary administration of ACh (20, 50, and 100 μg) into the left coronary artery (LCA) and that of ACh (25 and 50 μg) into the right coronary artery induced epicardial coronary spasm accompanied by chest pain and ischaemic ECG changes. Chest pain, ischaemic ECG changes, and myocardial lactate production were already noted at the timing of administration of 20 μg of ACh into the LCA before the occurrence of epicardial coronary spasm at 100 μg, indicating that microvascular spasm (MVS) preceded epicardial coronary spasm. Thus, we diagnosed that she had both epicardial coronary spasm and MVS, and initiated drug therapy with a calcium antagonist (benidipine 8 mg/day). After discharge from our hospital, she experienced no episode of postprandial attacks and her urinary catecholamine levels remained low, indicating that she was free of catecholamine surges from pheochromocytoma . She again underwent a scheduled follow-up ACh provocation testing at 18 months after the operation. Calcium antagonist was discontinued 72 h before the provocation testing. Interestingly, epicardial coronary spasm was no longer induced, whereas MVS persisted .