A 66-year-old caucasian male, with a past medical history of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, symptomatic persistent AF with a LAAO device compliant on apixaban 5 MG BID, hypertension, stage 2 chronic kidney disease, and coronary artery disease, presented to the university cardiology clinic with fatigue, lightheadedness, and exertional dyspnea. The patient, a retired warehouse worker, had undergone DCCV 10 days prior to symptom onset for which sinus rhythm was restored. The TEE obtained before cardioversion showed a normal ejection fraction with no wall motion abnormalities and no thrombus present on the left atrial appendage .
At the clinic, the patient was found to have reverted back into AF with rapid ventricular response with physical exam remarkable for the patient being tachypenic, in moderate distress, and having an irregularly irregular pulse.
Of note, the patient had his WATCHMAN device implanted about 2 years prior to symptom onset, with a TEE showing successful placement of the device within the left atrial appendage and no thrombus or peridevice leak noted. Forty-five days after implantation, the patient underwent a TEE as part of a routine postwatchman device assessment, which again showed appropriate device positioning with no thrombus or peridevice leak noted.
Given that the patient had reverted back into AF, cardioversion was tenatively planned. At the request of the patient; however, a TEE was obtained prior to cardioversion, which incidentally found a 2 cm×1 cm thrombus visualized in the left atrium above the WATCHMAN device . TEE also was notable for a normal ejection fraction and no wall motion abnormalities. The cardioversion was subsequently canceled and the patient was hospitalized for AF management. The labs obtained on admission were unremarkable. Digoxin was started for rate control and the patient’s home metoprolol was titrated up to 100 MG BID. The patient’s symptoms stabilized and he was discharged on warfarin with enoxaparin bridge and aspirin 81 mg daily.
About one-and-a-half months later, the patient underwent a TEE, which showed a well-seated LAAO device, within the left atrial appendage, and no thrombus or peridevice leak noted . Warfarin was still continued given the patient’s recent history of thrombus while on uninterrupted oral anticoagulation with apixaban, with a tentative plan for an electrophysiology study with AF ablation. The patient’s perspective on his course of events was that of curiosity and confusion regarding how he developed a thrombus, despite being adherent to his anticoagulation regimen, along with an eagerness to resolve his AF.