A 42-year old man suffered from fever, sore throat, mild bilateral headache, and runny nose for 5 days. An acute onset of occipital headache and vertigo occurred one day before admission. He had transient diplopia and confusion for several hours on the day of admission, and received intravenous drip of penicillin. Shortly after the relief of confusion, he experienced dysphagia, hoarseness, as well as ataxia of the left upper and lower extremities. He had no coughing or vomiting during this period. The patient was healthy previously, and denied any head or neck trauma and chiropractic manipulation. He smoked 10 to 15 cigarettes daily, without any use of alcohol or recreational drugs.
On physical examination, his temperature was 37.6°C, pulse 72 beats/min, blood pressure 130/80 mmHg. No remarkable positive signs were detected by the lung, cardiac, and abdominal examinations. Neurologic examination revealed that the pupils were equal and reactive to light, but horizontal nystagmus, hoarse voice and decreased movement of the left soft palate were noticed. He had normal strength in all limbs but decreased pain sensation on the left face and right limbs. In addition, he had left-sided finger-to-nose and heel-knee-shin dysmetria. Neck stiffness was mild, but Kernig's and Brudzinski's signs were not observed.
Admission laboratory studies showed normal serum electrolyte and metabolic panel. The blood count showed 13,760 white blood cells (WBCs) per cubic millimeter with 91% polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN). Coagulation tests and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal. Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody test were negative. High sensitive C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) (3.72 mg/dL) and fibrinogen (4.1 g/L) were elevated. Connective tissue disease work-up was negative. He had normal chest X-ray and electrocardiography. Lumbar puncture on admission showed an opening pressure of 190 mmH2O. It was a traumatic tap, so three serial samples of fluid were taken. Being clear and colorless, the third one was analyzed. The CSF study showed 84 WBCs per cubic millimeter with 90% lymphomonocyte and 10% PMN, 236 red blood cells per cubic millimeter, normal glucose concentration (3.3 mmol/L), increased protein concentration (744 mg/L), increased IgA and IgG concentration (11.0 mg/L and 38.3 mg/L respectively), and normal IgM level (0.23 mg/L). The IgG index was 78%. CSF cytology, smear for acid-fast bacilli, Gram stain and Indian ink were all negative. Viral immunological reactions were negative (herpes simplex virus I and II, Epstein Barr virus and cytomegalovirus), so were CSF polymerase chain reactions for enterovirus, herpes simplex virus I and II.
CT of the head and electroencephalography were normal. T2-weighted MRI of the brain on the second day showed hyperintense signal in the left lateral medulla and narrowing of the lumen of the left vertebral artery. DWI images also showed hyperintense signal in the left lateral medulla and hyperintense signal of left inferior turbinate, suggesting medullary infarction and rhinitis . DSA showed focal luminal dilatation involving left V4 segment of the artery just proximal to posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) and insufficient blood flow to its distal portion. Dissection of the left vertebral artery at the level of V4 segment was confirmed .
Intravenous heparin was administered to the patient. After 24 hours of treatment, his vertigo was relieved. Ataxia and headache alleviated by day 4. He was discharged 10 days later after admission with only symptom of dysphagia. At one-month follow-up, the patient recovered completely, and repeated CSF study was normal.