A Chinese 3-year-old girl, who had normal intelligence and an unremarkable medical history and family history, was hospitalized in June 2022 because she was suffering from the terrible pain in the lower limbs and abnormal gait for 4 days. She had no recent vaccination, obvious digestive, or respiratory symptoms before the onset of the symptoms. On admission, physical examinations showed positivity for the following main nervous system signs: nuchal rigidity; bilateral ptosis; facial nerve weakness (showing complete disappearances of frontal wrinkles and a decrease depth of the bilateral nasolabial sulcus), which was slightly more prominent on the right side; hand tremors and severe truncal ataxia resulting in poor balance and head control; low muscular tension; areflexia in all limbs; and Romberg’s sign. The muscle strength of the bilateral distal and proximal limbs was grade II and grade III, respectively. In the hospital for 5 days, she had hoarseness, ptyalism, and dysphagia, with no influence on slowly drinking and eating fluid food. In the 11 days of her illness, her condition becomes worse, with undergoing urinary and fecal incontinence and excessive sweating. The findings of cranial MRI and cervical and thoracic spinal MRI were normal. Early in the disease course, nerve conduction studies (NCS) findings showed that the absence of compound muscle action potentials (CMAP) in the right facial nerve, the amplitude of the distal CMAPs was obviously decayed in the left facial nerve, and the bilateral tibial and common fibular nerves, the CMAP amplitude was reduced, the motor nerve conduction velocity (m-NCV) was slowed, sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) could not be detected in the common fibular nerve, and F-wave latency and H-wave absence were observed . Lumbar puncture was performed 1 week after onset, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed that the protein level was 1.2 g/L (normal values 0.2–0.4 g/L), while the white blood cell count was 3 × 106/L (normal values 0–5 × 106/L). Her acute-phase serum and CSF samples were investigated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for anti-ganglioside antibodies (for sulfatides, GM1, GM2, GM3, GM4, GD1a, GD1b, GD2, GD3, GT1a, GT1b, and GQ1b), including IgG and IgM. Only anti-GM4 IgG antibodies were detected, and the other 11 antigen tests had negative results. A clinical diagnosis of overlapping MFS/GBS was made based on the patient’s clinical presentation. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy at the dosage of 2.0 g/kg was immediately initiated on the seventh day of the course of disease, followed by rehabilitation therapy. The neurological symptoms were gradually resolved by 1 month from the onset of symptoms in the sequence of neuropathic pain, ataxia, autonomic dysfunction, cranial nerve palsy, peripheral nerve paralysis. During an ill period of 3 months, her motor strength was 4/5 bilaterally in all limbs, with a complete improvement in her multiple cranial nerve palsies.