A 37 year old female presented to her primary care physician with nonspecific abdominal pain. She underwent CT imaging that revealed bilateral ovarian masses and ascites. Preoperative CA125 was the only tumor marker examined and it was within normal limits. A presumptive diagnosis of ovarian cancer was made and she underwent exploratory laparotomy which revealed macroscopic peritoneal metastases to ovaries, omentum and pelvic peritoneum. At that time total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingoopherectomy, pelvic lymph node sampling, partial omentectomy, appendectomy and evacuation of mucinous ascites was performed. Final pathology revealed low grade mucinous adenocarcinoma in all specimens, arising from an appendiceal primary. The patient received no additional therapy and was followed clinically. She developed recurrent abdominal pain approximately 2 years later. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed progressive nodularity in the mesentery and peritoneal surfaces consistent with recurrent disease. This was further evaluated with a laparoscopy, which revealed mucinous tumor implants along the anterior abdominal wall, right retroperitoneum, diaphragm, and remaining omentum . At this time, the patient was referred to the University of Cincinnati for consideration of cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal hyperthermic chemoperfusion. The patient's past medical history was significant only for a seizure disorder which was managed by anticonvulsant medication and an implanted vagus nerve stimulator. Preoperative CA19-9 was elevated at 59, while CEA and CA-125 were normal. The patient was felt to be an appropriate candidate and underwent exploration. At surgery, extensive disease was noted over the peritoneal surfaces. A complete cytoreduction was achieved requiring, right colectomy, splenectomy, cholecystectomy, omentectomy, and perionectomies of the diaphragms, anterior abdominal wall, and pelvis. Tumor nodules were excised from the small bowel and large bowel mesentery. The cytoreductive portion of the operation was completed in approximately 210 minutes. Per our current practice protocol, a 90 minute perfusion was performed using an inflow temperature of 44°C, with peritoneal surface temperatures averaging 40.5–41.5°C. Intraperitoneal temperatures were measured via four temperature probes, one within the liver parenchyma, and three within separate quadrants of the peritoneum. Core temperature was recorded via the bladder and esophageal temperature probes. Per our standard protocol, the carrier solution was peritoneal dialysis fluid (2.5%). The patient's maximum recorded core body temperature during the procedure was 38.7°C and the maximum recorded liver temperature was 38.8°C. Mitomycin C was delivered using a total dose of 10 mg/L perfusate, delivered in divided doses of 7 mg/L at initiation and redosed after 45 minutes at 3 mg/L. A total dose of 45 mg was delivered in this patient. During the operation, the patient had no significant electrolyte abnormalities aside from the expected glucose elevation seen during the perfusion period. The maximum serum glucose was 355 mg/dL and the lowest serum sodium was 135. The operation was generally uneventful; no blood transfusions were required and the patient was transferred to the ICU in stable condition. Postoperatively, all serum electrolytes were normal and albumin was 3.4 mg/dl compared with 4.3 mg/dl, preoperatively. The patient was easily arousable and followed commands appropriately. However, approximately 4 hrs later, the patient complained of headache and right eye pain. Her headache was treated with analgesics, however 3 hours later, she was found to be tachypenic, bradycardic, and hypotensive, and was unresponsive with fixed, dilated pupils. She was emergently intubated and resuscitated. After approximately 15 minutes, she regained consciousness, and responded appropriately to commands. Her pupils returned to 3 mm and because reactive. Neurology was consulted and she was loaded with Dilantin due to her history of seizure disorder. An urgent CT scan was ordered. On route to the CT scanner, she once again became bradycardic and hypotensive with fixed, dilated pupils. The CT scan revealed diffuse cerebral edema . ICP monitoring revealed pressures of 70–90 mmHg. Mannitol was used in an attempt to lower intracranial pressure without success. EEG was consistent with diffuse brain dysfunction. A brain death protocol revealed that she had suffered brain death and care was subsequently withdrawn. At autopsy, diffuse cerebral edema with tonsillar herniation was noted . No pathologic findings were present to indicate the cause of the cerebral edema. The final pathology on all resected specimens reconfirmed the diagnosis of mucinous adenocarcinoma .