A 19-year-old female Caucasian patient was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia at the age of 15. Treatment was initiated according to the acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)-10 protocol. A venous access port for intravenous infusion of chemotherapy was surgically placed with the tip of the catheter in her superior vena cava via her left subclavian vein. Treatment was continued for two years.
Ten months after her final treatment with chemotherapy, our patient relapsed and induction chemotherapy was administered according to the ALL-R3 protocol. This was complicated by renal failure and encephalopathy and therefore mechanical ventilation and dialysis were initiated. After clinical recovery, her treatment was switched to an alternative re-induction regimen.
During follow up treatment with 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate, cytarabine, idarubicin, etoposide and cyclophosphamide, our patient presented to the outpatient clinic with a fever and general malaise. Blood work revealed a C-reactive protein level of 462 mg/L. The differential diagnosis included sinusitis, deep neck infection and line infection. Blood cultures were negative. A CT scan of her neck was ordered, which revealed a submental abscess extending into the submandibular space. Her skin was incised and the underlying abscess was drained.
Our patient’s fever persisted, and as the central venous catheter was still in situ it was seen as the only possible remaining cause of infection. The catheter was surgically removed without any problems, three and a half years after placement. Cultures of the catheter tip were negative, however her fever persisted and she still showed signs of ongoing infection. This inflammatory response, possibly caused by immune reconstitution, was treated with colchicine and Indomethacin. Her fever subsided and the colchicine and Indomethacin were subsequently stopped, even though her C-reactive protein level remained high (169 mg/L). Three months after removal of the indwelling central venous catheter, she underwent a stem cell transplantation.
During stem cell transplantation, clinical suspicion arose for deep venous thrombosis of her left arm. A CT scan revealed a hyperdense structure in her left innominate vein, with thrombosis . After a conferral with the radiologist and clinicians, it was concluded that this hyperdense lesion was a foreign body, most likely the tip of the central venous catheter which had previously been (incompletely) removed. However, on conventional chest radiographs no foreign body was visible. Due to this inconsistency, three-dimensional reconstructions were done; it became clear that this ‘hyperdense line’ was of variable density, had an irregular surface and the continuity was interrupted at certain points . It was now concluded that these hyperdense structures were calcifications that had developed after line removal in an old (infected) thrombus in her left innominate vein, which resembled a foreign body. She was treated with low molecular weight heparin and antibiotics, after which her fever subsided.