We report the case of a 48-year-old female who checked into the emergency room (ER) having experienced pain in her chest and left shoulder since the previous evening. The patient was of normal weight and reported a positive family history for coronary artery disease, but denied other cardiovascular risk factors such as hypercholesterinaemia, hypertension, diabetes, or nicotine consumption. The patient had no past medical history and was taking no medication. At presentation, her vital signs were stable. The physical and cardiovascular examination revealed no abnormalities. The chest pain receded after one gram of paracetamol.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed in the ER at presentation, showing inverted T-waves in II, III, aVF, V4, V5, and V6 . Bedside echocardiography revealed hypokinesis in the apical inferior segment of the left ventricle. The laboratory results showed significantly increased values for high-sensitivity troponin I (upward of 25 000 pg/mL, reference range: 0.0–51.4 pg/mL) and creatine kinase (CK) (540 U/L, reference range: 0–145 U/L). Therefore, a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction was suspected, and the local interventional cardiology centre was contacted to perform coronary angiography (CAG).
The patient was swabbed before transfer to exclude a SARS-CoV-2 infection, as per the Medical University of Innsbruck (MUI) guidelines during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic; surprisingly she tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on the real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay. After further questioning, she reported having experienced isolated throat discomfort since the beginning of February, but denied contact with individuals with confirmed infections or flu-like symptoms; she also denied fever, cough, malaise, dyspnoea, or anosmia.
After further discussion with the cardiology department, the ER team revised the working diagnosis to viral myocarditis and referred the patient to our infectious diseases ward, where she was promptly isolated and received cardiac and haemodynamic monitoring. We started therapy with acetylsalicylic acid, prophylactic-dose low-molecular-weight heparin, a statin, and a proton-pump inhibitor.
A computed tomography coronary angiography (CTCA) was performed to exclude a coronary origin for the complaints and for the laboratory and ECG abnormalities, which revealed no significant coronary obstruction (Coronary Artery Disease Reporting and Data System: 0; Coronary Artery Calcium – Data and Reporting System: 0) .
To further confirm the diagnosis of viral myocarditis, a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was arranged. Surprisingly, CMR showed features of myocardial oedema restricted to the mid-ventricular to apical territory of the right coronary artery (RCA), as evidenced on T2 short tau inversion recovery sequence (signal intensity ratio of myocardium over skeletal muscle 2.3, ) and on T1 maps (increased native T1 of 1313 ms at inferior wall; reference value 980 ms, ). Based on subendocardial to partially transmural late gadolinium enhancement in the mid-ventricular to apical inferior wall, an acute myocardial infarction was diagnosed .
Meanwhile, troponin T and CK values decreased , and episodes of mild chest pain were sufficiently controlled with paracetamol.
After further communication with our interventional cardiology department the diagnosis was revised to a posterior MINOCA; the cardiologists advised against a CAG, due to the absence of coronary obstruction on the CTCA scan.
Further diagnostics with cardiac positron emission tomography–computed tomography showed evidence of reduced metabolic activity in the area affected by the infarction .
We prescribed dual anti-platelet therapy and an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor. A beta-blocker was not started due to a resting heart rate of 60 beats per minute. After two negative SARS-CoV-2 swab results in over 24 h and absence of COVID-19 typical symptoms, the patient was no longer considered infectious and could be assigned to a cardiac rehabilitation program. Follow-up echocardiography 2 days after discharge revealed a normal ejection fraction (58%) despite persistent inferior apical akinesia.