A 60-year-old female sheep herder from Eritrea presented to St. Paul’s Hospital Millennium Medical College ophthalmology department with a 3-month history of painless left eye protrusion associated with progressive decreased vision of the left eye. Otherwise, she had an unremarkable history. Visual acuity in the right eye was 6/18 and counting finger in front of the eye on the left eye. Physical examination revealed a 4 mm discrepancy on exophthalmometry between the two eyes with a proptosis of 21 mm on the left eye. On fundus examination, there was a tortuous temporal arcade and grade 4 papilledema in the left eye. Otherwise, there was an unremarkable finding. Laboratory investigation revealed a normal complete blood count. Computerized tomography (CT) of the brain and orbit showed a well-defined thin-walled non-enhancing fluid density cystic mass in the left orbital cavity measuring 2.6 cm by 2.0 cm by 1.9 cm with compression and lateral displacement of the globe as well as compression and stretching of the optic nerve. The left medial rectus muscle was not clearly and separately visualized from the lesion. There were no osseous lytic or sclerotic changes of the bony orbit. The CT scan was suggestive of a hydatid cyst of the orbit. Abdominal ultrasound and chest X-ray findings were unremarkable.

The patient was given albendazole 400mg orally twice per day for 2 weeks and re-evaluated. Subsequently, she was taken to the operating room with an impression of a left medial mass secondary to Hydatid cyst. The cyst was approached through a medial anterior orbitotomy. Intraoperatively, a cystic mass attached to the inferior aspect of the medial rectus (MR) was identified. The cyst ruptured during manipulation and a clear fluid came out. A paper white cyst lining was removed in piecemeal and the external capsule was excised with care not to severely damage the MR muscle. Then, the surgical field was irrigated with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution followed by copious normal saline solution, and the tissue was sent for histopathological examination. Biopsy result revealed an acellular laminated membrane with germinal epithelium and a daughter cyst with protoscolices and surrounding soft tissue consisting of chronic inflammatory cells confirming the diagnosis of hydatid cyst. Cytology from cyst fluid showed a hemorrhagic background with no cells.

On her first postoperative day, she had lid edema with limited adduction of the left eye and mild ocular pain. Oral albendazole 400mg twice daily was continued postoperatively. Follow-up on her 7th post-operative day showed that there was mild improvement in the adduction deficit and lid swelling had resolved. Subsequent follow-up on her 21st postoperative day showed left eye visual acuity of counting fingers at two meters and the adduction deficit improved to −2. Furthermore, the optic disc edema also resolved to grade 1. However, the patient moved back to Eritrea, and we were not able to follow the subsequent progress of the patient beyond the first 3 weeks.