A 9-year-old girl was admitted due to repeated loss of consciousness, concomitant with a pale face, palpitations, and convulsions, which had persisted for 2 years and had been aggravated during the previous 2 months. These symptoms occurred automatically. The patient denied experiencing any sweating, nausea, vomiting, trembling, or an obvious sense of hunger before meals. The patient was previously misdiagnosed with epilepsy in another hospital, but no abnormal findings were detected on a 24-h electroencephalogram at our hospital. Her abdominal perfusion CT showed a highly perfused nodule within the pancreatic tail; A magnetic resonance scan confirmed the location of this nodule and indicated that its size was 11.6 × 13.2 mm . Additionally, 68Ga-exendin 4 PET-CT showed a region in the pancreatic tail with abnormally high metabolism and overexpression of the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor . Lab testing showed a low fasting blood glucose (BG) of 2.2 mmol/L (reference range: 3.9–6.1 mmol/L), a high proinsulin level of 4455.9 pg/mL (reference range: 30–180 ng/mL), a normal C-peptide level of 2.56 ng/mL (reference range: 0.8–4.2 ng/mL), a serum insulin level of 15.35 μIU/mL (reference range: 5.2–17.2 μIU/mL), and a gastrin level of 92.6 pg/mL (reference range: < 100 pg/mL). These results confirmed a diagnosis of insulinoma. Imaging examination showed no abnormalities indicative of parathyroid adenoma or malignancy in the pituitary or adrenal glands. Lab testing showed normal levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH), blood calcium, phosphate, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 24-h urinary free cortisol (24 hUFC), and serum cortisol. Her luteinizing hormone (LH) level was 0.24 IU/L (reference range: 2.12–10 IU/L during the follicular phase), which was considered related to her age.
Preoperative preparation: To avoid recurrent symptoms and to maintain her fasting BG at a tolerably low level, the patient was given regular snacks before bedtime. BG can be controlled at a level between 50 and 60 mg/dL preoperatively.
Surgical procedure: The patient underwent minimally invasive insulinoma enucleation surgery under the Da Vinci robot-assisted system with intraoperative ultrasound (IOUS) connected. The patient was put in a head-low, feet-high and left-lateral position. The robotic system was positioned at the head of the patient, while the assistant surgeon stood between the patient’s legs. Abdominal exploration via laparoscopy was conducted, and no obvious abnormalities were found. The robotic lens and operating arms were docked. The gastrocolic ligament was dissected with an ultrasonically activated scalpel. The head of the pancreas was exposed by grasping the colon downward and lifting the stomach. Towards the tail of the pancreas, we separated and exposed the spleen. The surgeon then controlled the ultrasound probe, exploring the tumor from the pancreatic tail to the head and the uncinated process with the assistance of a prograsp clamp. A quasi-circular, hypoechoic lesion was found at the end of the pancreas with a diameter of approximately 10 mm and a clear boundary. We marked the normal pancreatic tissue around the lesion with an electrotome, and while dividing the pancreas sequentially, suction was used continually to visualize the tumor capsule. Precise positioning was achieved using IOUS, and the tumor was completely resected along the capsule . A peritoneal drainage tube was placed. The surgery went well, lasting 65 min (skin to skin), and the volume of intraoperative bleeding was 5 mL. Intraoperative BG is documented in Table .
After surgery, the patient was given liquid diet on POD2. The drain was clean and was removed on POD4, and the patient gradually resumed her normal diet. She was discharged to home on POD6. During the following 1.5 years, the patient had no recurrence of the disease. No postoperative complication occurred, such as pancreatic fistula or pancreatic function deficiency.
Pathological examination showed that the tumor was a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (Grade 2 with a Ki-67 index of 4%) . This tumor was positive for CgA, Syn, and AE1/AE3 . Insulin staining was partially positive , while gastrin, glucagon, and somatostatin staining were negative .
Sanger-directed sequencing for the MEN1 gene mutation was performed on a peripheral blood sample, revealing a homozygous pathogenic mutation of c247_250delCTGT (p.Ile85Serfs*33) . This point mutation was also detected in the frozen tissue of the patient.