An 8-year-old male with a history of autism spectrum disorder presented to our hospital with idiopathic right posterior neck pain and torticollis. The patient had no sign of infection around the neck or neurological disorders, such as numbness or muscle weakness. The ADI was 3.6 mm in the plain lateral radiograph of the cervical spine . Plain computed tomography (CT) showed that the atlas was rotated 32° to the right relative to the axis . The patient was diagnosed with AARF type II according to the Fielding classification, and Glisson traction therapy was initiated. After 26 days of Glisson traction, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which revealed a C1–2 rotation of 19°. Reduction under general anesthesia was performed; however, the procedure was complicated by soft tissue tension associated with the chronic nature of the condition. After reduction, the rotation angle of C1–2 was 15° and was not sufficiently improved. Therefore, Glisson traction was continued for an additional 3 weeks. An MRI scan after 3 weeks of Glisson traction revealed an improved rotation angle for C1–2 of 11° , preserved atlantoaxial distance, and no signs of cervical canal stenosis. By the end of the 3-week Glisson traction, 3 months had passed since AARF onset. The patient was discharged with a neck collar and rehabilitated at an outpatient clinic. Although there were no traumatic episodes, a plain lateral radiograph of the cervical spine taken 2 months after discharge showed that the ADI had increased to 8.9 mm. MRI revealed mild spinal cord compression at the C1 level, and the patient was diagnosed with ASS .
Since the rotation angle of C1–2 improved to 5° on CT, the AARF appeared to be improving; unfortunately, atlantoaxial instability was present . Considering the risk of fatal complications due to progressive dislocation, posterior cervical fusion was performed. After wearing the halo vest, the patient’s ADI was 4.3 mm. C1–2 fusion was performed using C1 lateral mass screw and C2 pars screw and connected to the rod in situ .
Post-operative CT revealed improved spinal canal stenosis and he was discharged 8 days post-operatively. In the 6 months since the operation, the patient has progressed well.