On 7 March, 2018, a 73-year-old man, HIV-negative, was hospitalized to the local county hospital for 2-month chest pain, low-grade fever, asthenia, anorexia and weight loss. The patient had history of type II diabetes mellitus with regular administration of gliclazide, but efficacy was poor. Physical examination revealed body temperature 36.7 °C, pulse rate 96 beats/min, blood pressure 133/83 mmHg, respiratory rate 20/min, oxygen saturation 96% and mildly yellow skin and sclera. Respiratory system, cardiovascular system, neurological system and abdomen were normal. Laboratory examination showed anemia (hemoglobin 114 g/L), abnormal liver function (alanine aminotransferase 57 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 48 U/L, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 818 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 671 U/L, total bilirubin 44 μmol/L) and elevated cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9, 165 U/ml). The interferon-γ release assay test was negative. The skull computerized tomography (CT) showed lacunar infarction in bilateral basal ganglia. The thorax CT revealed multiple round or round-like nodules with variable sizes scattered throughout both lungs, suggestive of metastatic lung disease . Abdominal enhancement CT showed that a mass at the pancreatic head was obviously strengthened in the arterial phase, and the pancreatic duct and intrahepatic bile duct was slightly dilated . Taken together, all examination results were strongly suspected of lung metastasis, which was originated from the pancreatic head or intestinal origin. However, TB infection could not be excluded completely. The patient denied further biopsy, and chose to accept experimental anti-TB therapy with rifampin and isoniazid. After one month, chest CT showed that lung lesions were not absorbed. Laboratory test showed that CA19-9 sharply increased, up to 1167 U/ml. Sputum smear for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) was negative. The doctors in the local county hospital excluded TB infection and proposed gastrointestinal malignant tumors combined with lung metastasis. The patient family was in deep sorrow and prepared to give up.
On 7 May, 2018, his daughter persuaded the patient to the provincial hospital for further diagnosis. Laboratory examination revealed hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 70 μmol/L), CA19-9 832 U/ml, cancer antigen 125 141 U/ml, neuron-specific enolase 22.98 ng/ml, angiotensin-converting enzyme 178 U/L and serum (1,3)-β-D-glucan 235 pg/ml. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET) scan showed focal high uptake in the multiple organs, including lung, liver, pancreas, spleen, gallbladder neck , which suggested benign disease (especially TB). The patient accepted the endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography to relieve hyperbilirubinemia, which was caused by bile duct obstruction. Biopsy from brushed biliary cell indicated no malignant tumor. A CT scan-guided transthoracic needle biopsy of the nodule at the left upper lobe was performed and the histopathology showed coagulative necrosis combining with granulomatous inflammation. AFB staining was positive and Periodic Acid-Schiff staining was negative . In the meanwhile, qPCR for MTB DNA showed 4900 copy/ml in the sputum. Thus, the diagnosis of TB infection was definite. The patient then accepted anti-TB regimen, including isoniazid (300 mg/once a day [QD]), rifampicin (450 mg/QD), ethambutol (750 mg/QD), pyrazinamide (1500 mg/QD), levofloxacin (600 mg/QD) for three months, followed by isoniazid (300 mg/QD) and rifampicin (450 mg/QD) for another nine months.
On 2 September, 2018, almost four months after hospitalization to our hospital, the thorax CT revealed that the lung lesions were absorbed significantly . After one year of treatment, continuous clinical and radiological improvement was observed, and the drugs were then withdrawn. The patient was asymptomatic at the follow-up of half year after withdrawal.