On Apr 16, 2015 a 52-year-old male was referred from a local clinic because of a radiolucent lesion in the left mandibular angle area. The patient showed pain in the left buccal area and had numbness on the left lower lip area. He received an operation under general anesthesia because of pneumothorax in 1998. He had been diagnosed with pneumoconiosis in 2001. Because the symptoms of pneumoconiosis were aggravated from 2011, he received medications, such as ozagrel, erdostein, acebrophyline, and Synatura® (Ahngook Pharm, Seoul, Korea), intermittently. Synatura® is an herbal medicine mixed with ivy leaf and coptis stalk. From February 2015, he received olmesartan (an angiotensin receptor antagonist) for the treatment of hypertension. From March 2015, he received atrovastatin calcium for the treatment of hyperlipidemia. He did not receive irradiation of the jaw regions. From a computerized tomogram examination, we observed that the lesion was localized in the left first and second molar area below the inferior alveolar canal . The lingual cortex adjacent to the lesion showed an erosive change . Based on the radiologic findings, the lesion was primarily diagnosed as Stafne’s bone cyst.
An excisional biopsy of the left mandibular body was performed using the submandibular approach. Yellow colored semi-solid materials were removed from the bone marrow cavity . The lesion was poorly encapsulated, and the surrounding cortical bone had become thin but appeared to be intact . After removing the necrotic tissue, the wound was closed layer by layer. The removed specimen was sent for pathological examination. The removed specimen was fixed in 10 % neutral formalin and sectioned at a thickness of 4 μm. The microsections were routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), and we also performed immunohistochemical (IHC) staining using anti-sera of lysozyme (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), matrix metalloprotease-1 (MMP-1, Santa Cruz Biotech, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), MMP-2 (Santa Cruz Biotech), MMP-3 (Santa Cruz Biotech), hypoxia inducible protein alpha (HIFα; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF; Abcam), osteoprotegerin (OPG; Santa Cruz Biotech), and the receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL; Santa Cruz Biotech). IHC staining was performed using the indirect triple sandwich method. The use of the present biopsy specimen was filed in the Department of Oral Pathology, Gangneung-Wonju National University Dental Hospital, and was approved by our institutional review board (IRB2015-7). The sections of the embedded specimens were stained with HE. The specimens contained inflammatory cells and fibroblastic cells. Variable sized woven bone was observed with a cholesterol cleft appearance . The marrow stromal tissue was diffusely fibrosed and filled with fatty bubble-like materials and was infiltrated with a large number of macrophages . Most of the adipocytes were destroyed and disappeared, resulting in the replacement of the fatty necrosis with variable sized vacuolated empty spaces. There also appeared to be several foci of the cholesterol slits, where fatty materials were also removed during the histological procedures . Stromal fibrosis increased in areas lacking vascular channels and advanced to the osteolytic trabecular bones, which showed irregular and rudimentary bony trabeculae with no signs of osteoid deposition and bisphosphonate-related multiple reversal lines .
In the immunohistochemistry analysis, the marrow stromal tissue was weakly positive for MMPs and the infiltrated macrophages were strongly positive for lysozymes . Some marrow cells near the osteolytic trabecular bones were strongly positive for RANKL and OPG, and the stromal fibrous tissue was consistently positive for HIFα, but rarely positive for VEGF.
After surgery, the patient was advised to stop taking Synatura® and olmesartan, which are anti-angiogenic drugs. The patient’s symptoms disappeared during follow-up and bone healing was uneventful at 5 months postoperatively . The patient was followed up for 9 months postoperatively. No event occurred during follow-up.