A 41-year-old, previously healthy Sri Lankan female presented with sudden onset severe headache for one day. The headache started in the occipital region and spread towards the vertex. It worsened with standing and was accompanied with nausea and vomiting. The patient described it as her ‘worst-ever’ headache. She denied a past history of migraine. Remarkably, the headache resolved with lying supine and recurred on sitting up or standing. It would commence as a sensation of ‘heaviness’ of her head that would gradually progress to a severe, disabling headache. The maximum duration that she could tolerate an upright posture was approximately one hour. She did not have any other co-morbidities and denied use of any medicinal or recreational drugs. There was no history of surgery or trauma involving the head, neck or spine.
On examination, she was comfortable in the supine position and detested sitting up or standing. The cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal and nervous system examinations were normal.
Haematological and biochemical blood investigations including full blood count, electrolytes, random blood glucose, liver and renal function tests, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were normal. Electrocardiogram was normal. Computerised tomography (CT) scan of the head did not reveal any abnormality. However, gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed generalized meningeal enhancement . The MR angiogram was normal.
Lumbar puncture done in the lateral decubitus position revealed a CSF opening pressure of less than 30 mm of H2O. The biochemical, cytological and microbiological analysis of CSF was normal and there was no xanthochromia. MR myelography failed to identify the site of CSF leak.
The patient was managed with bed-rest and hydration with infusions of normal saline. She was prescribed analgesics and encouraged to drink excess amounts of coffee ad libitum. Over the ensuing 3 months, her headaches became less intense and she could progressively tolerate longer durations in the upright posture. At three months’ review she was able to maintain her upright posture for up to 6 hours without headache. Since she showed small but definite improvement each day, the plan for epidural blood patching (EBP) was perpetually deferred. However, in retrospect, given the protracted time to recovery it would have been appropriate to have instituted EBP earlier.