A 60-year-old woman presented to her general practitioner with a decade-long history of chronic dysphagia, with acute deterioration in the past 3 months. She had previously been diagnosed, through her general practitioner, with “oesophageal spasm” on spurious clinical grounds, with no oesophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) performed for evaluation of this dysphagia (she had undergone an EGD approximately 20 years prior to this, but on another indication). Having previously tolerated solid foods with some difficulty, the patient could now only take fluids. Her past medical history was significant for mucosal ulcerative LP in the mouth and genitalia for the past 15 years, heterozygotic α1-antitrypsin deficiency, active smoking with 40 pack years, and COPD. The oral LP had been difficult to treat, mainly managed with on-off local group IV steroids. Her hepatitis C status was negative. At the time of her presentation to our clinic, her oral LP was active with painful lesions of the oral mucosa, while her genital LP was entirely quiescent. She was urgently referred to an EGD for suspected oesophageal carcinoma.
Macroscopically, the oesophageal mucosa was rigid and trachealised with a papier-maché appearance, suspicious for long-standing eosinophilic oesophagitis (EoE) . Biopsies were taken along the length of the oesophagus. Histopathological examination of the biopsy of the distal oesophagus revealed a lichenoid oesophagitis pattern of injury , with a prominent band-like lymphocytic infiltrate involving the interface of the lamina propria and epithelium as well as Civatte bodies – apoptotic keratinocytes considered a hallmark of LP. Additionally, intraepithelial lymphocytes and dyskeratotic keratinocytes were observed. Several biopsies showed hyperkeratosis and granulation. No dysplasia or fungal organisms were identified. The patient was subsequently referred to our clinic at the Department of Gastroenterology, Skåne University Hospital, for further evaluation.
Given the suspicious histopathologic appearance for LP as well as the significant past medical history of mucosal LP, the patient was diagnosed with ELP over other far less likely differential diagnoses such as Crohn's disease, infections, medication-induced oesophagitis, or pill oesophagitis. A discussion was had as to the best treatment strategy, as no internationally accepted treatment guidelines for ELP exist. Several pharmacological treatment regimens were found in the literature, including oral budesonide formulations, calcineurin inhibitors, mycophenolate mofetil, PDE-4 inhibitors, as well as systemic corticosteroids [–]. As topical corticosteroids are the first line of oral LP, we opted for Jorveza™, a novel budesonide orodispersible tablet (BOT) designed for EoE highly selective to the oesophagus . Prior to the introduction of BOT, EoE treatment was largely based on topical steroid therapies. These are now, however, defunct given the efficacy of BOT for EoE treatment. We found no studies on the efficacy of BOT on ELP, only nondescript topical steroid solutions now defunct in our clinical practice. We opted for BOT as this formulation seemed the most targeted and efficacious approach. The patient gave informed consent and was commenced on oral BOT (Jorveza™) 1 mg BD (twice daily) for 10 weeks.
Within days of commencement of treatment, the patient experienced a complete remission of dysphagia. She reported no side effects. Surprisingly, she also reported marked improvement in her oral LP, with near-complete healing of ulcerations. A follow-up EGD was performed 2 months post-therapy initiation, which was normal apart from incidental candidiasis (a common side effect of BOT ), after which the patient received fluconazole 200 mg BD for 14 days. Biopsies taken from the length of the oesophagus showed no evidence of existing oesophagitis, with an entirely normal mucosal appearance – apart from diffuse candida hyphae and spores without inflammatory response in the distal oesophagus .
After 10 weeks of induction therapy, the patient remained completely asymptomatic. The patient’s weight increased from 68 kg (BMI 25.9) pretreatment to a steady state of 72 kg (BMI 27.4). Her serum albumin remained unchanged, ranging between 38 and 42 g/L. We opted to cease active treatment and now plan for renewed EGD in 6 months followed by once yearly for surveillance of subclinical disease and/or SCC of the oesophagus as well as to monitor the possible need for oesophageal dilation. In the event of clinical recurrence, we plan the recommencement of induction dose BOT 1 mg BD for 6 weeks. Alcohol and smoking cessation was advised to further reduce the risk of oesophageal SCC.