An 18-year-old male patient presented with symptoms of pain and swelling localized on the medial aspect of his right ankle joint, specifically at the medial malleolus. The patient noted a recent history of a twisting injury of his right ankle 6-months before presentation at our specialty orthopedic clinic. The injury occurred while playing football. Initially, he was treated by his general practitioner, who assumed it to be a severe sprain injury and had placed him on a course of ice compress and anti-inflammatory medication followed by a below knee plaster cast for a period of 3 weeks. Following this treatment protocol, the patient was able to walk but reported on-going pain while walking once the plaster cast was removed. No radiographic imaging was done at the time and was therefore not available for review and comparison.
On further examination, swelling was observed over the distal aspect of the medial malleolus, along with tenderness over deltoid ligament of the right ankle. There was no bone related tenderness at the distal tibia. Ankle joint movement was also observed to be normal. We proceeded with a thorough radiograph examination including standard X-rays and 3-dimensional computed tomography (CT) scanning of the right ankle, which revealed the presence of a small bone fragment located anterior and distal to the medial malleolus (, ). This fragment was not free floating and rather appeared to be attached to the distal tibia. Furthermore, it was a uni-lateral presentation as the patient’s left ankle anatomy did not reveal the presence of a similar bone fragment and was rather normal in appearance . Based on our findings as well as the findings of previously published reports on this topic, a benefit of doubt was provided, and it was assumed to be a case of acute trauma, leading to a small fracture of the anterior aspect of the distal tibia.
At first consultation, the patient was explained of his diagnosis and offered a conservative treatment protocol that included a compression bandage and anti-inflammatory medication. Since this had minimal effect on his symptoms, he was placed in a plaster cast for period of 6 weeks thereafter. Following removal of the cast, the patient’s symptoms re-occurred, and at that point, he had been on a conservative treatment regimen for almost 10 months with no significant clinical benefit. Based on this, it was considered that this might be a case of differential diagnosis, with the possibility of it being the case of a symptomatic Os subtibiale. At that stage, a surgery appeared to be the best option to help this patient with his symptoms. It was noted that intraoperatively, this surgery may involve either fixation of the bone fragment if it was deemed to be a fracture, or removal of the same if it appeared to be an Os subtibiale. The patient was then offered a surgical treatment option to which he consented and agreed to proceed as necessary.
On admission to the operating theater, the patient was positioned supine and administered general anesthesia. An upper thigh tourniquet was used on the patient’s right leg in this case. To gain access to the distal tibia, a 4–5 cm anterior mid-line incision over right ankle joint was performed . The surrounding soft-tissue structures, superficial nerve, and vascular structures were carefully protected and retracted to gain exposure to the distal tibia, which revealed the presence of a smooth and oblong bone fragment attached to the anterior-distal aspect of the medial malleolus, as was observed in the X-ray and CT imaging . Based on its appearance, and the lack of bony fusion like characteristics with the adjacent distal tibia, this bone fragment was deemed to be an Os subtibiale. In addition, the margins of the distal tibia marked with a surgical marker, without considering the Os subtibiale, gave the appearance of a normal medial malleolus. It was also observed that it was pressing directly on the deltoid ligament, which explained the on-going pain that the patient experienced while walking. The deltoid ligament was released and the Os subtibiale was then surgically excised using a small 3 mm osteotome and a small bone rongeur. It was measured to be approximately 2 × 11 × cm3 in size . Following excision, the surrounding bone and soft-tissue structures were carefully examined to ensure that there were no other anatomical bone or soft tissues abnormalities that could be contributing to the patient’s symptoms. On confirmation, the surgical area was thoroughly irrigated with saline, and standard surgical procedures were used to close the incision in a layer by layer fashion. A standard surgical dressing was applied over the operated site, and the foot was placed in a heavy compressive bandage for the next 2 weeks. This was followed by ankle mobilization and stretching exercises as tolerated by the patient. At his latest follow-up of 18 months, the patient reported to be pain free and displayed normal range of motion at the ankle joint compared to his non-operated, contra-lateral left foot. He also consented to participating in this study.