A 15-month-old girl presenting a congenital hydrocephalus, diagnosed at uterine life. At the age of 3 months, a right VAS was made due to the progressive character of her congenital hydrocephalus. Immediate and short time follow-up was simple. One year later, the infant goes to the emergency department for a progressive respiratory distress with polypnea and diminution of oxygen saturation. She was afebrile with pulmonary auscultation evidencing hypophony of the right hemithorax and abdomen not distended and depressible without pain. The blood analysis did not show significant alterations. A thoracoabdominal X-ray shows complete opacity of the right hemithorax, without evidence of intestinal obstruction or intraperitoneal air and with a well-positioned catheter tip but in contact of diaphragm on sleep position and in pelvic cavity on up position . This was confirmed by ultrasound exploration without CSF ascites. A thoracoabdominal scan revealed the right pleural hydrothorax and the position of the catheter tip in the peritoneal cavity . The patient has been transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit and right pleural effusion drainage has been performed, obtaining a clear crystal appearance and transudative fluid. Proteinorachia and glycorachia were normal in CSF microbiological studies and culture excluded infection. Noninvasive ventilatory support is initiated with oxygen therapy. We had progressive clinical improvement after cessation of drainage debit and the radiographic disappearance of the effusion after 48 h. A cardiac cause was eliminated by a strictly normal cardiac examination and echocardiography not compatible with heart failure, as well as a nephrological origin by the biological analyzes. However, clamping of the chest tube was marked by recurrent pleural effusion 24h after with polypnea. A ventriculoatrial shunt was performed with simple operative follow-ups. Clinically, the patient became normal and resolution of the pleural effusion was obtained on the thoracoabdominal control X-ray .