An 80-year-old Asian woman with Alzheimer dementia was found lying unconscious at her house, which had no air conditioner and the windows were kept closed; the highest outside temperature was 36.1 °C. There was no history of seizure, previous use of medication, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, alcohol abuse, smoking, or cardiac disease. During transportation, a physician began to assist her ventilation, and she was intubated because her SpO2 level was 78% under room air. She was brought by the ambulance with a physician onboard to our hospital unconscious. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 6 (eye, 1; verbal, 1; motor, 4), with a high bladder temperature (42.5 °C). On arrival, her blood pressure was 104/79 mmHg and pulse rate was abnormal at 110 beats/min. She was vomiting but had no traumatic scars. Results of an arterial blood gas examination are shown in Table . Laboratory data revealed renal dysfunction and an elevated white blood cell count at 13,890/μL (normal range 3000–9000/μL) . Her DIC score was 5 points as per the DIC diagnostic criteria established by the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine (JAAM) on admission. On day 2, she met the criteria (5 points) of a different diagnostic system established by the International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis (ISTH) . Her blood culture was sterile. An electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography showed normal results. Serology laboratory tests for venereal disease, human immunodeficiency virus, and viral hepatitis markers (hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV)) were negative. No abnormal lesion was found on the head computed tomography (CT) examination performed on arrival .
The patient was diagnosed with severe heat stroke, placed under intensive care, and managed with rapid cooling, intravenous fluid therapy, antibiotic therapy, and anti-coagulation therapy for DIC . Anti-coagulation therapy consisted of treatment with recombinant thrombomodulin for 4 days (days 1–4) and recombinant antithrombin for 1 day (day 1). We transfused 10 U of platelet concentrate because her platelet count had decreased to 1.7×104/μL due to exhaustion on day 2.
Head CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations were performed on day 3 because she was still unconscious. Diffuse-weighted imaging showed high-signal intensities in the bilateral cerebellar hemisphere, bilateral occipital lobe, and basal ganglia. Intracranial magnetic resonance angiography showed normal results. Imaging indicated new multiple cerebellar infarctions . As described above, she had no arrhythmia or organic cardiac disease, and the location of the infarcts included the cerebellum. It was thought that heat stroke with DIC complicated the acute infarctions. A tracheotomy was performed on day 9 because her unconscious condition had not improved. She was transferred to another hospital for subacute care on day 23.