A 21-year-old man presented to the emergency room (ER) complaining of stomach and serious back pain 2 months after spinal surgical intervention. Two months before his visit, he fell from a 10 m tall building. He was confirmed as suffering fracture and dislocation from T11 to L2 by a computed tomography (CT) examination. The patient complained of severe back pain. There was no neural deficit. The patient underwent thoracolumbar pedicle screw implant surgery using ‘freehand technique’ under fluoroscopic guidance in a local hospital. Eight pedicle screws with contoured rods were placed spanning T11 to L2 after the correction of deformities. The patient tolerated the procedure well and developed no neurodeficits postoperatively. Radiological examination revealed a partial correction of the deformity.
The patient was presented with a recurrence of pain at the operated site 10 days postoperatively. The pain was a dull ache, non-radiating, and showed a progressive increase in intensity. This was accompanied by constitutional symptoms like poor appetite and a general feeling of being unwell. In view of the non-specific nature of the complaints, no further investigation was carried out and the patient was advised to attend regular follow-ups.
In our hospital, enhanced CT and X-rays were performed after thorough clinical evaluation. The CT scan revealed the malposition of a pedicle screw on both sides at the T11, T12, and L1 levels, which was a disaster. The left side T12 and L1 malpositioned screws had exited the lateral pedicle cortex and were clearly abutting the posteromedial aspect of the descending thoracic aorta , with the formation of associated pseudoaneurysms in the thoracic aorta. The right side of T11 and both sides of T12 screws also had exited the lateral pedicle cortex and were abutting the wall of the pseudoaneurysm. The left side screw in L2 perforated the lateral pedicle cortex but did not abut the aorta . A re-surgery with the interdisciplinary collaboration of orthopaedics and vascular surgery teams was recommended and was subsequently performed in another hospital. In the surgery, after the anesthesia and cardiopulmonary bypass, pseudoaneurysm and malpositioned screws were found under direct vision. An ascending aorta replacement with artificial tissue was performed (Vascutek Ltd., diameter 16 × 8 mm, usable length 45 cm). The extruded part of the pedicle screw was cut in situ so as to avoid any chance of re-injury. The patient endured the surgery well and had a good recovery in his 4-month follow-up examination.