A 65-year-old Asian female (Height: 5 feet 4 inches; Weight: 52.5 kg; Occupation: retired teacher) referred to our clinic March 8th, 2013. Her family and social history was as follows; she lived alone and had quit cigarette smoking 10 years ago, with no alcohol or illicit drug use. Her mother had a history of colon cancer. She had a past medical history of a left breast mass that had required resection and radiation therapy. Three weeks before being admitted, the patient had presented an initial episode of cystitis. This was treated by a single dose of fosfomycin, which led to regression of the clinical symptoms. One day before hospitalization, she presented sudden onset of clinical signs of pyelonephritis: dysuria, urgency, frequency, urinary incontinence, suprapubic pain and elevated temperature (37.7°C). Urinalysis revealed positive leukocyte esterase, with 50-60 white blood count and 18-22 red blood count per high-power field. Her serum creatinine level was 125.3 umol/L and hemoglobin level was 10.7 gr/dL. There were no other significant laboratory findings.
Urine samples were taken and cultured using both Columbia blood agar (Acumedia Manufacturers, Inc., US.) and MacConkey agar (Teknova Inc., US.). Microscopic examination of Gram stained smears of the urine revealed Gram-negative rods. Yellow colonies of the microorganism were detected on all culture media after overnight incubation. No other bacteria were detected. The isolate was identified as E. hermanii after assessment using the API 20E system (bio-Merieux, Lyon, France) for biochemical properties and enzyme activities.
This isolate was forwarded to the local laboratory and biochemical testing and sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene confirmed the isolate as E. hermanii. The upstream primer used for the amplification of the 16S region in the E. hermanii genome was 5′-AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3′. The downstream primer was 5′-ACGGCTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3′. The nucleotide sequence of the 16S rRNA gene was 99.86% identical to that of E. hermanii T91, according to the NCBI GenBank database. Bacterial cultures were grown aerobically at 37°C in an incubation chamber.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed using minimum inhibitory concentration (CLSI) broth microdilution minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) method . The organism was found to be susceptible to piperacillin-tazobactam (MIC ≤ 4 mg/L), ceftazidime (MIC ≤ 1 mg/L), cefazolin (MIC ≤ 4 mg/L), cefixime (MIC ≤ 0.25 mg/L), aztreonam (MIC, 4 mg/L), gentamicin (MIC ≤ 4 mg/L), tobramycin (MIC ≤ 1 mg/L), imipenem (MIC, 2 mg/L), meropenem (MIC ≤ 0.25 mg/L) andamikacin (MIC ≤ 1 mg/L); and resistant to amoxicillin (MIC ≥ 16 mg/L). Antibiotic treatment was initiated with oral cefixime (400 mg every 24 hours). The symptoms were relieved within 72 hours after therapy. A urine sample was taken seven days after antibiotic therapy. E. hermanii was no longer isolated.