An 18-year-old woman sustained a neck contusion following blunt trauma to the submandibular region from her bicycle handlebar grip end after a light contact with a motor vehicle. Upon initial examination, the patient's level of consciousness and vital signs were within normal ranges, and she did not report any previous medical history of concern. The patient did not express any concerns regarding the condition of the neck or throat. A secondary survey revealed a 25-mm contusion in the submandibular region with a 3 × 5 mm laceration at its center. The wound was free of contamination, exhibited no active bleeding, and did not present with surrounding hematoma formation. Furthermore, it was determined that there was no tracheal injury due to the absence of abnormal breath sounds at the neck and the absence of any airway deformity or deviation. Computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of interstitial air extending through the soft tissue gap between the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the larynx, extending to the retropharyngeal space. While the wound was cleansed with saline solution, the patient reported the presence of water in her oral cavity. Therefore, we established a connection between the pharynx and the exterior laceration site. Subsequently, a water drinking test was conducted to ascertain the presence of a fistula from the pharyngeal side to the neck wound. However, no fluid was observed to leak from the wound, and the fistula was thus determined to be unidirectional. A film-shaped drain was placed within the wound, and the wound was sutured in a roughly approximated manner. The patient was admitted to the hospital for a follow-up examination. Fluids and oral antimicrobials were administered 3 h after admission, and the patient was permitted to commence oral feeding after 12 h. The patient was discharged on the third day without any issues with her general condition or neck. Subsequent to her discharge from our institution, the patient did not contact us to express any concerns regarding unusual occurrences. The outpatient examination conducted on the sixth day following the injury revealed no abnormal physical findings, and the drain was subsequently removed.