A 56-year-old male with a history of right lower limb arteriovenous malformation, diagnosed when he was 2 years’ old, was living in Tomioka Town, located 5 to 14 kilometers south from the FDNPP, before the FDNPP accident. He was recognized as having a grade 3 extremity disability (a unilateral lower limb that does not function completely) by the Act for the Welfare of Persons with Physical Disabilities in Japan. Although his right lower limb was difficult to use, he could walk using crutches. Some support was necessary from his family members; however, he had been able to live without limitations in daily activities before the disaster.

On March 11 in 2011, the patient experienced the Great East Japan Earthquake while at his home with his family. The tsunami did not reach their house. The next day, the Japanese central government declared Tomioka town as part of the mandatory evacuation zone. The patient and his family immediately evacuated to an evacuation center in Tamura city, 40 km west from their home. Although the evacuation center was open to all evacuees, no space was particularly prepared for people with physical disabilities, leading our patient to spend almost all of his time in his car because he felt that his existence in the public space may become a nuisance to others. Several days later, he moved to a room in a hotel in Koriyama city, 60 km west from Tomioka town. Dramatic environmental changes from repeated evacuations imposed a significant physical burden to our patient. He also experienced psychological stress, feeling that he was imposing a strain on family because he thought that his existence prevented his family from being able to freely evacuate.

Three months after initial evacuation, he was referred to a hospital near the hotel in Koriyama city, with symptoms of fever and palpitation. He was admitted to the hospital with a new diagnosis of atrial fibrillation and congestive cardiac failure. During this admission there was deterioration of his right lower limb arteriovenous malformation, located between his abdominal aorta and right femoral artery, which caused a right foot ulcer. He was treated with anticoagulation therapy and diuretic therapy, and was discharged from the hospital approximately one month after the admission, although his foot ulcer required frequent care because it was refractory after hospital discharge.

The hospital admission after repeated evacuations notably weakened our patient's physical activity. After hospital discharge (approximately 4 months after his initial evacuation from Tomioka town), he moved into a temporary house constructed for evacuees in Koriyama city because the mandatory evacuation order continued. Although he could not ambulate, dress, or bathe himself without support, he did not need support for eating and using the toilet. The temporary house presented a particularly difficult environment for someone with a physical disability; unpaved roads around the house severely limited his opportunities to go outside and the bath was too narrow to use while requiring support from family.

His physical condition gradually worsened. Continuation of frequent care, such as washing and applying ointments, did not improve his foot ulcer. Following a detailed medical examination in February 2012, which revealed that his arteriovenous malformation was no longer eligible for aggressive intervention, he decided to only be treated with supportive therapy. From August 2012, he became confined to bed and required assistance for all activities of daily living. In July 2013, he was no longer able to go out to temporarily visit his original home in the evacuation zone, which had been only thing he looked forward to. He prioritized time with his family, did not like being admitted to hospital, and did not seek medical care outside of periodic visits to the clinic. Although he was hardly eating, and was aware of pain in his right limb and shortness of breath from December 2013, he did not visit the hospital. In the middle of a night in February 2014, he was transported to the hospital after massive bleeding from his right foot ulcer. After admission to the hospital, infection to the ulcer was found in addition to refractory bleeding. Despite blood infusion therapy and antibiotic therapy, he died of septic shock 18 days after admission.