A 54-year-old woman (height, 145 cm; weight, 43 kg) diagnosed with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes elected to undergo cochlear implantation to address her progressive bilateral sensorineural deafness. Preoperative electrocardiography showed no abnormalities. Transthoracic echocardiography showed circumferential thickening of the left ventricle and asymmetric hypertrophy of the septum, which was thicker than the posterior wall. Cardiac contractility was diffusely decreased and cardiac ejection fraction was 45%. Estimated glomerular filtration rate was low (27 mL/min) because of diabetic nephropathy. Although enhanced insulin therapy had been introduced, her HbA1c level was high (12.5%) immediately before surgery. Creatine kinase level was 162 IU/L (normal range, 41–153). Her medications included 5 mg oral imidapril daily and subcutaneous insulin (6 units in the morning, 8 units in the afternoon, and 6 units in the evening). She was not taking any antiepileptic drugs.
No premedication was administered. Intravenous remimazolam was administered as a 0.2 mg/kg bolus over 1 min, which resulted in loss of consciousness, followed by continuous infusion of remimazolam (1 mg/kg/h) and remifentanil (0.2 μg/kg/min). Neuromuscular monitoring of the left ulnar nerve was initiated using a train-of-four (TOF) stimulus (TOF watch SX®, MSD, Japan). Three minutes after administration of 30 mg of intravenous rocuronium, all four twitch responses disappeared and tracheal intubation was performed. During surgery, remimazolam was administered along with a continuous remifentanil infusion (0.2–0.25 μg/kg/min) to maintain the patient state index value between 25 and 50. Patient state index was measured using the SEDLine® monitor (Masimo Inc., Irvine, CA). A catheter was placed in the right radial artery for continuous arterial pressure monitoring. Intermittent blood gas analysis showed that the lactate concentration and pH ranged from 1.8 to 1.9 mmol/L and 7.41 to 7.45, respectively. Surgical time was 1 h and 34 min. Additional rocuronium administration was not needed throughout the surgery. After surgery was completed, the infusions were stopped and the TOF ratio was 0.91. The patient was extubated after stable spontaneous respirations with tidal volumes ≥ 8 mL/kg were confirmed (22 min after the end of surgery and 8 min after discontinuation of remimazolam). Thirteen minutes after extubation, her eyes remained closed; therefore, 200 μg of intravenous flumazenil was administered. Two minutes later, she opened her eyes, became verbally responsive, and was discharged from the operating room. After surgery, her only complaints were sore throat and nausea, which were treated with 1000 mg of acetaminophen and 10 mg of metoclopramide.