A 69-year-old female patient with a long vascular history and atrial flutter, presented with acute critical limb ischemia of the left extremity after stopping her anticoagulation (apixaban).
She had received an aortobifemoral graft at the age of 53, and had two prior episodes with acute occlusion of the right limb of the graft, 10 and 14 years after the primary operation. Both occlusions was resolved with catheter-directed thrombolysis, the last time with application of a stent in the proximal part of the right limb of the graft.
CTA confirmed occlusion of the left leg of the aortic-bifemoral bypass, and new short occlusions of two calf arteries. There was also wall thrombus in the native aorta above the graft, as well as in the main body of the graft.
After discussion with the vascular surgeon, we started catheter-based intraluminal tPA-administration via a crossover hook-shaped catheter, with the intention to aspirate residual emboli from the calf the next day if needed.
After 12 h, the thrombus was dissolved. There was significant residual stenosis due to neointimal hyperplasia or wall adherent thrombus in the proximal limb, and the left groin was punctured to apply kissing stents at the bifurcation of the graft . Control angiograms after stent placement showed restricted flow through the left limb, with correct placement of the wire in the aorta above the graft anastomosis . The findings of the angiograms were consistent with neointimal dissection at two levels. At the proximal level, the stent was deployed inside the false lumen without inflow, but with the distal end inside the true lumen. The proximal neointimal dissection could only be resolved with prolonging the kissing stents all the way to the proximal graft anastomosis . The distal dissection was not flow limiting after the wire was moved to the correct lumen via buddy wire technique, and this dissection was left untreated.
Emboli to the left calf were aspirated via a new antegrade puncture in the left groin, but completion angiograms showed some residual thrombi and a chronic occlusion of the dorsal pedal artery.
The patient is back to her habitual state 6 months after the procedure, with no rest pain or wounds, but claudication at 500 m. Initially after the procedure the patient received dual antiplatelet therapy, but she was reinstated on apixaban from the cardiologist due to atrial flutter at dismissal from the hospital. She is currently on life-long anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy with apixaban and ASA.