A 74-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of a nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid. The nodule had been found during a medical examination performed 3 years ago, but she did not undergo a detailed examination at the local hospital at that time. On physical examination, a palpable and hard nodule of approximately 2 cm in size was noted in the right side of her neck. Results of the blood examination were normal, except for mildly increased thyroglobulin (142 ng/mL) and antithyroglobulin antibody levels (59.7 IU/mL). Ultrasonography and computed tomography showed a right thyroid nodule with calcification. The nodule had no signs of extrathyroidal invasion and measured 21 mm in diameter. The lymph nodes of the neck were not swollen . The nodule was diagnosed as an indeterminate lesion by fine needle aspiration cytology. The fine needle aspiration smears showed spindle-shaped cells with prominent nucleoli and nuclear inclusion. The intercellular space was metachromatic on Giemsa staining . Taken together, these findings suggested a hyalinizing trabecular adenoma, granulomatous lesion, papillary carcinoma, or poorly differentiated carcinoma.
We decided to treat this nodule as thyroid cancer. Right thyroid lobectomy and central neck dissection were performed. Macroscopically, a well-circumscribed mass in the right lobe of the thyroid was observed. Histologic evaluation of the thyroid nodule showed multinodular proliferation of oval to polygonal-shaped epithelioid cells with oval nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in sheet- or cord-like patterns, accompanied by fibrous stroma and marked osseous metaplasia. Nuclear atypia was mild, and mitosis was not prominent. Results of the immunohistochemical staining showed that these areas were partially positive for cytokeratin, cluster of differentiation (CD)34, and factor VIII; diffusely positive for vimentin; and negative for thyroglobulin, thyroid transcription factor-1, smooth muscle actin, desmin, S100, CD31, CD68, and CD163 . These findings were suggestive of EHE.
Postoperatively, the patient’s thyroglobulin level fluctuated inconsistently (range, 11–292 ng/mL), as did the antithyroglobulin antibody level, although it remained positive. The mild elevation of the preoperative and postoperative thyroglobulin levels might have been caused by chronic thyroiditis. The patient has been followed-up for 3 years and has had no signs of recurrence postoperatively.