Our patient was a six-year-old girl who had presented at the age of eight months to
our hospital with persistent symptoms of cough, dyspnea and hypoxaemia since she was
two months old. She had an unremarkable neonatal history, which was the result of a
full-term pregnancy, and had a birth weight of 2.4 kg. Her symptoms led to an
initial diagnosis of viral bronchiolitis. However, her dyspnea persisted, and her
condition further deteriorated during successive viral infections. Her parent
complained that she suffered from recurrent vomiting, choking and symptoms
suggestive of aspiration. The parents were first-degree consanguineous cousins, but
there was no family history suggestive of chronic respiratory diseases.
On clinical examination, she was in respiratory distress, was failing to thrive and
had a weight below the third percentile. Her height and head circumference were
normal. No dysmorphism was noted, and clubbing was not initially present. Her vital
signs showed tachypnea and hypoxaemia, and clear chest auscultation was observed. On
cardiovascular examination, there was no murmur and no initial finding suggestive of
pulmonary hypertension.
Her initial basic laboratory workup was normal apart from a nasopharyngeal polymerase
chain reaction that was positive for rhinovirus. Chest X-rays showed diffuse
bilateral ground glass opacity . An echocardiography was unremarkable. Her immunological work
up was normal, and a bronchoscopy showed a normal airway structure. A workup for
gastroesophageal reflux disease revealed moderate gastroesophageal reflux disease in
pH probe studies. She was managed accordingly, and because the patient did not
respond to optimal medical therapy, we proceeded with fundoplication and gastrostomy
tube insertion.
Nevertheless, within the following year, she continued to exhibit dyspnea without
exertion and hypoxaemia. Thus, a diagnosis of childhood interstitial lung disease
was suspected. A chest computed tomographic scan showed diffuse inhomogeneous
bilateral ground glass opacity with scattered small, thin-walled cysts in the
superior segments of both lower lobes and the lateral segments of the middle lobe
.
A wedge lung biopsy was obtained, which showed prominent large, irregular and cystic
parenchymal distortion with marked thickening and fibrotic expansion of the
interstitial spaces . The alveolar spaces showed moderate epithelial hyperplasia with
abundant foamy histiocytes, lymphocytic infiltrate and some areas with cholesterol
clefts .
Histiocytes also showed dense eosinophilic granules and occasionally globules of
periodic acid–Schiff stain-positive proteinosis material . The airways showed mild epithelial
hyperplasia and focal mild subepithelial fibrosis. These histological features are
typical of genetic disorders of surfactant metabolism, and this morphological
pattern at this age is most commonly associated with mutation in SFTPC. This
diagnosis was confirmed by genetic testing, which showed a p.I73T pathogenic
mutation located in coding exon 3 of the SFTPC gene, and no
abnormalities were detected in the ABCA3 or NKX2.1
genes.
Currently, our patient is six years old. She was managed with six doses of monthly
pulse therapy with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, which led to subsequent
improvement in her respiratory status, as demonstrated by a decrease in her home
oxygen requirement from 2 l/min to 0.5 l/min. She is also managed with supportive
care, including nutritional, psychosocial and home care therapy. She was referred
for the evaluation of lung transplantation.