A 53-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our centre for absolute dysphagia. This, initiated 4 months before for both solids and liquids, had an insidious onset and was accompanied by a slight cough and persistent fever for which initial antibiotic therapy was prescribed. Fever, usually mild and constantly measured, peaked twice over 40°C.
The initial radiological assessment consisted of a chest X-ray showing a large right paratracheal mass. A computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed, at the level of the thorax, the presence of a large (7.5 cm) lobulated mass of heterogeneous density located below the carina. This was clearly compressing the oesophagus. . No evident signs of direct infiltration were found. No other abnormalities were found at the level of the brain, abdomen or pelvis.
A subsequent orogastric endoscopic ultrasonography revealed a hypoechogenic lesion 5 cm in maximum diameter and 25 cm from the incisor teeth, with regular margins, directly compressing the oesophagus. Fine needle aspiration cytology, with double sampling by CT guided transthoracic and ultrasound guided transparietal endoscopic procedures in two different regions of the mass, revealed a loosely dispersed population of rare epithelioid atypical cells with prominent nucleoli and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. No lesions or compressions were detected at fibro-tracheo-bronchoscopic examination.
Because of the rapid worsening of symptomatology, the patient underwent surgical intervention with a minimally invasive approach, initially with diagnostic intent. Should resectability have been confirmed, a radical procedure was planned. A right video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy was performed. The frozen section demonstrated a malignant epithelioid lesion. Lung origin was excluded and further thoracoscopic exploration confirmed the feasibility of a radical resection.
The lesion was radically resected via an open thoracotomy. No signs of direct infiltration of the mass were confirmed at the level of surrounding organs. In particular, the surface of contact with the oesophagus, the right atrium, the main right bronchus and the pulmonary artery was carefully explored. The vagus nerve was identified. A single chest drainage tube was left in situ. The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient started oral intake of fluids on the first postoperative day.
Gross pathologic examination of the posterior mediastinal mass showed a grey lobulated mass measuring 8 × 9 × 7 cm . Routine histologic studies showed large sheets of epithelioid cells with abundant eosinophilic to clear cytoplasm. Focal spindle cell features and brown pigment were also present. The mass showed peripheral compressed nodal tissue with anthracotic pigment. The nuclei showed frequent inclusions and prominent nucleoli . A Fontana-Masson stain confirmed the presence of melanin pigment in the cytoplasm of neoplastic cells. Immunohistochemical positivity for S-100, Melan A and HMB 45 confirmed the melanomatous nature.
The final diagnosis was malignant metastatic melanoma of a lymph node. No evidence of a primary tumour or superficial nodal involvement was detected outside the mediastinum. The patient is alive and well one year after the operation with no signs of recurrent disease in the mediastinum or appearance of other signs of disease elsewhere. Standard adjuvant immunotherapy has been administered.