62-year-old previously healthy female hiker and climber presented with dizziness, imbalance, and gait instability that developed rapidly within a few weeks in 2016. Subacute cerebellar ataxia was suspected and a number of studies including oncological blood tests, oncological neuronal antibodies, brain and body PET, cerebrospinal fluid examination, brain imaging, and genetic testing for ataxia were performed with no positive findings. After an initial plateau of symptoms, the patient entered a slow and progressive neurological decline with late-onset idiopathic cerebellar ataxia as the most likely diagnosis. After multiple medical consultations, she came to our center in 2022. The patient denied a family history, frequent cough, digestive problems, and autonomic disorders. The neurological examination showed unstable, wide-based gait and a positive Romberg test. She presented dysarthria, vertical descending nystagmus in primary gaze, and lateral gaze nystagmus. The slow eye tracking was fragmented and the visual suppression of the normal vestibulo-ocular reflex was observed. The head impulse test and dynamic visual acuity were abnormal. In addition, symmetrical bilateral inframalleolar hypalesthesia and presenting vestibulo-neuromuscular reflexes were observed. No autonomic weakness or muscle weakness was detected in the extremities. In summary, the patient with no relevant family history developed a late-onset idiopathic cerebellar ataxia with diverse neurological manifestations including sensory and vestibular disorders, while the studies performed did not yield a specific diagnosis. Complementary studies: To revalidate the clinical diagnosis of a mixed vestibulo-cerebellar dysfunction, a 3 Tesla magnetic resonance of the brain (MRI), a video head impulse test (VHIT) and vestibulo-myogenic evoked potentials (VEMPS) were performed along with sensory potentials of the four limbs. The MRI of the brain showed a discrete cerebellar vermiform and para-vermiform atrophy without focal structural damage. The vestibulo-myogenic evoked potentials showed a severe global vestibular hyporeflexia. Genetic studies: A clinical exome study was performed, using next-generation sequencing (NGS), to search for point and small insertion/deletion variants on a panel of 677 candidate genes according to the patient's phenotype, mainly associated with spinocerebellar ataxia, which was negative. Subsequently, a specific genetic study for intronic expansion in the RFC1 gene was performed, which was consistent with the presence of a pathogenic AAGGG motif biallelic expansion. These findings of bilateral vestibulopathy associated with cerebellar ataxia and sensory neuronopathy suggested the diagnosis of CANVAS, which was confirmed by the identification of biallelic expansion of the RFC1 gene in genetic testing.
