A 71-year-old man with severe COPD with rapidly progressing dyspnea, low exercise tolerance, and hypoxemia.
The patient was diagnosed with COPD in 2010. Over the last 5 years, the patient experienced a gradual progression of dyspnea that limited his performance of everyday activities.
In 2019, the patient underwent Bentall’s heart surgery with resection of the left atrial appendage. The patient did not claim any diseases of affluence.
The patient has a 30 pack-year history (20 cigarettes a day for 30 years) and has not smoked since 2008. He works as a managing director and denies any risk factors for lung disease from his occupation. His father contracted tuberculosis after the Second World War and died of lung cancer, and his brother has diabetes mellitus.
The patient was afebrile with alveolar respiration and sinus rhythm, and his lower limbs were without swelling.
Alpha1-antitrypsin levels were normal. Arterial blood gas examination showed an oxygen partial pressure pO2 = 7.67 kPa; carbon dioxide partial pressure pCO2 = 4.56 kPa; pH = 7.46; and blood saturation SpO2 = 90%.
Computed tomography results demonstrated centrilobular emphysema bilaterally reflecting a severe obstructive ventilation disorder.
The patient underwent spirometry and body plethysmography examinations with the following results: forced expiratory volume in 1 s = 1.07 L; forced vital capacity = 1.94 L; inspiratory capacity = 1.57 L; total lung capacity (TLC) = 5.51 L; peak expiratory flow = 3.38 L. Inspiratory muscle performance was examined with the PrO2 device (Design Net, Smithfield, United States), showing the following results: maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP) = 57 cmH2O; sustained maximal inspiratory pressure (SMIP) = 404 PTU (pressure-time unit); inspiratory duration (ID) = 7.7s; and fatigue index test (FIT) = 12.1. Questionnaires assessed the subjective perception of dyspnea with a COPD Assessment Test score of 15 and modified Medical Research Council Breathlessness score of 3. The six-minute walk test (6-MWT) was used to assess exercise tolerance, with the distance walked being 270 m, and the oxygen saturation decreased from 95% at baseline to 75% during the test. The multifactorial body mass index, airflow obstruction, dyspnea, and exercise (BODE) index was used as a predictor of prognosis with an initial score of 5. The Charlson Comorbidity Index calculated the 10-year mortality risk to be 53%.