A 26-year-old Caucasian woman presented to cardiology polyclinics with heart palpitations and shortness of breath. The patient's mother had died when she was 35 years old as a result of sudden cardiac arrest (SCA), and her grandmother had died as a result of congestive heart failure (CHF). The patient's body mass index was 24 kg/m2. The 24-hour electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring documented 2602 bi-geminal, tri-geminal and quadri-geminal ventricular extrasystoles per hour as well as ventricular tachycardia (VT) episodes. The duration of filtered QRS was more than 120 ms. Her echocardiogram was within the normal ranges. Cardiac non-contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse thinning of the right ventricle and local dilation in the right ventricular wall with segmental hypokinesia. The electrophysiological study revealed sustained non-inducible VT, low-amplitude areas in the right ventricular outflow tract and ventricular ectopic beats originating in the right ventricular outflow tract. Because VT was non-inducible, neither the use of an implanted cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) nor ablation was considered. There was right ventricular dilation and apical mild hypokinesia. She had no signs of left ventricular dysfunction. On the basis of these results, the diagnosis of ARVD was made according to the original International Task Force diagnostic criteria. She was prescribed metoprolol and propafenone. She avoided physical stress and did very well with pharmacological treatment. After three years of follow-up, she wanted to conceive. She was counseled that only a few pregnancies have been reported in patients with ARVD and that the risk of transmission of the disease to the offspring is 50%. A mutation screening was offered, but she refused the mutation screening because of the high cost. She conceived and ceased her medications but did very well during her pregnancy until term.
A fetal echocardiogram was performed at the 21st week of pregnancy, and after delivery no abnormality was detected. In the third trimester, she had heart palpitations and became symptomatic again. The 24-hour ECG monitoring at the 32nd week of pregnancy documented 16,251 ventricular extrasystoles.
She delivered at the 38th week of pregnancy by elective cesarean section while under general anesthesia. After three days of hospitalization, she was discharged without medications and continued breastfeeding for six months.