A 510 g Caucasian female infant without prenatally diagnosed anomalies was delivered to a previously healthy 37-year-old mother (gravida 7, para 4, ab 2) at 25.7 weeks gestation via cesarean section after pathological findings on cardiotocography and growth retardation. Apgar scores were 3, 6, and 7. The patient was intubated immediately after birth, and broad-spectrum antibiotics (ampicillin + cefotaxime) were started. EA/TEF (Gross type C) was diagnosed via chest x-ray after a nasogastric tube was unable to pass the esophagus. A Replogle tube was placed in the upper pouch with continuous suction, and an umbilical vein catheter was established. Cardiac and renal ultrasound were normal; no additional malformations were diagnosed. The three older siblings of the patient do not have any congenital anomalies and are all healthy.
On the first day of life (DOL) (10 hours after birth) open TEF clipping was performed via an extrapleural approach in the incubator at the neonatal intensive care unit using a titanium clip (operation time 36 minutes). To reduce the operative trauma in the initial neonatal period and enable extubation after 6 days, we decided to postpone the placement of a gastrostomy. Therefore, we applied total parenteral nutrition (TPN), which resulted in a constant elevation of direct bilirubin (maximum of 200 mg/dl). At 22 DOL (weight 725 g), we created an open gastrostomy (operation time 58 minutes). After steady weight gain (2510 g), we performed a thoracoscopic primary esophageal anastomosis (operation time 93 minutes) at 3 months of age, without tension and without any perioperative adverse events . The patient was weaned from mechanical ventilation after 4 days. A transanastomotic tube was left in place until an upper contrast swallow study was performed 7 days after surgery. After 14 days, the patient was completely on oral feeds.
Upper endoscopy including balloon dilatations started routinely after 1.5 months postsurgery. There was no event of complete stricture. However, we performed eight dilatations during the first year of life until the anastomotic stenosis resolved. Although the patient experienced one to three respiratory infections per year, there were no events of aspiration pneumonia or sepsis. Currently, the patient swallows effortlessly at the age of 4 years and thrives well [15 kg (Percentile 28); 100 cm (Percentile 24)].