A 44-year-old healthy Japanese female experienced pain in her left eye when she was relaxed and watching television. She massaged her eyes with strong pressure several times with her fingers. Subsequently, she noticed a sudden loss in the left central vision. The next day, she visited our hospital. When questioned, she could not remember having done anything that might induce Valsalva retinopathy.
Upon examination, her left eye had a best-corrected visual acuity of 0.01, intraocular pressure (IOP) was 17 mm Hg, and the cornea and lens were clear. A left fundus examination showed a dense preretinal hemorrhage at the posterior pole . The preretinal hemorrhage appeared to be located under the internal limiting membrane (ILM) due to the reflection of the surface of the preretinal hemorrhage, and this was confirmed by optical coherence tomography . A mild vitreous hemorrhage was also observed. Fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography showed no retinal vascular abnormality, although the posterior pole was veiled by the preretinal hemorrhage . In her right eye, no abnormality was found. The blood examination including complete blood counts and clotting parameters were within normal limits.
During her first visit to our hospital, we could not perform a neodymium-doped yttrium-aluminium-garnet laser membranotomy to perforate the ILM due to interference by the vitreous hemorrhage. Five days after the first visit, the vitreous hemorrhage had decreased and we successfully performed the neodymium-doped yttrium-aluminium-garnet laser membranotomy (power setting, 5.4 mJ) using Goldmann's three-mirror contact lens. The preretinal hemorrhage immediately moved to the vitreous cavity through the open hole in the ILM. Two days after the treatment, the best-corrected visual acuity improved to 1.0, but a small amount of the vitreous hemorrhage and residual preretinal hemorrhage were observed at the posterior pole . The optical coherence tomography image showed remaining ILM elevation . One month after the treatment, we performed another fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography, and it demonstrated no retinal vascular abnormalities in the macular area .