A 42-year-old female was seen in the emergency department with three days of severe abdominal pain and sepsis. Medical history included menometrorrhagia due to uterine fibroids and previous endometrial ablation in 2015. She used a contraceptive vaginal ring for three months prior and Provera for 2 days prior to presentation for persistent vaginal bleeding. Physical examination revealed the following vital signs: temperature 39.2°C; blood pressure 136/78 mmHg, pulse 132 beats/min, and respiratory rate 16 breaths/min. Oxygen saturation was 100% on room air. Physical exam revealed tenderness throughout the lower abdomen with voluntary guarding. Labarotory data revealed WBC of 12,000/µL, Hgb of 7.8 gm/dL and Hct of 25.7, sodium of 127 mmol/L, and chloride of 96 mmol/L. Lactate was normal at 1.5 mmol/L. Initial CT scan showed uterine masses, consistent with known fibroids, and minimal pelvic fluid .
She was initially admitted to the medical service for sepsis. Given her lower abdominal pain, Gynecology was consulted for presumed pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). She was started on empiric antibiotics for PID (ceftriaxone IV 1 g every 24 hours, azithromycin IV 500 mg every 24 hours, and metronidazole IV 500 mg every 8 hours). Blood, urine, and stool cultures were sent upon admission, all of which were negative.
Her pain continued to progress with rising leukocytosis to 20,000/µL. A repeat CT scan on hospital day four showed interval development of ascites . Surgical consultation was obtained, and she was found to have an acute abdomen. She was taken for a diagnostic laparoscopy, which revealed a dense fibrinous exudate and significant ascites in all four quadrants of the abdomen . Multiple peritoneal biopsies were taken, and peritoneal fluid was sent for gram stain, cultures, and cytology.
Postoperatively, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA-125 levels were obtained. CEA was within the normal range, and CA-125 was mildly elevated at 56.8 U/mL (normal 0–35.0 U/mL). Her WBC fluctuated between 15,000 and 25,000/µL. The peritoneal fluid gram stain did not reveal any bacteria. Cytology revealed rare mesothelial cells and abundant neutrophils but no malignant cells. Final pathology report stated the presence of benign fibromembranous tissue with severe acute inflammation and extensive necrosis, consistent with “severe necrotizing acute peritonitis.”
Given the extensive inflammatory reaction, infectious disease was consulted. Group A Strep (GAS) peritonitis was suspected, and recommendations were made to continue ceftriaxone at 1 g IV every 24 hours in addition to one dose of clindamycin 600 mg IV. Azithromycin was added to ceftriaxone three days later (IV 500 mg every 24 hours). A streptolysin O antibody (ASO) titer was sent but came back normal at 61 I U/mL (normal range 0–330 IU/mL), arguing against GAS peritonitis. Ceftriaxone was stopped, and azithromycin was transitioned to oral 500 mg daily.
She continued to have persistent abdominal pain and anorexia. A repeat CT scan obtained nine days after surgery showed peritoneal enhancement and several fluid collections. A diagnostic paracentesis was performed, and the peritoneal fluid was sent to an outside institution for 16S ribosome analysis, to isolate bacterial RNA.
Her abdominal pain and leukocytosis slowly improved. She continued to have severe anorexia and food aversion, despite reassuring physical exam findings. On hospital day 23, she was discharged home on oral azithromycin. Several days after discharge, 16S ribosome testing revealed Mycoplasma hominis RNA within the peritoneal fluid. Her outpatient antibiotic was changed to oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for three months. She was closely followed as an outpatient and gradually demonstrated clinical improvement. She remains well ten months after hospitalization.