An 81-year-old man presented with abdominal discomfort. Computed tomography imaging revealed a large tumor with intermediate signal intensity, showing heterogeneous contrast enhancement in the subphrenic area and the feeding artery originated from the diaphragm . Within several days, he suddenly experienced loss of consciousness. Serum examination indicated hypoglycemia (glucose levels, 18 mg/dL). Insulin (1.05 μIU/mL), C-peptide (0.71 ng/ml), and IGF1 (39 ng/mL) levels were all relatively low but still within the physiological range. Western blot analysis of the patient’s serum revealed overexpression of high-molecular-weight IGF-2 designated “big IGF-2” . Along with glucose compensation, the patient underwent surgery for total tumor resection. In the operative view, the large tumor appeared to compress the right lobe of the liver without invasion. The feeding artery originating from the diaphragm was ligated and divided. A part of the diaphragm was resected with autosuture owing to firm adherence of the diaphragm to the artery. The tumor was then dissected along the liver surface without simultaneous resection of any other organs, and a tumor-free margin was achieved macroscopically. The tumor measured 34 cm at the major axis and weighed 1350 g and was well demarcated by a fibrous membrane. The resected surface was elastic, firm, had an ivory-like appearance, and was multilobulated with trabeculation. The solid component was predominant, and a small myxoid component was also noted . Microscopically, spindle cells generally constituted the tumor without specific cellular arrangement in the solid component . A few areas in this component demonstrated keloid-like collagenous stroma and stag horn-like vessels. However, some areas with myxoid appearance upon gross examination revealed a multi-cystic formation by cavernous hemangioma-like septa. Karyokinesis was detected in more than 0/10 high-power fields in the hypercellular area. Necrosis was obscure. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells expressed STAT6 and CD34. The highest Ki-67 labeling index was 15%. These results confirmed that the tumor was a malignant SFT. In addition, the tumor cells exhibited cytoplasmic IGF2 expression , specifically with paranuclear dot-like reactivity. The tumor cells were positive for IGF2R but negative for IGF1R. Since surgery, the patient has been free from tumor recurrence and hypoglycemia for more than 24 months.