A 4-day-old full-term firstborn baby boy born to a 19-year-old mother was admitted to the neonatal ICU with complaints of bilious vomiting and delayed meconium passage. During clinical examination, we discovered forehead hair, eye, and right forearm discoloration. , and an erect abdominal X-ray revealed air fluid level, which is a radiological sign of intestinal obstruction, with suspected intestinal atresiawe as a periliminary diagnosis . Blood analysis revealed elevated coagulation parameters, urea and creatinine . Then started the correcting process: NG tube decompression and NPO.
After correcting the laboratory findings, we went to Operation, believing the cause of the intestinal obstruction was intestinal atresia. We made an incision of the right supra umbilical transverse incision and externated the whole intestine and searched for the atresia site but could not find it. Instead, we found a normal caliber of intestine to the terminal ileum, where intestinal caliber diminished. We controlled the patency of the lumen and it was patent. We thought this was caused by mild malrotation. Then we checked the large bowel and it looked normal after that closed abdomen.
For the following 8 days, we waited with the expectation of passing stool spontaneously, which unfortunately did not happen, and continued bilious drainage by NG tube. Then we did contrast clongraphy, which revealed a narrowed colon to the terminal ileum, which confirmed our suspicion of total colonic aganglionosis.
By searching for causes of total colonic hirschsprung disease with eye, hair, and skin discoloration, we came across the syndrome called WAARDENBURG SHAH SYNDEOME (TYPE IV). Later, we discovered through a family history that the patient's mother had a variant of Waardeburge syndrome with only right eye iris hypopigmentation and her grandmother had forelok discoloration, which indicates that this disease is genetically inherited. The following day, we operated on the neonate, taking a full-thickness biopsy from the terminal ileum to the rectosigmoid junction, opening a loop ileostomy 10 cm above the where-seems transition zone, and taking a biopsy from the stoma's mouth before closing the abdomen . The pathology results revealed the presence of ganglion cells at the stoma site and an absence of ganglion cells from the terminal ileum to the rectum, which confirms total colonic Hirschsprung disease. Stoma started working on post-op day 3 and started oral feeding with a small amount and increased gradually until reaching full feeding regarding his age and being discharged. He was readmitted with.
He was readmitted with severe dehydration due to excessive stoma output and passed away at the age of 2 months due to intractable sepsis.