A 50-year-old housewife was diagnosed to have end-stage renal disease of uncertain etiology. After being on hemodialysis for one year, she underwent living unrelated renal transplantation at another centre with basiliximab induction followed by triple drug immunosuppression with tacrolimus (trough level 6.7-8.8 ng/mL), mycophenolate mofetil (1 gm twice daily) and prednisolone (5 mg daily). The pretransplant CMV sero-status of the donor and recipient was not known and she was not on prophylaxis for CMV. Three months post transplant, she was admitted with fever, headache, oral ulcers and dysphagia of one week duration and soon after admission she developed slurring of speech with drowsiness and weakness of left upper and lower limbs. During the preceding three months, she had maintained normal graft function and did not receive any anti-rejection therapy. There was no history of contact with pets or occupational exposure. At presentation, she was hemodynamically stable, febrile, had multiple oral ulcers with left hemiparesis and right upper motor neuron facial palsy. Her hemoglobin was 112 gm/L, total leukocyte count 7.8 × 109/L, platelet count 145 × 109/L and serum creatinine 78 μmol/L. Noncontrast computerized tomography (CT) followed by magnetic resonance imaging of brain revealed a 3 × 3 cm hypodense lesion in right temporo-parietal region with significant peri-lesional edema . An endoscopic examination for dysphagia revealed multiple esophageal ulcers, biopsy from which was positive for cytomegalovirus inclusions. Whole blood quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for CMV was positive with 17500 copies/mL. Simultaneously, a stereotactic biopsy from the brain lesion was performed. Fungal staining of the material showed septate hyphae, while fungal cultures grew melanin producing filamentous fungi with brown-black colonies. A lactophenol cotton blue mount demonstrated numerous single-celled, broadly clavate to ovoid conidia, 4–9 × 6–10 mm in size, rounded above with truncate bases, borne singly or in small groups on elongated, simple or branched conidiophores or on hyphae. These features confirmed the diagnosis of Scedosporium apiospermum . Mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus were stopped and she was started on intravenous (i.v.) ganciclovir and i.v. voriconazole. After one week of therapy, she became afebrile with improvement of power in the left upper limb. A repeat CT scan of the head done after one week showed reduction in size of the lesion . After 3 weeks of therapy, the patient showed significant improvement in the slurred speech and she became ambulatory with support. There was significant reduction in size in repeat CT scan. Repeat CMV PCR done after three weeks was negative and patient was started on valganciclovir prophylaxis and oral voriconazole. The levels of voriconazole were monitored and maintained between 1–5.0 μg/mL for initial 3 months. At the end of two months, she was readmitted with fever and dry cough. Chest radiograph and high resolution CT chest showed thin smooth walled cavitary lesion with surrounding consolidation. A fine-needle aspiration demonstrated acid-fast bacilli, which were confirmed to be Mycobacterium tuberculosis on culture. A CT chest was not obtained during the first hospitalization, thus we cannot exclude the possibility of either Scedosporium or tuberculosis in the lung at that time. She responded well with rifampicin based four drug antituberculous therapy. During the first month of rifampicin therapy, the median dose of voriconazole needed to be increased to 600 mg per day to maintain its levels in the therapeutic range, while subsequently voriconazole was given at a fixed dose of 200 mg once a day as secondary chemoprophylaxis. At six months of follow-up, she had recovered completely. She was maintaining normal graft function with prednisolone 10 mg once a day with a plan to introduce azathioprine. She continues to take 200 mg of voriconazole, while her antituberculous therapy and valganciclovir have been stopped. She was evaluated for an occult primary immunosuppressive disorder with defective cell mediated immunity, in view of the repeated life threatening infections. There was no hypogammaglobulinemia or CD4 cytopenia and her human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) status was negative.