A 54-year-old Thai man presented with low back pain lasting for 2 months. The symptom was gradually progressive and was aggravated by movements. The pain was referred to both legs and did not improve with medications. Later, the patient experienced weakness and numbness in his right leg and had walking difficulties. In addition, he had urinary retention which required urinary catheterization. The patient's symptoms worsened and limited his daily activities. Examination revealed generalized erythematous plaques on his head, trunk, back, and extremities. He also had several flaccid blisters. The patient had grade III motor weakness and paresthesia in his entire right leg; however, there was minimal motor weakness on the left side. Sacral sensation and sphincter tone were intact. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine showed a pattern of arachnoiditis at the L1-5 level. There were also multiple hypersignal intensity bead-like lesions on T2-weighted images in the spinal canal of the L4-5 vertebral level. The lesions were not enhanced with contrast . Laminectomy in the L4-5 with lesionectomy was performed because we considered a spinal infection resulting in the recent neurological deficits. During surgery, we observed that the nerve roots were severely clumped together and had arachnoid adhesion. The lesions were found to be multiple tapeworms between the nerve roots and were completely removed with partial lysis of the adhesions under nerve root monitoring . Microscopic examination demonstrated the presence of spargana with thick outer eosinophilic teguments and inner calcospherites . Therefore, spinal sparganosis was diagnosed.
The patient was a monk on pilgrimage and had ingested uncooked frogs, snakes, and other amphibians for 10 years. The year prior to his visit he was diagnosed with bullous pemphigoid and was on high-dose prednisolone since then. Further investigation was done to rule out potentially disseminated sparganosis. In addition, the patient had a history of epilepsy, which was neither investigated nor treated. Although brain MRI indicated cerebral atrophy with surrounding hypersignal intensity in the left parieto-occipital area on T2-weighted images, which is compatible with old inflammation, there was no evidence of the live parasite in the brain . An ocular examination by an ophthalmologist indicated the presence of an abnormal cystic, worm-like mass with calcification in the right conjunctiva. This was considered a nonactive lesion. However, we did not perform an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for sparganum or a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study. A stool examination revealed no evidence of parasite infection.
In the early postoperative period, the patient still had severe back pain; however, this improved during follow-up after a few months. Radicular pain, and weakness were also improved; however, neurological function of the urinary bladder was still deficit.