A 38-year-old male (Caucasian) patient from Turkey presented with a persistent severe headache with a duration of approximately three months. Both the severity and duration of the symptoms increased gradually during this time. Vomiting, nausea, and temporary gait disturbance were present during the three weeks leading up to his hospital visit. According to his clinical history, his headache did not respond to any prescribed medication, and his complaints did not correspond to a specific posture. Hematological parameters were within normal limits, and the serological test for human immunodeficiency virus was negative. Visual field and visual quality were tested with standard clinical finger confrontation. The results of tests were free of abnormal findings. A fundoscopic examination revealed that his optic disc margins, ratio of artery to vein sizes and venous pulsation were within normal limits. Mid-line cerebellar function was tested by having our patient walk on a straight line, and hemispheric cerebellar function was tested by having our patient perform rapid alternating movements and by rapidly having him touch his nose or the physician's moving index finger. The examinations of cerebellar, ganglionic, and cortico-spinal pathways were all normal. The results of all of these neurological examinations were within normal limits and suggested that our patient did not have any symptoms of neurological disturbance. To identify the underlying pathology, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. This examination revealed that the third ventricle was completely filled with a mass-like lesion that was hypointense on T1-weighted scans and hyperintense on T2-weighted scans. The lesion was partially obstructing the foramen of Monro; however, it did not cause severe hydrocephalus . Our patient underwent surgery for a craniotomy.
An intra-hemispheral transcallosal approach was performed, allowing access to his right ventricle and the foramen of Monro. Due to tumoral expansion, the foramen of Monro was dilated. Although analysis of a frozen section was consistent with PCNSL, the tumor was completely resected without complication.
Histopathological examination revealed increased lymphoma sheets of round cells with small to moderate amounts of cytoplasm . Our patient underwent a staging evaluation that included a whole-body positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan, bone marrow biopsy and analysis of blood chemistry. All of these procedures failed to reveal any abnormalities. The PET/CT scan showed a slight accumulation of 2-[18F] fluoro-2-deoxyglucose in the original location of the tumor.
A post-operative cranial computed tomography (CT) scan concluded soon after surgery revealed a hematoma in the third ventricle . The neurological examination was free of symptoms. Follow-up CT scans were conducted and revealed a blood clot that obstructed the foramen of Monro, resulting in hydrocephalus. However, the follow-up cranial CT scan did not show the hydrocephalus, which indicated that the hematoma was no longer present. Our patient refused all treatment options except corticosteroids. A follow-up cranial MRI conducted six months after surgery showed that the lymphoma had not reoccurred . Our patient was available for follow-up after one year.