A 75-year-old man with a history of stage 4 prostate carcinoma that was first diagnosed in 2008 developed an idiopathic limbal stem cell deficiency and underwent bilateral keratoepithelioplasty by a previous doctor in 2011. He was prescribed the therapeutic contact lenses postoperatively. He was referred to our clinic for further ophthalmic therapy in November 2012.
Our initial examination found that he had bilateral end-stage primary open-angle glaucoma, prior bilateral keratoepithelioplasty, and phacoemulsification with posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation in the left eye. His decimal visual acuity with Landolt broken ring chart was 0.07 in the right eye and 0.2 in the left eye, and his intraocular pressures were 13 mmHg in the right eye and 13 mmHg in the left eye. He had been treated with 0.3% topical gatifloxacin and 0.1% topical fluorometholone twice a day, topical travoprost and timolol maleate once a day, and 1% topical dorzolamide hydrochloride three times a day for glaucoma. He was also prescribed therapeutic contact lenses for both eyes to protect the corneal epithelium. Systemically, he had stage 4 prostate carcinoma and had had a cerebral infarction. He had been treated with oral anti-androgen drug and 0.1mg/day of dexamethasone. His general condition was very poor. He was examined monthly, and his ocular condition had stabilized by September 2015. His decimal visual acuity with Landolt broken ring chart was 0.2 in the right and left eyes, and his intraocular pressures were 6 mmHg in the right and left eyes in September 2015.
He visited our clinic in October 2015 with blurred vision in his left eye of two weeks duration. Our slit-lamp examination showed a greyish-white epithelial opacity in the central cornea of his left eye . His decimal visual acuity with Landolt broken ring chart was 0.2 in the right eye and 0.07 in the left eye, and his intraocular pressures were 14 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. The patient was advised to stop using the therapeutic contact lens and 0.1% topical fluorometholone. Fungiflora Y staining of cultures of corneal smears and therapeutic contact lens swabs were negative for fungus but Gram-positive organisms were detected. The organisms were unicellular, spherical, and contained multiple endospores . We identified the organisms as Prototheca spp. based on the morphology. He was started on topical 0.3% tobramycin four times a day, but he could not continue because of irritation. So, 0.5% AMPH-B ointment was prescribed three times a day along with 0.2% topical FLCZ six times a day, and corneal surface debridement was performed four times. The keratitis improved and 4 months later a culture of the ocular surface was negative for Prototheca spp..
We planned to continue the AMPH-B and FLCZ treatments but had to stop the eye treatments because of a worsening of his general condition. Two months later, a greyish-white epithelial opacity in the cornea of his left eye was detected again . We considered either continuing with the medical treatments or performing therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) even though there was a risk of disseminating Prototheca into the intraocular space. We presented the risks of both treatment plans, and the patient declined undergoing therapeutic PKP. So, he was retreated with 0.5% AMPH-B ointment three times a day and 0.2% topical FLCZ six times a day without debridement, and the lesion did not recur. From November 2016 to April 2018, the grayish-white lesion continued to recur during periods of radiation for the recurrence of the prostate carcinoma and invasion of the urinary bladder. We continued the AMPH-B and FLCZ treatments, and the lesions were improved whenever his general condition recovered. The recurrent lesions were intermittent and remained only in the epithelial layer and did not spread into deeper layers. In April 2018, 300 mg/day of oral VRCZ was added to the treatment regimen because new grayish-white epithelial infiltrations were noted. Two months later he stopped the oral medication because he was diagnosed by his oncologist to be at the terminal stage, and he was switched topical 1% VRCZ six times a day. The infiltration was slowly resolved but he died in September 2018.