A 52-year-old North African man was transferred from an emergency unit to our department for unstable angina of 24 hours’ duration. He had a history of hypertension and dyslipidemia and he had smoked tobacco for 30 years. Progressive effort-induced angina and exertional dyspnea had been deliberately neglected for 10 years until recent onset of acute coronary syndrome. On clinical examination, he was hypertensive at 142/83 mmHg with a regular pulse at 59/minute and body mass index of 25 kg/m2. His heart sounds were normal without any additional sounds or murmurs. His lungs were clear to auscultation and there was no peripheral edema or jugular venous turgor. The auscultation of carotid arteries was normal.
Resting electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm at 55 beats per minute (bpm) without any ST segment changes. There were anteroseptal Q waves and inverted T-waves on apical and lateral leads. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a normal LV size and function (LV ejection fraction at 68%) with normal motions of all segments . The LV filling pressures were low. Systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 24 mmHg and the right ventricular size and function were normal. Coronary angiography revealed total occlusion of LMCA with no antegrade flow in the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the circumflex artery (Cx) . RCA was dominant and well developed; it irrigated the left coronary arterial network through an extensive collateral circulation . However, RCA had a significant stenosis .
He was referred 2 days after coronary angiogram to surgery for elective on-pump CABG. Anesthesia was uneventful: cisatracurium besylate, midazolam, thiopental, and propofol. After median sternotomy, the internal thoracic arteries and the saphenous vein graft (SVG) were harvested. His right internal thoracic artery (RITA) was anastomosed to left internal thoracic artery (LITA) to make composite “LITA-RITA-Y” graft configuration. A cardiopulmonary bypass, performed by aortic and venous cannulation, was conducted under moderate systemic hypothermia. Myocardial protection was achieved with antegrade cold blood high potassium cardioplegia. We carried on with distal anastomoses of SVG to RCA, RITA to obtuse marginal branch, and, finally, LITA sequentially to diagonal artery and LAD. His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged at day 9. The 6-month control showed good recovery without residual chest pain or dyspnea and a normal physical examination without signs of heart failure. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm at 63 bpm with no ST segment changes and persistence of anteroseptal Q waves, but disappearance of inverted T-waves on apical and lateral leads. An X-ray of his chest was normal without cardiomegaly; transthoracic echocardiography showed normal LV size and function with 62% of ejection fraction and normal segmental contractility.