A 31-year-old female was referred to the ED with spontaneous onset pain in the right upper quadrant and flank region accompanied by nausea and flatulence. Initial vitals were apyretic, respiratory rate 28/min, heart rate 118 beats/min, blood pressure 85/50 mmHg, with normal oxygen saturation. On physical examination, the patient had significant pain in the epigastric and right flank region with involuntary guarding, but signs of peritoneal irritation or a palpable intra-abdominal mass were absent. There was no evidence of acute cholecystitis, appendicitis, or peritonitis. The patient had no history of surgery, trauma, calculus, and drug abuse. Her family and social histories were unremarkable.
Laboratory investigation showed a white blood cell count of 11.3 K/cmm, hemoglobin of 48g/dL, hematocrit of 30.7%, and serum creatinine of 2.4 mg/dL. Tumor markers, including alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen (CA 199 and CA 125), were within normal limits. Also, no abnormal data in the blood hormonal sampling, including adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, aldosterone, and epinephrine, were observed. Bedside ultrasound of the abdomen revealed an irregular and heterogeneous mass in the retroperitoneal space with an obvious fluid collection in the right subhepatic space. Hemoglobin on repeat cell count was 39 g/dL. After a rapid intravenous infusion of 500 ml of Ringer’s lactate solution and 500 ml of 10% hydroxyethyl starch, urgent non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a 7×8 cm well-contained, right-sided retroperitoneal hemorrhage between the liver and right kidney .
An urgent laparotomy was performed, revealing a massive right-sided retroperitoneal hematoma with a small amount of intraperitoneal blood. The ascending colon was mobilized to give a more complete view of this large mass and hematoma situated between the liver and right kidney. The right adrenal gland was closely adherent and was excised along with the mass. The cut surface of the mass showed some areas of necrosis. Histological examination confirmed the features of cavernous hemangioma. Microscopically, histology showed degenerative changes in vessel walls, some of which were obliterated. The blood-filled lacunae were lined by benign endothelial cells. The periphery represented a normal adjacent adrenal gland . There were no signs of malignancy. The patient did well postoperatively and was discharged after 7 days. Surgical resection was curative, with no recurrence at the 1-year follow-up.