A 81-year-old man with an adenocarcinoma of the prostate diagnosed one year earlier presented with a five month history of gradually progressive complaints of dyspnea. At the time of diagnosis of the prostate cancer, there had been no signs of metastases and since it was an asymptomatic grade 2 prostate cancer in a man of advanced age, a watchful waiting policy was followed. The medical history revealed hypertension and a transurethral resection of the prostate six years before presentation. The patient complained of dyspnea, progressive peripheral edema, orthopnea, and painful knees and thighs which made walking extremely difficult. There had been weight loss of ten kilograms over six months, with associated loss of appetite. No thoracic pain, hemoptysis or other pulmonary or cardiac complaints were present. The patient had been a heavy smoker for fifty years.
On admission his blood pressure was 150/80 mmHg with an irregular pulse of 96 per minute, temperature 36.2°C, and he had a normal central venous pressure. The heart sounds were normal. Percussion and auscultation of the left lower lung revealed dullness with diminished breath sounds. These signs were indicative of pleural effusion. The liver was not enlarged. There was pitting edema especially at the lower extremities, but also of both hands, which were also noted to be remarkably large. Percussion of, and axial pressure on, the vertebrae was not painful. The patient refused rectal examination because of painful earlier experiences.
Laboratory examination revealed the following data: ESR 35 mm in the first hour (normal: <7), CRP 134 mg/l (normal <10), hemoglobin 6.3 mmol/l (normal: 8.9–10.7) with a MCV of 82 fl (normal: 80–100), leukocytes 8.6 × 109/l (normal: 4.5–10.0) with 90% neutrophilic granulocytes (normal 40–70), normal blood platelets, electrolytes and liver enzymes. Creatinine was 77 μmol/l (normal: 64–108), alkaline phosphatase was elevated at 285 U/l (normal: 40–120), calcium was 1.95 mmol/l (normal: 2.15–2.68) with an albumin of 23.9 g/l (normal: 35–50 g/l) and a normal phosphate. Blood gas analysis showed a chronic compensated respiratory acidosis with an oxygen saturation of 80%.
Electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation with a left bundle branch block, similar to earlier ECGs. Chest X-ray revealed a large amount of pleural fluid on the left side and an enlarged heart without signs of vascular redistribution. There were no signs of tumor or pulmonary metastasis on chest X-ray.
Analysis of the pleural fluid was performed. A total amount of 4.5 liters was evacuated. Cytological and biochemical analysis showed only lymphocytosis with no signs of malignancy or bacterial infection. Auramin and Löwenstein cultures were negative. An echocardiography showed good left ventricular function. Ultrasound investigation of the abdomen showed a dilated inferior caval vein without other abnormalities. The entire presentation was compatible with right-sided heart failure in a patient with probable pulmonary hypertension. On Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) there were no pulmonary embolisms visible but a large amount of pleural fluid was seen in the left pleural cavity.
Because of the elevated alkaline phosphatase, the bone pains and the previously diagnosed prostate cancer, skeletal scintigraphy was performed. It showed a 'super scan', meaning there was diffuse uptake throughout the entire skeleton. This was judged as fitting diffuse skeletal metastasis of the prostate cancer [Figure ]. However the prostate specific antigen was within the normal range at 1.4 μg/l (normal < 4.4)
With the remarkably large hands in mind, additional investigations were carried out [Figure ]. A bone marrow examination showed no marrow disease nor malignancy. X-ray of the hands, humeri, femora and pelvis revealed extensive subperiosteal bone appositions compatible with generalized hypertrophic osteoarthropathy [Figure ]. Repeat of the earlier performed CTA indeed now showed a fluid-containing cavity in the lower left lobe surrounded by a large amount of pleural fluid at that side suggestive of a lung cancer. Bronchoscopy confirmed this diagnosis. The left main bronchus was stenotic with tumor totally occluding the left lower lobe and almost occluding the left upper lobe. Histological examination was not possible due to technical difficulties during the procedure. The diagnosis of incurable bronchial carcinoma with hypertrophic osteoarthropathy was made with the prostate cancer as an "innocent" bystander. Since the patient was rapidly deteriorating palliative care was given. The patient died several weeks after admission. Post mortum examination confirmed the clinical diagnosis. There was a large undifferentiated non-small cell lung carcinoma with a diameter of 10 cm and extension in the adventitia of the esophagus and lymphatic metastasis in the hili and mediastinum. Three liters of tumor-positive pleural fluid and extensive hypertrophic osteoarthropathy was seen without distant metastasis.