A 39-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for a laparoscopy-assisted vaginal hysterectomy under general anaesthesia (induced with midazolam, fentanyl and propofol, and maintained with sevoflurane in oxygen/air mixture). The patient reported an unremarkable medical and family history and stated that she had never smoked. She also denied the following: (a) regular exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (at home or at her workplace), (b) abuse of illicit or recreational drugs, (c) food or medication allergies, (d) recent camping or wild animal contact. A more detailed history revealed that the patient was otherwise healthy and had taken no medications prior to the present illness. Three days after her surgery (with prophylactic ampicillin/sulbactam administered as i.v. bolus), the patient experienced acute epigastric pain with vomiting and diarrhoea along with dyspnea that gradually increased in severity. The patient had a temperature of 38.2°C, blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg, hearth rate of 120 beats/min, and respiratory frequency of 30 breaths/min. Inspection of her thorax revealed decreased movement of the chest wall, a hyperresonant percussion note, diminished fremitus and reduced breath sounds on the right side. The abdominal examination showed distension, guarding, and diffuse tenderness. The patient’s physical signs and radiographic findings were compatible with peritonitis and pneumothorax; the laboratory examination revealed a leukocyte count of 2,100 cells/μL, with 84% neutrophils and 3% eosinophils. A laparotomy revealed purulent fluid throughout the abdominal cavity, which was associated with fibrinous plaques covering most of the abdominal viscera; these findings were the result of a rectal perforation. A perforation closure was performed and peritoneal toilets (a 9-day-toilet plan) were initiated. The pneumothorax was managed with a thoracostomy tube drainage. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and began an empirical treatment with piperacillin and tazobactam. On the day of admission, an arterial blood analysis yielded PaO2 of 67 mmHg and SaO2 of 91.2% on ambient air. Non-invasive ventilation was started under moderate sedation with propofol. In the meantime, Enterococcus and Escherichia coli were cultured from the peritoneal exudate. On the seventh postoperative day, the patient’s clinical condition worsened, with increasing intra-abdominal fibrinous adhesions and paralytic ileus; the previous treatment was discontinued and an empirical administration of imipenem was begun on the conjecture of possible resistant enterococci. On the tenth postoperative day, she developed a new spontaneous pneumothorax on the right side , with respiratory rate increased to 28 breaths/min; the pathological event was managed with a thoracostomy tube drainage. Because the patient’s clinical condition were worsened, imipenem was discontinued on the twelfth day and substituted with tigecycline based on the antibiotic-sensitivity results for Enterococcus faecium isolated from the peritoneal toilet on the tenth postoperative day. On the eighteenth postoperative day, the patient’s respiratory distress increased (34 breaths/min and SaO2 of 88% with 6 L/min supplemental oxygen), her temperature was 37.6°C, her hearth rate 110 beats/min and her leukocyte count 19,400 cells/μL (neutrophils 86%; eosinophils 2%). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed an abundant left-sided pleural effusion pressing on the lower pulmonary lobe, and multiple areas of alveolar infiltrates in the upper and middle right pulmonary lobes. The serology (hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus, Cytomegalovirus, Chlamydia and Mycoplasma) eventually proved negative. Antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmatic antibody and rheumatoid factors were negative or non-specific. The levels of immunoglobulin [Ig] G, IgA, IgM, complement C3 and C4 were within the normal limits, and the IgE concentration was 112 kU/L. The CD4+/CD8+ T lymphocytes ratio was 1.7; since this value is usually significantly decreased in patients with various types of respiratory viral infections, the presence of influenza virus and/or bocavirus was not investigated.
The blood cultures for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria remained sterile. No pneumocystis was detected by polymerase chain reaction. The patient was then empirically treated withceftazidime and clarithromycin for atypical pneumonia, on the basis on the radiographic findings. Despite these measures, she did not improve and continued to have fever, with a temperature of approximately 37.5°C and mild leukocytosis. On the twenty-fifth postoperative day, a chest CT scan demonstrated a left-sided pneumothorax with dense consolidations of the left upper and middle pulmonary lobes along with multiple areas of alveolar infiltrates in the upper and middle right pulmonary lobes. As the patient gradually became more dyspneic and hypoxic, she was placed under ventilation with continuous positive airway pressure. Instead of previous antibiotics, rifampicin and moxifloxacin were administered because of a positive test for Legionella, which, however, was refuted by laboratory on the following day. Because the patient’s respiratory failure further worsened, the previous treatment was discontinued and empirically substituted with three broad-spectrum antibiotics (linezolid, meropenem and moxifloxacin). Eosinophilic pneumonia was suspected when she showed no response to antibiotics within the next 2 days. Bronchoscopy demonstrated inflamed mucosa in both upper lungs with thick secretions in both lower lungs, and many nucleated cells (including 56% eosinophils) were detected in BAL fluid. These findings unequivocally supported a diagnosis of AEP, and parenteral methylprednisolone was initiated. Significant recovery occurred within the next 24 h, so the antibiotics were discontinued. The clinical symptoms further subsided and the patient was successfully extubated within 2 days after the initiation of steroids. The laboratory data and chest radiology revealed marked improvement. After 20 days in the surgery department, the patient was discharged with a course of oral prednisone that was tapered for 14 days. At 1 year following surgery, the patient did not have any recurrence of her pulmonary symptoms or infiltrates.