Physical examination on admission: Obese 61-year-old woman (BMI 30.1 kg/m2), pulse 60/min, blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, temperature 36 °C, O2 saturation 94% under mechanical ventilation. Heart, lungs, and abdomen unremarkable. Laboratory studies: Complete blood count: unremarkable. Plasma coagulation study: normal, D-dimers within normal limits, Clinical chemistry: C-reactive protein 6 mg/L (normal 5 mg/L), all other values within normal limits. ECG: Sinus rhythm, HF 60, no AV-Block, no QT time prolongation, inverted T-waves in the inferior leads (III, aVF) . Fast echocardiography: Normal systolic right and left ventricular systolic function, severe mitral regurgitation, no pericardial effusion. Chest x-ray: Normal cardiac size with evidence of pulmonary venous congestion.
Intensive care therapy achieved stabilization of the patient’s general condition. Controlled ventilation was stopped on the fourth day. Except for a hypoactive delirium, which was adequately controlled by administration of a neuroleptikum, no neurological deficits were manifested.
Evaluation of the 12-lead ECG did not reveal any evidence of ECG changes, which are normally associated with canalopathies (Brugada, ARVC, long-, short QT syndromes etc.).
However, we have registered recurrent ventricular salves during monitoring . In addition, we registered a short-lasting atrial fibrillation with spontaneous termination . Therefore, oral anticoagulation was initiated.
Follow-up echocardiography showed a significant mitral valve insufficiency with preserved left ventricular pump function. The left ventricle demonstrated mild endsystolic and enddiastolic dilatation. A severe dilatation of the left atrium (LA area 45 cm2) was noticed . The lateral mitral annular velocities was quantified with Doppler tissue imaging. The peak systolic lateral mitral annulus velocity was 18 cm/s .
Transesophageal echocardiography was performed to evaluate the mitral valve more precisely. A high-grade eccentric mitral valve insufficiency due to a pronounced PML and a mild AML prolapse could be demonstrated . Especially the PML showed thickening and myxomatous changes . The tendinous chordae appeared to be intact.
For further clarification of the arrhythmogenic event, we ordered a CMR. This exploration has shown a discreet mid-wall LGE in the LV inferobasal region . Additionally, LGE of the PM was visible on mid short-axis view . The right ventricle showed no pathology by echocardiography and CMR. A significant mitral annulus disjunction (MAD) measuring 11,2 mm was identified. .
Regarding the severe mitral valvular insufficiency due to the MVP, the case was discussed in the heart team. It was decided to provide the patient with an internal automatic cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) first and to repair the mitral valve by mini invasive surgery in 3 months.
The patient showed regression of the delirium and an increasing mobility. After implantation of an ICD device , the patient was discharged in good general condition and without significant neurological deficits. A cardio-neurological rehabilitation was organized. The first ICD follow-up analysis after 3 Weeks did not show any arrhythmogenic events. At the 3 months ICD follow up, few days after the mitral valve reconstruction, we detected a VT, which has been successfully electrocardioverted .