A 32-year-old female was admitted to hospital due to recurrent bilateral ptosis for 8 years, diplopia for 2 years and limb weakness for 1 year and a half. Eight years ago, she developed ptosis. After taking mecobalamin orally for a few months, her symptoms completely recovered. Two years ago, ptosis recurred along with diplopia, and half a year later, her condition was aggravated by limb weakness with the distal muscles more severely affected than the proximal muscles. Since then, she couldn’t take care of herself independently, and couldn’t walk on a level road without support. Fluctuations in muscle strength were not pronounced. She had normal motor development milestones but began to notice poor performance in sports since school age, and during her adult life. She can only do some indoor housework, but not the outdoor heavy farm work. During the course of the disease, no neurodevelopmental abnormalities or psychiatric symptoms were observed. The patient was born from consanguineous parents, and she has a negative family history of neurological or neuromuscular disease.
Her physical examination on admission revealed bilateral ptosis, complete external ophthalmoplegia, and diplopia. Muscle strength was 2/5 for finger/wrist extension and ankle dorsiflexion/plantar flexion, 3/5 for wrist/finger bending, while proximal muscle strength was 4/5 for upper limbs and lower limbs (grades 0–5 on the Medical Research Council Scale). The tendon reflex of both upper limbs was normal and symmetrical. The knee reflex and Achilles tendon reflex were absent, and the plantar reflexes were flexor. There were atrophy of the distal muscles of upper and lower limbs, per cavus, claw-like hands, and a steppage gait. Sensory examinations were normal. No signs of neuromyotonia were observed.
Intramuscular injection of neostigmine 1 mg significantly improved her ptosis and diplopia. The acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibody was elevated (11.793 nmol/L, normal < 0.5 nmol/L). Immunofixation electrophoresis in blood and urine was normal. Thyroid function was normal. Computed tomography of the chest showed no parenchymal abnormalities. The result of lumbar puncture cerebrospinal fluid examination was normal. Brain and spine MRI were not done, since there were no neuropsychiatric symptoms. Electromyographic studies revealed a chronic motor axonal neuropathy, without neuromyotonic or myokymic discharges . Electromyography (EMG) showed complex repetitive discharges (CRD) in the right biceps brachii, left quadriceps femoris, left anterior tibialis muscle, T12 paraspinal muscle. Decremental CMAP responses in low frequency RNS were recorded in the right deltoid muscle and the left trapezius muscle, and were not observed in the left deltoid muscle, left abductor digiti minimi muscle, right abductor pollicis brevis, and right trapezius. The magnitude of decrement was 27.4% in the right deltoid muscle and 17.7% in the left trapezius muscle respectively. The diagnosis of MG was established, and a concomitant hereditary motor axonal neuropathy was also suspected. Next generation sequencing (NGS) identified a novel homozygous missense variant c.278G > T (p.G93V) in the patient, which was later confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Her parents and the healthy younger brother all were heterozygous carriers . The amino acid G93 in HINT1 is highly evolutionarily conserved among different species . The variant c.278G > T (p.G93V) was neither found in 1000 Genomes Project databases nor in Exome Aggregation Consortium databases. Several online softwares including MutationTaster, SIFT and polyphen2 predicted that the variant may have a deleterious effect on the gene product. A different amino acid substitution for Glycine (Gly, G) at position 93 of the HINT1 protein occurred in a patient with autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia . According to the ACMG guidelines, the variant c.278G > T (p.G93V) in HINT1 can be classified as likely pathogenic. Consequently, the diagnosis of HINT1-related hereditary axonal motor neuropathy was considered.
The patient received a therapy with pyridostigmine (60 mg/6 h), oral prednisolone (35 mg/24 h) and azathioprine (100 mg/24 h). After 6 months of therapy, ptosis and diplopia greatly improved with only mild adduction deficit of the right eye. Unfortunately there has been little recovery in limb weakness. The dose of prednisone was reduced to 30 mg/24 h. Anti-AChR antibody remained elevated but to a lesser degree compared with the initial titer. She is currently followed up every 3–6 months in our neurology clinic.