A 78-year-old Japanese man underwent a bilateral partial nephrectomy for bilateral RCC 8 years ago. The pathological diagnosis was ccRCC. Seven years after bilateral partial nephrectomy, solitary lung metastasis appeared at the hilar region in the right lower lobe of the lung; thus, he underwent a thoracoscopic resection of the lobe, and it was pathologically diagnosed as metastatic ccRCC. Eight years after bilateral partial nephrectomy, multiple metastases to the pancreas and liver occurred. Biopsy revealed pancreatic and liver metastases from ccRCC. He started systemic therapy with ipilimumab (1 mg/kg) and nivolumab (240 mg). After 4 cycles (1 cycle/3 weeks) of combination therapy, nivolumab (240 mg) was continued every 2 weeks. Three months after initiating ICI therapy, he developed type 1 diabetes mellitus, and insulin replacement therapy was initiated. He also subsequently developed panhypopituitarism, necessitating hydrocortisone replacement therapy (15 mg daily). Fifteen months after initiation of ICI, he experienced right knee joint pain, and 22 months later, indurated swelling with edema in both limb joints also materialized . Laboratory tests indicated elevated inflammatory markers with C-reactive protein of 9.00 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 86 mm, and matrix metalloproteinase-3 of 999.2 ng/mL. However, RF and anti-CCP antibodies were negative, as were other autoantibodies. Ultrasonography revealed synovitis and hypervascularity in the symptomatic joints. X-ray findings of the hands and legs presented osteophyte formations and bone erosions in 11 areas. This case was diagnosed as seronegative rheumatoid arthritis according to the ACR/EULAR rheumatoid arthritis classification criteria with a total score of 7 and negative RF and anti-CCP antibodies. He had no past or family history of connective tissue disease or inflammatory arthritis. Nivolumab was suspended, and PSL treatment was initiated at 20 mg daily. Two days post-treatment, limb swelling improved, and the pain vanished after 7 days . Inflammatory markers returned to normal. PSL was gradually tapered to 9 mg/day 7 weeks after initiation, and nivolumab 240 mg was restarted. The metastatic lesions in the pancreas and liver did not increase in size during cessation of nivolumab . He remained stable after the resumption of ICI without recurrence of arthralgia or other irAEs.