An Asian male, aged 63 years, presented with sudden severe bilateral leg edema. His past medical history included hypertension that was made stable by medication for over 10 years. Abdominal CT showed various lymph node swellings, including in the left subclavian, para-aortic, and intrapelvic regions . Biopsy of the para-aortic lymph node was performed; histopathological findings revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for AE1/3 , PSA , and negative staining for TTF1 , synaptophysin , and chromogranin A . The patient was referred to our department since such results indicated the primary tumor occurred in the prostate. The serum PSA level of the patient was 20.3 ng/mL. Various serum tumor markers were within normal range, including NSE. MRI of the prostate showed an indistinct hypo-intensity in the left peripheral zone on T2-weighted images with a focal area of diffusion restriction (apparent diffusion co-efficient 0.63 × 10−3 mm2/s; Fig. ), diagnosed as prostate cancer of PI-RADS-v.2 category 4. MRI-fusion ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy showed PCa with a Gleason score of 4 + 3 . The final diagnosis was prostate cancer of stage IV (T2N1M1a) with aggravation in the short term. After informed consent, the patient agreed to be treated with a combination of surgical castration and abiraterone acetate. As a result, his serum PSA quickly decreased to 1.34 ng/mL and adverse events did not occur; all lymph node swellings gradually reduced on CT by 4 months after the initiation of treatment.
However, 10 months after the initiation of treatment, serum NSE was elevated to 27.4 ng/mL (normal range: 0–10 ng/mL), without elevation of serum PSA. Furthermore, CT revealed multiple liver nodules and bone metastasis in the fourth lumbar vertebra. Pathological findings of the specimen obtained by biopsy of liver tumor, on HE staining, nests of round to polygonal cells with scant cytoplasm and infiltrated necrosis were observed as shown in Figure . The cells were immunohistochemically positive for PSMA , CD56 , synaptophysin , and negative for chromogranin A . Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with t-SNPC, and combination chemotherapy of etoposide and cisplatin was administered. The serum NSE levels quickly decreased to a nadir level of 7.9 ng/mL and metastatic sites uniformly reduced at 3 months after the initiation of chemotherapy; however, those increased after seven cycles of treatment. After informed consent, second-line amrubicin treatment was administered but the reduction in tumor growth was insufficient. FoundationOne® CDx (Foundation Medicine Inc, Cambridge, MA, USA) was used for cancer-related gene profiling of a formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded liver tumor specimen that identified a BRCA2 mutation at H1223fs*9. Considering this result, a PARP inhibitor was promising drug, however, progression of the tumor was very rapid, and finally, the patient died because of cancer-related disseminated intravascular coagulation 10 months after the initiation of first-line chemotherapy.