In March 2018, an 85-year-old man with no medical history was admitted after a 6-month history of worsening pain and swelling in the right wrist. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a large region of tenosynovitis from the distal forearm to the palm, and a biopsy of the synovial membrane was performed. Histological testing showed granulomatous inflammation. After nine weeks of culture on Ogawa medium (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial CO., Japan), smooth non-pigmented colonies were observed. The colony was positive for Ziehl Neelsen stain, suggesting acid fast bacilli. Initial testing with AccuProbe (Hologic, Marlborough, MA) was positive for MAC, with a value of 197,546 relative light units (RLU). COBAS TaqMan MTB/MAI (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland), another real-time PCR test, was positive for M. intracellulare as well. However, further identification of the isolate using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; MALDI Biotyper Version 2.0, Bruker Daltonics, US) suggested that the isolate was M. marseillense, with a score of 2.023 indicating a probable species identification. Because of this discordance, the rpoB and hsp65 regions were sequenced [, ]. In the Basic Logical Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) analysis, both sequences showed a 99.7% (E value, 0.0) and 100.0% (E value, 0.0) alignment respectively with those of Mycobacterium marseillense (GenBank accession number CP023147.1).
Drug susceptibility testing was performed by a broth microdilution test, BrothMIC NTM (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial Co., Japan). Based on the breakpoints proposed by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute , the isolate was sensitive to clarithromycin and amikacin. Subsequently, clarithromycin, ethambutol and rifampicin were initiated, and symptoms subsided gradually over the following month. Rifampicin was discontinued due to neutropenia after 2 months. Unfortunately, the patient died from an unrelated cause six months after the initiation of treatment.