61-year-old man was referred to the cardiologist at a highly specialized Danish university hospital, Rigshospitalet, for an evaluation of severe congestive heart failure (CHF) in 2017. He had a history of CHF, dilated cardiomyopati since many years and left ventricular ejection fraction at 20%. About half a year ago, he had an ablation due to tendency to ventricular tachycardia. He was assessed to NYHA class III and had multiple heart failure-related hospitalizations in the past few years. He presented a clinical challenge, as it was difficult to control his fluid balance. He was deemed a candidate for a CardioMEMS device, which was implanted in the fall 2018 without complications. His pulmonary artery pressure was found too high, and subsequently tried lowered by many different kinds of diuretics. However, trying to drain his fluid overload by diuretics turned out to have severe adverse effects:

○ Kidney parameters increased rapidly
○ Hypokalemia
○ Ventricular tachycardia
In a little more than 3 months’ time, the patient went from a state of CHF with diuresis to a state with chronic kidney disease and anuria. He started on a hemodialysis regime with in-hospital dialysis three times weekly through a central venous catheter. After 8 dialysis sessions, he was in start 2019 referred to Department of Nephrology at a bigger university hospital outside Copenhagen, North Zealand University Hospital, Hillerød. This rare combination of having an implanted CardioMEMS device and ongoing hemodialysis gave the possibility to invasively monitor pulmonary pressure in course of the dialysis sessions, and compare the results to clinical assessment and bioimpedance analysis. The sessions were conducted. Bioimpedance2. Bioimpedance (BIA) was measured by a multifrequency portable whole-body bioimpedance spectroscopy device (Fresenius Medical care). By intradialytic hypotension is understood a decrease in systemic blood pressure along with clinical symptoms as assessed by the responsible dialysis nurse. Pre-dialytic blood samples was planned once weekly. Endpoint was set to be either 10 dialysis, patient death or withdrawal for other reasons.