A 40-year-old male presented to us with right flank pain experienced for two weeks. Pain was colicky in nature, radiating to genitalia, associated with vomiting. Bowel habits were normal. There was no history suggestive of any other system involvement. Examination was unremarkable. Computed Tomography (CT) of urinary system revealed right hydronephrosis and a calculus measured 0.9x0.8x0.6cm located in the right upper ureter, and the distance between the stone and renal pelvis was 7.44cm (a).
Ureteroscopic removal was planned. Forceful placement of rigid ureteroscope resulted in instrument drag, which hampered its maneuverability. An attempt at extraction produced full-length complete avulsion of ureter. The avulsed ureter was pulled out of body (b), and the native ureter was preserved in physiological saline. The reconstruction treatment selection was a decision made for the patient after extensive discussion with urologists of the Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University. After discussing the complication with the patient, his spouse and his family members, we underwent ureteral reconstruction by standard open surgical techniques. About 6 hours after ureteral avulsion, pyeloureterostomy plus greater omentum investment outside the avulsed ureter and ureterovesical anastomosis were performed for the patient. A single double-J stent tube (6F, Budd Company) was placed inside the ureter (c-f).
The patient was followed-up for 34 months. Plain abdominal radiography (KUB) and CT indicated that there was no hydronephrosis and the position of double-J tube was normal (a and b). At 3 months, CT indicated that there was a stone like-material attached to the double-J tube (c). After extensive discussion with urologists and with the patient, his spouse and his family members, we decided to pull out the double-J tube finally. At 5 months, CT indicated that there were no hydronephrosis and other abnormalities (d). At 23 months after first operation, CT revealed right hydronephrosis and a new upper ureteral stone (e). Rigid ureteroscopy and holmium laser lithotripsy were used, and a single double-J stent tube was placed inside the ureter after management, which was removed one month later. At 34 months, CT of urinary system revealed no hydronephrosis, renal atrophy or other complication (f).