Our patient is a 51-year-old Filipino female who had been recently diagnosed with hypertension, non-compliant with medication, presented to the emergency department with acute confusion for 1 day and repeated vomiting. There was no history of loss of consciousness or seizures. On admission, her blood pressure was 198/120 mm Hg, pulse was 92/min, and respiratory rate was 20/min. On examination, her glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 14/15, pupils were 3 mm, equal and reactive bilaterally. No evident cranial nerve palsy was observed. There was no papilledema.
Patient underwent CT scan brain and CT angiogram (CTA), which showed dilatation of both lateral and the third ventricles with periventricular hypo densities suggestive of transependymal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) permeation. No intracranial hemorrhage was seen . The fourth ventricle was normal. The patient underwent external ventricular drain (EVD) insertion for decompression of the ventricular system, following which the patient's GCS improved. Postoperatively, left facial palsy was noted.
The following day, we performed MRI with MR angiogram (MRA) and CSF flow studies. This revealed residual dilatation of both lateral and the anterior part of the third ventricle . MRA revealed a dominant left vertebral artery, an elongated basilar artery reaching 18 mm above the dorsum sellae, which was elevating and compressing the posterior floor of the third ventricle and aqueduct, hence causing dilatation of the anterior third ventricle. The basilar artery was not significantly dilated and was slightly deviated off the midline. CSF flow studies did not show any flow in the third or lateral ventricles. Good flow was noted in the fourth ventricle, cistern magna, and pre-pontine cistern. Few incidental lacunar infarcts were seen in the thalamus and basal ganglia.
On retrospect, the third ventricular compression and the elevation of the basilar bifurcation was overlooked on the initial CTA. MRI and MRA were useful in settling the diagnosis.
Finally, the external ventricular drain was converted to ventriculo-peritoneal shunt and was subsequently discharged.