A 76-year-old female presented with MDD with inadequate response to antidepressants, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, pseudobulbar affect, insomnia, restless leg syndrome, constipation, back pain, gastroesophageal reflux disease, hyperlipidemia, and glaucoma. Smoking status was not disclosed. Hepatic, kidney, and thyroid function laboratory values were all within normal limits (e.g., albumin, AST, ALT, creatinine, BUN, total protein, globulin, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin total, thyroid-stimulating hormone). The medications prescribed by the primary care provider (PCP) to manage her various medical conditions are listed in Table .
The patient’s chief complaint was uncontrolled depression despite multiple attempts with various antidepressants. These medications include bupropion, escitalopram, and venlafaxine which all resulted in the patient experiencing ADEs and/or inadequate depression control. In brief and based on medical history, the patient was initially started on bupropion which was discontinued as she experienced uncontrolled shaking. Escitalopram was then used for 2 months and was discontinued due to an unknown reaction. Subsequently, venlafaxine was used for 3 months without favorable outcomes. This led to the introduction of other medications, such as: sertraline, risperidone and duloxetine. Additionally, this patient was also treated with quetiapine, although initiation date of treatment was unknown. The timeline for her antidepressant trials and other concomitant medications, including prescription and over the counter, is depicted in Table .
This participant had recently enrolled in the Program of All-inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE). Within the PACE model, pharmacists and other healthcare practitioners collaborate to identify and mitigate medication-related problems . PGx testing is one of the initiatives utilized to further improve the care of PACE participants. Being newly introduced to the management of this patient, a clinical pharmacist recommended a PGx test to optimize MDD management; this recommendation was accepted by the PCP. A DNA sample was collected via buccal swab and analyzed by a genetic laboratory (CQuentia, Memphis, TN; Genetic Response Report) and the clinical pharmacist was consulted to interpret relevant pharmacogenomic results. The patient was identified as a CYP2C19 IM, with a CYP2C19*2|*17 genotype, and as a CYP2D6 IM, with a CYP2D6*1|*4 genotype.
Although the clinical pharmacist assessed the complete drug regimen, only recommendations relevant to antidepressant and antipsychotic therapies will be discussed in this case report. It is also worth acknowledging that although the patient’s chief complaint was uncontrolled depression and focus was on the MDD diagnosis, there are common symptoms with regards to her present psychiatric comorbidities. DGIs were considered relevant for the metabolism of duloxetine and risperidone (CYP2D6), and for the disposition of sertraline (CYP2C19). The CYP2D6 IM phenotype is associated with reduced enzyme activity and decreased clearance of CYP2D6 substrates. Hence, the risk of toxicity is increased for risperidone and to a lesser extent for duloxetine; it should be noted that the major metabolic pathway for duloxetine is through CYP1A2 (70%), while the contribution of 2D6 is limited to 30%. Similarly, a CYP2C19 IM has reduced enzyme activity, which results in decreased sertraline clearance and increased risk of toxicity.
The clinical pharmacist also identified three clinically significant DDIs . Quinidine, a potent CYP2D6 inhibitor, is expected to inhibit the metabolism of risperidone and duloxetine. Such inhibition occurs regardless of the time of administration of the drugs as this interaction is mechanistically a non-competitive inhibition. The CDSS, which is based on algorithms and several pharmacological factors, was used to determine the presence of drug-induced phenoconversion (patent: WO 2019/089725). Quinidine inhibition of CYP2D6 resulted in phenoconversion whereby this patient’s phenotype is converted from a CYP2D6 IM to a PM phenotype. When this interaction occurs, the plasma concentrations of risperidone and duloxetine are likely to be higher than predicted from the genotypic results alone. Lastly, DDIs were also identified by the CDSS on the CYP3A4 metabolic pathway; risperidone and quinidine are drugs with stronger affinity for the CYP3A4 enzyme than quetiapine. Consequently, these drugs are expected to competitively inhibit the metabolism of quetiapine when co-administered. When this interaction occurs, the plasma concentrations of quetiapine are likely to be significantly higher than predicted (CYP3A4 contributes to 75% of the total clearance of quetiapine), increasing the risk for toxicity. A similar mechanism of DDI occurs between sertraline —a CYP3A4 substrate with low affinity— risperidone, and quetiapine. CYP3A4 is responsible of 25% of the total clearance of sertraline, leading to moderately clinically significant changes in plasma concentrations of sertraline (if only this route of elimination is affected).
When performing the assessment and making recommendations, the clinical pharmacist considered several factors including previous unsuccessful medication trials, PGx test results and concomitant medications. Quetiapine has a low affinity for the dopamine 2 receptor, which is required for antipsychotic efficacy, therefore higher doses may be required for clinical effects for mood disorders and agitation. Additionally, quetiapine has mixed results for the treatment of dementia psychosis and agitation . Given this information and the DDI impacting the metabolism of quetiapine at CYP3A4, it was recommended that the PCP taper off the quetiapine while simultaneously optimizing the risperidone dose and frequency (targeting the lowest effective dose). Continued monitoring (e.g., EKG, palpitations) for risperidone was also suggested due to an increased risk of QTc prolongation caused by the presence of a DGI and a DDI at CYP2D6, and by the combination of quinidine , risperidone , rosuvastatin , quetiapine , and pantoprazole , which have all been associated with drug-induced QTc prolongation. Furthermore, it was recommended to optimize antidepressant therapy dosing based on clinical response and presence of ADEs.
Over the next 8 weeks the aforementioned recommendations were accepted by the PCP, who before implementing had a thorough discussion with the patient’s psychiatrist to account for other non-PGx factors. Tapering of the quetiapine dose was attempted and risperidone did not require a further increase in dose. Antidepressant therapy was optimized by increasing the duloxetine dose from 30 mg to 60 mg daily, the patient was monitored closely during dose escalation. It was determined that the dose of sertraline would be re-assessed based upon therapeutic response to these changes. The PCP reported that the patient was experiencing less anxiety and better control of depression as frequent monitoring was continued.