In October 2009, a four-year-old girl was referred to the Rare Disease Unit of Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, presenting with phthisis bulbi (atrophy of the ocular bulb) of the left eye. She was the second child of Caucasian, non-consanguineous parents. Since the age of two-year-old, she developed recurrent episodes of conjunctivitis with pseudomembranes on the eyelids. After the failure of medical treatments, topical antibiotics and steroids, the lesions were surgically excised, but after a few weeks, they recurred, and conjunctivitis persisted. The surgical procedure was repeated twice.
After the third recurrence, she was referred to our unit with a suspected diagnosis of LC.
At first examination, the left eye presented a red, woody-like pseudomembrane (9 mm thick) that involved the edge of the upper lid and the upper tarsal conjunctiva, causing ectropion of the lid . Slit lamp examination revealed a yellow-white membrane affecting the bulbar conjunctiva, fornix, and cornea, hampering the evaluation of both anterior and posterior segments. Brain MRI with Optic Nerves study, showed severe involvement of the left eye .
The right eye examination showed a small area of corneal de-epithelialization with a paracentral stromal opacity, and a whitish-yellow soft pseudomembrane involving the upper tarsal conjunctiva. The bulbar conjunctiva was not involved, and the rest of the ocular examination was normal. .
After approval of the local Ethical Committee, treatment was started with topical plasminogen drops prepared from fresh frozen plasma (Kedrion Industrie Farmaceutiche, Lucca, Italy) in sodium hyaluronate, according to the Watts formulation [, ]. An intensive treatment schedule was chosen, with two drops instilled every two hours in both eyes.
A rapid and complete response was observed in the right eye after one week. . In the left eye, we observed a reduction of the pseudomembranes after one week of treatment . The therapy was further intensified three days before surgery to two drops every hour. After that the red woody-like membrane was surgically removed. The thickened subconjunctival tissue was debulked via a conjunctival approach but the ectropion and lid retraction was not corrected until the upper lid retractors were recessed. The debulked posterior surface of the tarsus was left bare to granulate and the debulked flaps of conjunctiva were approximated to the upper border of the tarsus. The eyelid margin was left intact. A prosthetic shell was inserted behind the eyelids to maintain the conjunctival sac. The plasminogen was restarted every two hours.
The eye drop schedule was prolonged from every two hours to every four hours, and there was no evidence of membrane reformation at the twelve-month follow-up evaluation up to the present twelve-year follow-up and the eye prosthesis is well tolerated .
After three years of follow-up a nodular asymptomatic gingival hypertrophy with ulceration around the eruption site of tooth 36, was found. Non-surgical management of the lesion and strict follow-up was performed. The first molar erupted completely, with no signs of bone and periodontal pathology.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by using NucleoSpin tissue, according to the manufacturer's protocol (Macherey–Nagel, Germany). Whole exome sequencing (WES) was conducted on the proband and his parents by using kit Twist Custom Panel (clinical exome—Twist Bioscience) on platform NovaSeq6000 (Illumina). The bioinformatics analysis was performed trough BWA Aligner or DRAGEN Germline Pipeline systems and the sequences were aligned to reference human genome GRCh37. The DNA sequence analysis showed the variants c.112A > G (p.Lys38Glu) and c.217 T > C (p.Cys73Arg) in compound heterozygosity of PLG gene. The first variant was inherited by the father and the second by the mother.