In a 78-year-old female patient with long history of persistent AF and symptomatic AF recurrences despite multiple previous ablation procedures and persistently isolated pulmonary veins, we performed isolation of the LAA by applying an anterior and a mitral isthmus line. Following a waiting period of 6 weeks post-LAAI and oral anticoagulation with a direct novel oral anticoagulant (Apixaban), we readmitted the patient in order to implant an endocardial LAA occluder device (Watchman; Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA). A preprocedural transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed and excluded a left atrial (LA) thrombus. The novel oral anticoagulant was stopped the day of the procedure. Under deep sedation using midazolam, sufentanil, and continuous infusion of propofol, a single transseptal puncture was performed using a regular 8, 5 Fr SL1 transseptal sheath (St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) after a multi-electrode diagnostic catheter was inserted into the coronary sinus. Intravenous Heparin was administered with a target-activated clotting time (ACT) of 300 s. Angiography of the LAA was performed revealing a ‘chicken-wing’ morphology . The maximal diameter at the landing zone as measured in fluoroscopy and TOE was 30 mm. Accordingly, a 33 mm Watchman device was selected to occlude the LAA. The transseptal sheath was changed over a regular guidewire for the 15 Fr non-steerable Watchman sheath (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA), which was gently advanced over the wire into the distal LAA until the according marker was in the predefined landing zone. Suddenly the patient became hypotensive and TOE showed a massive pericardial effusion . Immediate pericardiocentesis was performed, and a 7 Fr pigtail catheter introduced into the pericardial space. The 15 Fr Watchman sheath was immediately withdrawn into the inferior vena cava to avoid potential thrombus formation along the sheath. The ACT was measured with 357 s. A total of 5000 I.E. of protamine was immediately applied resulting in an ACT of 157 s. Aspirated epicardial blood was autotransfused via a right femoral vein access, but despite continuous aspiration the effusion remained unchanged indicating a massive perforation of the distal LAA.
In the meantime, the patient was intubated. Suspecting distal LAA perforation as the source of the massive bleeding proximal occlusion of the LAA was desired. Therefore a new transseptal puncture using a 8.5 Fr SL1 sheath (St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) was performed, and a guidewire was advanced into the LAA. The guidewire went via the distal LAA into the pericardial space proving the distal LAA perforation. Now, the SL1 transseptal sheath was changed over the wire for 12F steerable FlexCath Advance sheath (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) which was advanced to the base of the LAA followed by introduction of a 28 mm cryoballoon (ArcticFront Advance, Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). The cryoballoon was gently moved over a guidewire to the base of the LAA and manually inflated using the cryoballoon manual retraction kit (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) . Contrast medium was applied over the Flexcath sheath and demonstrated complete sealing of the LAA . Later the epicardial blood could be completely aspirated resulting in haemodynamic stability of the patient.
Since emergency open heart surgery in this older patient would have been associated with high peri- and post-operative risk, we decided to attempt epicardial LAA closure applying the Lariat epicardial LAA suture device (Sentreheart, Redwood City, CA, USA). Another anterior epicardial puncture was performed, and the epicardial magnet was introduced via the epicardial Lariat-sheath while the endocardial magnet was advanced over a second transseptal sheath and across the temporarily deflated cryoballon into the LAA. Both magnets connected and the Lariat device was brought into the pericardium and gently advanced over the LAA and over the cryoballoon to the LAA base . After echocardiographic and fluoroscopic verification of the position of the Lariat snare, the snare was closed and the cryoballoon deflated and pulled back into the LA which resulted in complete closure of the LAA . The Lariat suture was tightened one and a second time after a waiting period of 5 min. A final TOE evaluation as well as another contrast injection via the transseptal sheath demonstrated complete LAA occlusion, no further pericardial effusion occurred. All sheaths except a pericardial 7 Fr pigtail catheter were removed and the patient was transferred to ICU for further monitoring. The patient was extubated 2 h after the LAA closure and after exclusion of further epicardial effusion during the next 24 h the pigtail catheter was removed. She was discharged 10 days after the procedure. Three months from discharge the patient had one episode of persistent AF requiring electrical cardioversion, and she had no further pericardial effusion.