A 15-year-old previously healthy male presented with a 6 months history of severe right nasal congestion and rhinorrhea. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large right nasopharyngeal-enhancing soft tissue mass obstructing the nasopharyngeal airway and extending into the right posterior nasal cavity, pterygopalatine fossa, nasopalatine fossa and inferior sphenoid sinus . Bilateral retropharyngeal and level II A/B adenopathy was present. Biopsy of the mass showed infiltrating mature lymphocytes and neoplastic cells strongly and diffusely positive for EBV-LMP and EBER; CPS PD-L1 was >20. The patient was diagnosed with T4N1 EBV-positive undifferentiated non-keratinizing NPC and started on 7 weeks of curative-intent radiation with concurrent chemotherapy. Radiation was given as 70 Gy in 35 fractions to the gross tumor and 56 Gy to the bilateral nodes. Intravenous (IV) cisplatin was given concurrently on days 1, 22 and 43 at 100 mg/m2. After completion, adjuvant chemotherapy with daily infusional fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 for four days and IV cisplatin 80 mg/m2 was given for 3 cycles, with cisplatin omitted due to ototoxicity the last cycle.
Post-treatment MRI scans suggested complete response . He was placed on thyroid hormone replacement for post-treatment hypothyroidism. At 6 months post-adjuvant chemotherapy, the patient developed right thigh pain. Radiographs showed periosteal reaction in the distal femoral diaphysis and, as the patient was a competitive ice hockey player, this was considered likely a stress fracture. A subsequent biopsy was negative for malignancy. The discomfort persisted and worsened, with two-years post-treatment MRI scan of the femur showing worsening of aggressive bony changes and the appearance of new lesions suggestive of osteomyelitis or metastatic cancer. A PET scan performed 29 months post-treatment showed multifocal bony lesions and multiple hypermetabolic lymph nodes in the chest, abdomen and retroperitoneum without evidence of disease recurrence in the primary nasopharyngeal site . Biopsy of the right femur confirmed EBV-positive metastatic carcinoma.
The patient had moderately severe chronic right thigh pain, hemoglobin was 70 g/L, and serum EBV DNA titer was 678,000 IU/ml . Treatment was initiated with analgesics, packed red cell transfusion, palliative radiation 2000 Gy in 5 fractions to the femur, zoledronic acid 4 mg IV, and gemcitabine/cisplatin chemotherapy on a 21 day schedule. There was rapid improvement in the patient’s pain and a CT of the abdomen and pelvis following cycle 4 chemotherapy demonstrated complete resolution of the retroperitoneal and pelvic metastatic adenopathy . EBV titers nadired at 4000 IU/ml at chemotherapy cycle 5, and then began to slowly increase . Following cycle 7, the patient’s thigh pain recurred and he also developed progressive anemia which required transfusion. His energy level progressively deteriorated and he required wheelchair assistance. PET/CT after cycle 8 demonstrated cancer progression with new intrathoracic, retroperitoneal, and pelvic nodal lesions and left iliac bony lesion .
Chemotherapy was discontinued, zoledronic acid was maintained, and the patient was switched to 200 mg pembrolizumab every 21 days. Improvement in hemoglobin level were seen and the patient reported decreased pain and increased energy level after cycle 1. A CT scan following cycle 5 showed size reduction of lymph nodes in the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and stable bony metastasis in the pelvis. By cycle 6, the patient was able to engage in full range of physical activities and by cycle 10, his EBV titer was undetectable . He appeared well with no signs, symptoms, or abnormal blood work suggesting disease progression, and did not experience any obvious immune-mediated toxicities. Subsequent CT results to date show only stable healed bony metastasis .
Pembrolizumab was discontinued after 31 months (46 cycles). The patient is currently being surveilled quarterly with EBV serology and CT imaging, and receives maintenance zoledronic acid. Almost 2 years after discontinuing pembrolizumab, his physical examination, blood work, and CT are unremarkable, EBV levels are undetectable, and he has resumed playing competitive ice hockey. The patient’s treatment timeline and EBV titers are summarized in ; , respectively.