A 74-year-old Japanese female patient with a history of ischemic heart disease, nonvalvular atrial fibrillation, cerebral infarction, chronic kidney disease, and hypothyroidism was brought to the emergency department after a cardiac arrest at home. After a few minutes of manual CPR by her family and paramedics, mechanical CPR was initiated using the Lund University Cardiopulmonary Assist System-2 device (Physio-Control Inc.). The patient was defibrillated twice for ventricular fibrillation. She received multiple doses of epinephrine, and spontaneous circulation returned after 29 min of mechanical CPR. The device was used in its appropriate position.
However, as pulseless ventricular tachycardia was still observed, cardiac support with venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was initiated. Coronary angiography revealed no new lesions in the coronary arteries. A noncontrast CT scan was carried out to investigate the cause of cardiac arrest. This revealed multiple bilateral anterior rib fractures due to the chest compressions, with no evidence of other injuries . The cause of the arrest was considered to be hypokalemia (admission level K = 2.6 mmol/L) induced by multiple diuretic drugs. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for continued resuscitation. Furthermore, she received continuous infusions of unfractionated heparin based on active coagulation time. She was given prasugrel and apixaban because of her atrial fibrillation and high risk of stent thrombosis.
On hospital day 3, her blood pressure gradually decreased, and ECMO flow could not be maintained the following day. The patient had already received more than 20 units of blood products and was on a high-dose vasopressor. Blood examination revealed progressive coagulation abnormalities . The results were as follows: activated partial thromboplastin time, 136 s; prothrombin time activity, 31%; and platelet count, 25 × 109/L. Abdominal ultrasound revealed an echo-free space around the liver and spleen. An emergency laparotomy was carried out due to the massive bloody ascites observed on contrast-enhanced CT . Intraoperatively, a grade 2 splenic injury (according to the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma) was observed with a capsular tear and a 2 cm laceration at the inferior pole. The spleen was adherent to the retroperitoneum and diaphragm. The abdomen was temporarily closed using an open negative-pressure therapy system, ABThera (KCI). The volume of blood loss was greater than 10 L. As the patient was hemodynamically stable the next day, VA-ECMO was discontinued. Her coagulation abnormalities were resolved after management with the interruption of antithrombotic agents, surgical hemostasis, and blood transfusions. Abdominal closure was achieved on day 6. Histopathological examination of the excised splenic tissues was unremarkable. Tracheostomy was carried out on day 15, she was discharged from the intensive care unit on day 26, and transferred to a rehabilitation hospital on day 87 with no neurological deficits.