In October 2006, a 46-year-old man received brain MRI, advised by a family doctor to investigate the persistency of memory loss and headaches unresponsive to pain killers medications. MRI evidenced a previously unknown infra- and supra-sellar mass of 3.5 × 2.6 cm, with high pressure on the third ventricle and on the interpenducular cistern; with MRI contrast, peripheral highlighting and an 8 mm enhanced solid nodule were found; the imaging was consistent with a diagnosis of cystic craniopharyngioma .
Subsequently, the patient underwent fronto-temporal trans-cranial excision of the lesion and histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of PCP. In January 2007, the patient was referred by a multidisciplinary committee for discussion of adjuvant radiotherapy (RT), which was confirmed and then administered (total of 50 Gy in 25 fractions). Follow-up visits with clinical and radiological evaluations were periodically performed until 2013, every 3 months when the patient decided to discontinue medical examinations.
In November 2019, for the onset of vertigo and episodes of lipothymia, the patient accessed the emergency department where he performed computed tomography (CT), which showed an iso-dense infra and supra-sellar solid mass of 19 × 23 mm.
Additionally, a brain MRI was also performed, which confirmed the presence of a 25 × 38 × 23 mm lesion that extended to the chiasmatic and inter-peduncular cisterns and the flooring of the third ventricle; mass effect had displaced the pituitary gland to the right and had caused compression of the pons .
Thus, a second surgery was indicated for avoiding medical complications. Preliminary endocrinological and ophthalmological evaluations were performed and showed no critical signs. Therefore, in January 2020, the patient underwent total resection of the neoformation via endonasal endoscopic approach and the histological examination confirmed the recurrence of craniopharyngioma. The postoperative course was complicated by polyuria, mental confusion, dysphasia, ptosis, mydriasis, and ophthalmoplegia, and partially improved by palliative treatment with prednisolone and mannitol. Late surgery-related complications were anosmia and psychomotor impairment. At this stage, considering the young age of the patient and the clinical aggressiveness of the tumor, not controlled by curative treatments with surgery and RT, molecular analysis on the surgical sample was carried out: real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for BRAF gene mutation and then next-generation sequencing analysis for a panel of >300 genes was carried out and the canonical mutation V600E in the exon 15 of BRAF gene was identified as the only relevant mutation (c.t1799a, p. V600E). As previously anticipated, the BRAF mutation had been recognized as a characteristic mutation of PCP, being identified in most, but not all, PCP and never in adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma (ACP). Post-operative brain MRI performed in February 2020 revealed residual tissue with dimensions of 19 × 22 × 19 mm, and after contrast, an inhomogeneous increase in this lesion occurred . The timeline of the clinical course is highlighted in .
Due to the lack of standardized therapeutic approaches, an off-label therapy has been requested, considering BRAF mutation status. In literature, there have been several reports of remarkable responses to BRAF and/or MEK inhibitors (vemurafenib, dabrafenib, and combination therapy) in craniopharyngiomas in various stages, since the discovery that PCPs often harbor BRAF gene mutation .
The patient started combination treatment with double inhibition of BRAF and MEK with Dabrafenib 300 mg/day and Trametinib 2 mg/day .
The patient was consequently evaluated monthly clinically and with a biochemical profile. The treatment was initially well tolerated with no relevant adverse reactions.
At 4 months, laboratory results showed a pathological increase intriglyceride and Cholesterol levels, graded 3 on the CTCAE scale, rarely described during treatment with BRAF/MEK inhibitors. Anti-BRAF and anti-MEK were then suspended temporary and the patient was referred to an endocrinologist: a new medical treatment was established with Fenofibrate and Omega 3 with following the reduction in laboratory levels: oncological treatment was then resumed with dose reduction in accordance to European Medical Agency (EMA) recommendation (Dabrafenib 200 mg/day, Trametinib 1.5 mg/day) when levels reached grade 1, according to CTCAE scale. This was the only adverse event reported by the patient and it did not influence his quality of life. At the time of writing, treatment is ongoing (the total time of treatment until now is 14 months).
First radiological evaluation with MRI after 4 months of treatment showed not only a significant volume reduction of the tumor (14 × 9 × 5 mm vs. 19 × 22 × 19 mm) but also a reduction of the mass effect on the surrounding tissue, for example, realignment of chiasmatic structure . The last radiological evaluation, performed in August 2021 with MRI after 1 year of treatment, showed overall stability of tumor burden compared to November 2020 .