A 41-year-old Chinese man presented with palpable right breast lumps for 1 year. On physical examination, a large retroareolar hard nontender mass approximately 4.5 cm in size was palpated over the right breast. The mass was nonmobile and superficial but did not have any overlying skin findings. A smaller adjacent mobile and nontender lesion, approximately 3 cm, was palpated just medial to the first mass. Initial laboratory evaluation was normal for prolactin, estradiol, luteinizing and follicle-stimulating hormone levels. Furthermore, he had never previously been treated with radiation, according to his past medical history.
Conventional mammography was performed on Flat III (Metaltronica Company, Rome, Italy). Mammography showed a subcutaneous oval mass with a smooth and sharp margin on his right breast, and another small oval mass with a less well-defined margin was seen adjacent to the main lesion .
MR imaging was performed on a 1.5 T Signa Infinity TwinSpeed MR scanner (GE Company, Milwaukee, WI, USA). The examination comprised of routine T1- and T2-weighted fast spin echo (FSE) sequences in axial and sagittal planes; T1- and T2-weighted imaging fat-suppressed in axial and sagittal planes, respectively. On T1-weighted imaging, the lesions were predominantly hypointense to subcutaneous fat and mildly hyperintense to the pectoralis major muscle. On T2-weighted imaging, the lesions were of a higher signal than the subcutaneous fat. Furthermore, the larger lesion had a smooth contour and well defined borders on all sequences which, on T2-weighted images, had a lower signal central region. Along the border of the larger lesion, there was a distinct rim of decrease in signal between the lesion and fat interface , whereas, the small lesion had a less poorly defined border on conventional T2 weighted images. On the fat-suppressed sequences, both lesions had better depiction for the margins and borders and there was a mild mass effect of the dominant lesion on the underlying pectoralis major muscle .
The gross pathology of the specimens after surgery showed a yellowish tanned smooth surface mass measuring 4.5 cm × 3.0 cm × 2.0 cm and a smaller lesion with similar features measuring 2.5 cm × 2.0 m × 1.0 cm. Histologic specimens showed high cellularity monomorphic slender spindle cells arrayed in a storiform pattern aligned at right angles to small vessels and collagen fibers intermixed with scattered adipose tissue. The nuclei of the spindle cells were well differentiated with only rare mitotic figures. The larger mass had a fibrous envelope and plentiful collagen fibers in the central region. The smaller mass lacked the fibrous envelope. There was positive immunohistologic staining for vimentin and cluster of differentiation (CD) 34, negative for b-cell leukemia-lymphoma (Bcl -2), S-100 protein, smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA).