A 9 year-old boy with severe OI and previous history of multiple fractures, small stature and associated skull deformities presented with loss of vision in his right eye of unknown duration. The patient exhibited a low degree of myopia (RE −1.50/−3.00 × 180; LE −1.00/−3.50 × 173) and the anterior sclera was abnormally thin. Posterior segment examination revealed a right macula-off retinal detachment associated with a giant retinal tear (GRT) and C3 proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR).
Genetic analysis was performed by an NHS England molecular genetics service, when the child was 2 years old. At that time (2008) no potentially causative DNA change was found in COL1A1 or COL1A2, and so genetic analysis targeted regions of the CRTAP and P3H1 (previously named LEPRE1) genes, which had only recently been shown to cause recessive osteogenesis imperfecta . This revealed a homozygous change c.1914 + 1G > A (NM_001243246.1) splice site mutation in intron 13 of P3H1 gene with parents being first cousins and heterozygous for same mutation. The same change has also been reported by Pepin et al. in a case of osteogenesis imperfecta with compound heterozygous mutations of P3H1. Although they were unable to determine the effect of this particular c.1914 + 1G > A mutation on the mRNA, in the majority of the other cases of P3H1 mutations that they studied, mRNA instability was the outcome .
Examination under anaesthetic (EUA) showed a right GRT from 6 to 10 o’clock associated with a macula-off detachment and inferior epiretinal and subretinal fibrosis . EUA of the fellow eye revealed a further 180-degree GRT from 1 to 7 o’clock associated with a macula-sparing retinal detachment. A right 360-degree peritomy for placement of bridle sutures revealed a sclera that was more grey than blue in hue but very thin (see Fig. ). Right RD repair was performed via single-port pars plana vitrectomy (PPV), tamponade with silicone oil and cryoretinopexy extended to 360 degrees. The single sclerostomy and conjunctiva were successfully closed with polyglactin absorbable sutures.
Surgery for the left eye consisted of PPV and fluid/perfluorocarbon liquid (PFCL) exchange to unroll the posterior flap of the GRT, followed by direct PFCL-silicone oil exchange. Retinopexy was again applied to both the GRT and completed through 360 degrees.
Persistent antero-posterior PVR meant further right eye surgery was required, involving a 360-degree buckle, a silicone oil top-up and further retinopexy to seal a leak in the lower horn of the GRT. Scleral fixation sutures were not possible for the buckling procedure, which was completed with two 5/0 vicryl sutures tethering the anterior edge of the buckle to the medial and lateral recti to prevent posterior buckle migration with end to end shortening and suturing of the 360-degree explant. Retinal stability was achieved in both eyes but a chronic inferior RD in context of extensive PVR remains under silicone oil in the right eye. Visual acuity with silicone oil in situ at time of writing is RE 6/36, LE 6/12.