A 35-year-old Caucasian female patient was referred to our hospital because of an incidental finding of a large right ventricular mass during sonography of her upper abdominal organs performed for the evaluation of transient and moderate abdominal pain. Our patient did not have any specific cardiac symptoms like chest pain, dizziness, nausea, palpitations, syncope, or signs of congestive heart failure. Cardiovascular risk factors involved current smoking and obesity (body mass index 32.8 kg/m2). Her medical history included bronchial asthma, previous gestational diabetes, and minor depression. She was taking beclometasondipropionat, fluticason-17-propionat and formoterol-fumarate-dihydrate for the bronchial asthma, and fluoxetine for the depression. A cardiac murmur was not detected during a routine physical examination. Laboratory parameters were unremarkable, with no elevation in her levels of high-sensitive cardiac troponin T (7 pg/ml, reference <14 pg/ml), n-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (75 ng/l, reference <125 ng/l), or C-reactive protein (4.5 mg/l, reference <5 mg/l). A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed T-wave inversion in the inferior and precordial leads . Holter monitoring showed a normofrequent sinus rhythm without any supraventricular or ventricular ectopic beat. An exercise test revealed a good exercise capacity without chest pain, shortness of breath, or any other symptoms upon reaching a maximal heart rate of 163 beats per minute (93 % of the target heart rate). Her blood pressure and heart rate profile during exercise testing were normal and no ectopic beats were detected. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a large homogenous mass in her slightly dilated right ventricle, suggesting the involvement of her intraventricular septum and left ventricular apex. Her cardiac valves were normal without stenosis or regurgitation, and the size and function of her left ventricle were normal. A small, not significant pericardial effusion was also detected . Our patient then underwent cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging, which revealed a 104 × 62 mm right ventricular mass infiltrating her intraventricular septum and left ventricular apex. T1-weighted images showed isointensity and T2-weighted images showed clear hyperintensity of the relatively homogenous tumor . Late gadolinium enhancement depicted the dimensions of the tumor . Online supplemental video files show good systolic left ventricular function, slightly reduced right ventricular longitudinal function, and an intensive perfusion of the tumor (Additional files , and ).
A transvenous right ventricular biopsy was performed to gain tissue material for histological analysis; however, the obtained material was insufficient for a definitive diagnosis. Our patient was then referred for an open myocardial biopsy via a partial inferior sternotomy . Previously, a coronary angiography was performed to identify the feeding arteries of the large tumor. Coronary angiography revealed ectatic coronary arteries without any stenosis. A biventricular tumor was visualized on angiography with connection to both her right coronary artery and her left circumflex artery, showing a characteristic tumor blush . Histopathological analysis led to the diagnosis of a benign vascular tumor. Examination of the tumor revealed numerous capillaries, arterioles, and venules embedded in a collagen-rich matrix . Some vital heart muscle cells within the tumor mass could also be observed . Cells showed strong positive staining with antibodies against CD31 and CD34, which supported the vascular origin of this tumor . Histological findings were consistent with a benign intracardiac angioma. The first imaging follow-up was performed 2 weeks later by CMR, and showed an unchanged result. Because our patient was asymptomatic without signs of heart failure or arrhythmia, and the large tumor proved to be surgically unresectable, we decided on conservative management with regular clinical and imaging controls. Nine months later our patient presented to our department for her regular follow-up appointment without any major complications. Echocardiography showed no significant progress of the tumor.