On December 11, 2020, a 81-year-old woman presented to the eye hospital of Lucerne, Switzerland, with severe bilateral loss of vision. Eight days earlier, she had received uneventful bilateral injection of brolucizumab, a novel anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) single-chain variable region (scFv) recombinant protein drug, for treatment of neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD). The patient had a 2-year history of bilateral nAMD, which had been treated with ten anti-VEGF injections (3 × bevacizumab, 7 × aflibercept) in her right eye, and 12 aflibercept injections in her left eye, with a final treatment interval of every 8 weeks. Her visual acuity was 20/200 in her right eye and 20/400 in her left eye. She had undergone a vitrectomy with membrane peeling for macular pucker, combined with cataract surgery, in the left eye in March 2016. Her relevant medical history included arterial hypertension, osteoporosis, and follicular thyroid carcinoma treated with radiotherapy years ago without metastasis. Current medications included aspirin cardio, euthyrox, lercanidipine, nebivolol, irbesartan, and ibandronate.
In September 2020, her treating ophthalmologist switched her anti-VEGF treatment to brolucizumab with the aim of reducing her clinical visits to once every 12 weeks, based on the published data of the HAWK and HARRIER trials . Two weeks after her first same-day bilateral brolucizumab injections, the patient complained of a dark spot in her right peripheral visual field, which remained unchanged until her appointment 8 weeks later, at which she received her second same-day bilateral intravitreal brolucizumab injections. No additional examinations were performed to exclude signs of ocular vasculitis prior to the injections. A follow-up visit the next day revealed a mild anterior chamber reaction on the right eye, and no signs of inflammation on the left. No treatment was deemed necessary. Seven days later, the patient complained of moderate pain, redness, and blurry vision in both eyes. The following day, she presented to our emergency service due to severe vision loss in both eyes.
At presentation, her visual acuity in each eye was classified as “hand motions”. Slit-lamp examination revealed marked conjunctivitis with diffuse hemorrhages in both eyes. The cornea of each eye exhibited Descemet folds and severe stromal edema. In both eyes, the anterior chamber was filled with fibrin and dispersed blood on the corneal endothelium, but without a hypopyon , and the iris presented with scattered small hemorrhages. The intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in her right eye and 8 mmHg in her left eye. The fundus of the right eye was not visible due to cataract and corneal edema, and her left eye exhibited diffuse opacities in the vitreous cavity and dense retinal hemorrhages. Scanning laser ophthalmoscopy of her left eye revealed marked vascular sheathing .
Based on the lack of hypopyon and an A- and B-scan sonography without hyperreflectivity in the vitreous cavity, infectious endophthalmitis was considered unlikely, and was later excluded since taps from the anterior chamber and vitreous cavity remained negative for eubacterial PCR and microbial culture assay. As the clinical picture resembled an ocular ischemic inflammatory syndrome, temporal arteritis and other forms of vasculitis were considered, but were deemed unlikely due to the patient’s history, lack of painful temporal arteries, and atypical laboratory results.
With a working diagnosis of brolucizumab-related vasculitis, immediate treatment was initiated with intravenous methylprednisolone (250 mg) per clinicians discretion, followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kilogram body weight). We decided against a complete pulse therapy cycle with IV methylprednisolone after a reviewing the literature that did not show any proven clinical benefit . On the second day of treatment (10 days after second brolucizumab injection), her visual acuity had deteriorated to no light perception in both eyes and remained unchanged thereafter.
MRI evaluations were performed to search for vasculitis outside the eyeball. T1 fat-saturated post-contrast images of the orbit revealed a higher-than-normal signal of the choroid, with localized choroidal detachment . Additionally, pathologic enhancement was visible around the optic nerve in the orbit, which was interpreted as vasculitis . Black blood MR sequences were also performed, which did not reveal CNS vessel involvement. Due to the suspected severe periocular vaculitis, an additional vitreous tap was obtained, which revealed elevated levels of interleukin 6 (> 300 pg/ml; normal vitreous value in control group: < 30 pg/ml) and interleukin 10 (40.6 pg/ml; normal vitreous value: < 3 pg/ml) . Conjunctival biopsy of the left eye showed edema and inflammation, with intracapillary granulocyte accumulation. In the following days, intraocular pressure dropped to 1 mmHg in her right eye and 6 mmHg in her left eye, with signs of a bilateral panocular ischemia.