A 65-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a complaint of a mass in her left lumbar area. She had a previous history of appendectomy at the age of 19 and had diabetes, hypertension, angina and hyperlipidemia as comorbidities. On physical examination, reducible soft mass was located in the left lumbar area. Computed tomography showed a defect of transverse fascia in the left lumbar area with the perirenal fat protruding through the defect. The size of hernia orifice was 20 × 14 mm . Under a diagnosis of superior lumbar hernia, the patient underwent single-incision retroperitoneal laparoscopic repair.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the right lateral decubitus position. A single, 2-cm-long incision was made 1 cm ventral from the middle point between the 12th rib and superior anterior iliac spine on the middle axillary line . External oblique muscle, internal oblique muscle and transverse abdominal muscle were each split to reach retroperitoneal space. After placing a Lap-Protector Mini (Hakko Co., Nagano, Japan) in the retroperitoneal space, three 5-mm trocars (one for a 5-mm flexible scope and two for surgical devices) were inserted through a single-port access device (EZ Access; Hakko). The EZ access with three trocars was attached to the Lap-Protector Mini to maintain the inflation of the preperitoneal space with carbon dioxide (CO2) gas, and the retroperitoneal space was gradually dissected, using laparoscopic instruments without a dissection balloon. The hernia orifice was recognized and hernia sac was slipped from the hernia orifice. The collateral branch of subcostal nerve and iliohypogastric nerve were recognized . ProGrip™ laparoscopic self-fixating mesh of 15 × 10 cm (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) was placed to cover the hernia orifice without mesh fixation . The retroperitoneal space was carefully deflated to avoid displacing the mesh. The sheaths of transverse abdominal muscle and external oblique muscle were each closed with 2–0 absorbable suture, and the skin was closed with 4–0 absorbable suture.
The operative time was 50 min, and the bleeding volume was minimal. The postoperative course was uneventful. Food intake and normal activities restarted the next day after surgery, and she was discharged five days after surgery. At the 9-month follow-up, she remained well, with no signs of recurrence.