A 31-year-old woman presented at our Department due to infertility. Her medical history was unremarkable except unsuccessful attempts for pregnancy for the past 2.5 years. She had regular menstrual cycles since the age of 13 years. On clinical examination, she was normotensive and normokalemic without clinical signs of Cushing’s syndrome or hyperandrogenism. Her height, BMI and glucose homeostasis and bone mineral density proved to be normal (height: 170 cm, BMI: 19.8 kg/m2, fasting serum glucose: 5.0 mmol/l and HbA1c: 5.2%), and galactorrhoea was absent. Family history was also unremarkable. Initial laboratory findings indicated an increased serum prolactin level (93 ng/ml; reference range: 1.4–24 ng/ml), but this was due to macroprolactinemia (prolactin recovery after polyethylene glycol: PEG precipitation was 76%). Magnetic resonance imaging did not reveal any pituitary abnormality. A paternal cause of infertility was unlikely because her husband already had two children from his previous marriage. Detailed hormone laboratory investigations of the index patient suggested a partial resistance against glucocorticoids . After genetic counseling and written informed consent, Sanger sequencing of the coding region of the GR gene was performed. After identification of a pathogenic GR mutation, a family screening was indicated for the first degree relatives. Her 35-year-old, clinically healthy sister, who has no fertility problems (mother of a 10-year-old girl) was also genetically tested.
All patients and family members underwent genetic counseling and informed consent for genetic testing was obtained from all individuals. Evaluation and treatment of human data have been performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the study was approved by the Local Ethical Committee of Semmelweis University.
Laboratory measurements were performed at the Central Laboratory of Semmelweis University. Fasting blood samples were obtained between 08:00 and 09:00 h. Plasma, salivary and urinary cortisol and plasma ACTH, serum estradiol, progesterone, sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), testosterone, luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), free thyroxin (fT4), prolactin and growth hormone (GH) concentrations were measured with an electrochemiluminescence immunoassay (Cobas E411, ROCHE, Indianapolis; Architect System, Lisnamuck, Longford, Ireland; IDS-iSYS, Immunodiagnostic Systems Ltd., Boldon, England), while serum dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) and androstendione concentrations were determined with radioimmunoassay (Beckman Coulter Brea, California, USA).
DNA was isolated from peripheral blood by a standard procedure using commercially available DNA isolation reagents (DNA Isolation kit from blood, Qiagen, San Diego, USA). The whole coding region of the GR was evaluated by Sanger sequencing as previously described by Koper et al. .
Table summarises the main hormone laboratory findings of the index patient. During repeated measurements, serum cortisol levels in the morning were always elevated (between 26 and 35.4 μg/dl; reference range: 8–25 μg/dl) while plasma ACTH concentration was slightly above the upper limit or within the normal range (between 28.5 and 65 pg/ml; reference range: 7.2–63.3). Morning salivary cortisol levels (determined two times) were also elevated (1.36 and 1,13 μg/dl; reference range: < 0.690) but salivary cortisol collected at midnight was within the reference range (0.21 and 0.23 μg/dl; reference range < 0.430 μg/dl). A low dose (1 mg) overnight dexamethasone suppression test was performed twice, and showed an inadequate suppression of morning serum cortisol (10 and 15 μg/dl; reference range: l < 1.8 μg/dl). Repeated 24 h urinary free cortisol (UFC) concentrations were between 280 and 513 nmol/day (reference range: 100–379). Serum DHEAS was slightly elevated or normal (342 and 163 μg/dl, reference range: 130–330), and serum androstendione was increased (344 ng/dl; reference range 80-280 ng/dl). GH, SHBG, TSH, fT4, LH, FSH, testosterone, progesterone and estradiol levels were all normal (not shown in Table ).
As shown in Fig. , a heterozygous missense mutation (c.2141G➔A) resulting in a Arg714Gln change was identified in exon 8 of the GR gene. The same mutation was found in the clinically healthy 35-year-old sister of the patient, who had normal steroid hormone levels. Other family members denied the clinical, genetic or hormonal screening. In addition, this variant was not detected in more than 60 patients and controls tested either for glucocorticoid resistance or Cushing’s syndrome in our Laboratory. Moreover it was not present in commonly used genetic databases including Exome Variant Server , Exac and SNPeffect .
Molecular modeling and analyses were performed using the UCSF Chimera package . The coordinates of the GR ligand binding domain have been obtained from PDB structure 4UDC. Arginine at the position 714 is the member of helix 10 of the ligand binding domain (LBD) of the GR. It locates opposite side of the ligand binding pocket and relatively far from any known functional region. However, arginine has a large, positively charged side chain, which protrudes into a space created by helices 7–10 , but glutamine has a smaller, uncharged side chain, which may release helix 10 from its original position, which may lead to further conformational changes in the ligand-binding pocket. Nader et al. performed a complex functional testing of this mutation and using the quantification of the thickness of both the wild type and mutant Cα showed that the mutant LBD had an increased distance in root mean square deviation over the duration of the simulation compared to the wild type receptor, suggesting that the mutant structure binds the peptide with less affinity .