The patient is a 67-year-old male with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, chronic hepatitis B, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease secondary to remote smoking. After presenting to an outside hospital with conjunctivitis, elevated intraocular pressure, and hyperthyroidism, he was referred to our clinic and diagnosed with TED. His clinical activity score was 4 in the right eye and 5 in the left eye, with exophthalmometry of 19 OD and 21 OS (a). He was also diagnosed with anterior uveitis secondary to herpes simplex virus and noted to be hepatitis B positive.
He initially received treatment for his uveitis and hepatitis B since his proptosis was not severe at this initial appointment. However, due to his persistent uveitis and gradually worsening proptosis, he developed a perforated corneal ulcer in the left eye requiring an urgent penetrating keratoplasty and, when deemed safe, an orbital decompression. The patient later developed a corneal ulcer in the right eye and was scheduled for an orbital decompression. However, with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, all non-elective cases were canceled, delaying his surgery. While waiting for surgery, he received multiple temporary tarsorrhaphy procedures and initiated teprotumumab. His BMI was low, approximately 16 kg/m2 at baseline. He was not suspected to be diabetic at that time, and because original guidelines did not recommend any labaratory tests except for pregnancy prior to teprotumumab initiation, none were performed. An HbA1c, measured 6 months prior during his initial admission at the outside hospital, was later found to be 6.3%.
The patient received his first dose of teprotumumab partially alleviating his symptoms. Three weeks later, he received his scheduled 3-wall decompression in the right eye. One day after his surgery, a comprehensive metabolic panel reported a non-fasting blood sugar of 263 mg/dL. This was thought to be due to perioperative conditions, including perioperative steroids. He did not receive any follow-up treatment for his blood sugar elevation. A few days after his surgery, he received his second infusion and 3 weeks later, his third infusion.
Soon after his third dose of teprotumumab, the patient experienced vomiting and low appetite for 1 week. In the ED, he was found to have a blood urea nitrogen of 70, creatinine of 2.4, and blood glucose level of 1,059 with no ketonuria. His HbA1c at the time of presentation was 11.7%. He was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic nonketotic syndrome and transferred to the ICU on an insulin drip at 4 units/h. Upon discharge, he was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus, started on glimepiride, insulin glargine 15 units, and set up with regular endocrine follow-up. His teprotumumab was discontinued.
At his first follow-up appointment after hospitalization, glimepiride and insulin glargine were discontinued and insulin aspart mixed 70/30 with meals was started (20 units in the morning and 15 units in the afternoon) to improve blood glucose levels, which were in the 250s. Given his known autoimmune thyroid disease, workup was done to assess for autoimmune-mediated diabetes. The insulin autoantibody and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 antibody were negative, with detectable C-peptide of 3.1 ng/mL, suggesting medication-induced versus type 2 diabetes mellitus. Nine months after hospitalization, his insulin regimen was decreased to 15 units in the morning and 10 units in the afternoon with an A1c of 6.0%. He self-discontinued insulin approximately a year after hospitalization. An A1c performed on no insulin medication was 5.5%. At his latest follow-up, approximately two and a half years after his hospitalization, the patient had an A1c of 6.1% on no diabetes medication. The patient received a bilateral upper eyelid retraction repair and lower eyelid ectropion repair for his residual exposure keratopathy approximately 6 months after his hospitalization (b).