A healthy 15-year-old girl suffered a first episode of medial patellar dislocation of the left knee as a consequence of a traumatic impact during a skiing accident. In the following 9 months, she reported further eight spontaneous luxation episodes, which resolved after auto repositioning. The patient did not refer to any previous surgery. At the clinical examination, the left patella appeared to be medialized compared to the opposite healthy side; the medial shift test showed a clear tendency toward medial subluxation accompanied by patient’s discomfort (positive medial apprehension test) . The lateral retinacular showed to be hyperlax. Pre-operative imaging assessment included weight-bearing anteroposterior and lateral views of both knees . A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and also a computed tomography-scan of the left knee were collected. No rotatory malalignment was found. As pathological MRI findings, substantial hypertrophy of both the medial patellar retinaculum and the tendon of the oblique medial vastus muscle was documented. The initially proposed conservative treatment encompassed the use of a brace during sports activities and muscular imbalance correction. As the girl referred persistent sensation of “giving away,” 10 months after the first dislocation episode, the surgical operation was performed. It consisted in an open medial retinacular release with complete dissection of the hypertrophic MPFL and a transfer of the vastus medialis oblique (VMO) to the superior border of the patella . The medial retinaculum was dissected on a line drawn from 1 cm medial to the superior pole of the patella to the anteromedial portal. The inferomedial corner of the VMO was detached, and then transferred and sutured to the superomedial pole of the patella, using No. 2 PDS sutures with the knee flexed at 30°. The lateral retinaculum was tensioned, dissecting the two layers and consequently suturing them together in a “pants over vest” fashion. We did not perform a lateral retinaculum reconstruction to avoid over tightening. At the end of the surgery, we achieve regular patellar tracking without any tendency to medial or lateral subluxation during stress-testing. Postoperatively, the knee was placed in a knee brace, and partial weight bearing was advised for the first 4 weeks. Flexion was limited at 45° within the first 2 weeks, and at 90° within the first 4 weeks. Recovery to a full weight bearing was permitted 4 weeks after surgery, and range of motion was gradually increased. The post-operative 6 and 12-week follow-up showed promising results as far as the patient walked without pain and/or sensation of instability. Eight months after surgery on the left knee, the patient experienced a traumatic medial patellar dislocation also in the right knee, occurred during sports activity. Furthermore, in this case, the conservative treatment did not lead to favorable results. The right knee was addressed surgically with the same surgical steps already performed on the contralateral knee. The post-operative protocol was the same used for the left knee. The patient was reassessed 7 years after the surgical operation on the left knee and 6 years after surgical correction of the right one; so far, no further episodes of dislocation have occurred. In the right knee, the Lysholm score improves from 48 to 87, while the Kujala score increased from 55 to 88. The pre-operative Lysholm and patellofemoral Kujala scores improved, respectively, from 45 to 85 and from 56 to 88 in the left knee. The patient declared to be highly satisfied with the procedure, and the only complain was a slight difficulty in squatting, jumping, and running.