A 36-year-old Japanese female was referred to our hospital with morbid obesity and T1DM. She was diagnosed with T1DM at the age of 6 years, thereafter, treatment with multiple daily insulin was started. By the age of 20 years, she had a body weight of 70 kg, increasing to > 100 kg at the age of 34 years. Her required daily dose of insulin increased as a function of her body weight. At her initial assessment, she required 45 units of insulin aspart and 30 units of insulin glargine per day. Although a temporary weight loss and reduction in daily insulin dose was achieved with an in-hospital treatment, her weight rebounded shortly after discharge and the patient experienced difficulty in controlling her body weight. The patient expressed her intention for surgical treatment for weight loss, and she was referred to our department.
At the time of admission, her height was 159 cm and her weight 106.7 kg, BMI of 42.2 kg/m2. Blood analyses indicated HbA1c of 9.0%, and blood C-peptide levels were undetectable (< 0.01 ng/mL), suggesting her insulin secretion capacity was completely depleted. With medication, her blood lipid levels were within normal range. On computed tomography (CT) examination, the calculated visceral fat area was 162.6 cm2, with a subcutaneous fat area of 527.9 cm2, measured at level of the umbilicus . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no abnormalities in the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum.
To prevent complications associated with rapid postoperative blood glucose improvement, she was admitted to our hospital 2 weeks before operation for strict glycemic control, dietary restrictions, and exercise therapy. As a result, preoperative HbA1c was reduced to 7.8% and body weight was reduced to 101.1 kg.
We performed a laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) , using five ports,, as shown in Fig. a. The blood vessel along the wall of the greater curvature of the stomach was first dissected. We then inserted a 36 Fr (12 mm) bougie into the stomach and resected the greater curvature of the stomach, from a point, on the oral side, 4 cm from the pylorus to the His angle, using a linear stapler. The staple line was reinforced with continuous seromuscular sutures using non-absorbable stitches .
After the operation, a unit of insulin aspart was mixed with 5 g of glucose contained in the infusion solution and sliding scale insulin was added as needed. From postoperative day 2, insulin glargine was administered. Sliding scale insulin was added depending on fasting blood sugar level and oral intake and her daily insulin dose was determined accordingly.
There were no postoperative complications, including severe hypoglycemic episodes. One year after the procedure, her body weight had decreased to 81.0 kg, with a BMI of 32.2 kg/m2, with this decrease being mainly due to a decrease in the body fat mass. Her HbA1c level improved to 7.7%, and her daily required insulin dose had been reduced to 24 units (10 units of insulin aspart and 14 units of insulin glargine per day: Fig. a–d). On abdominal CT images, the visceral fat area, measured at level of the umbilicus, was 44.8 cm2, with a subcutaneous fat area of 408.8 cm2 . Therefore, there was a marked decrease in both visceral and subcutaneous fat.