A 4-day-old baby girl was referred from a paediatric tertiary care hospital for the genetic evaluation of bilateral asymmetric ectrodactyly. She is the second child of a non-consanguineous couple; a 25-year-old father and 23-year-old mother. The baby was delivered normally at term following an uncomplicated pregnancy. The birth weight was 2.5 kg and there were no post-natal complications. She had ectrodactyly involving three limbs, with the absence of the third digit on the left hand and the second and third digits on the right hand. The right thumb was clinically normal, but the fourth and fifth digits were malformed. The right foot had fixed clubfoot deformity with only 2 toes . There was no facial dysmorphism or facial clefts. Radiographs of the upper limbs showed complete absence of the metacarpal bone and the phalanges of the third digit in the left hand and absent metacarpals and phalanges of two digits on the right hand . During a subsequent evaluation of the proband at the pediatric clinic, right tibial hemimelia was documented in the patient’s medical records by the attending clinician, but the radiological images of the leg were not available for inclusion in this article. Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examination showed no abnormalities. Ultrasonography of the abdomen, brain and bilateral hips were normal.
The mother also had bilateral ectrodactyly involving both hands, with the absence of the third digit on the right hand and two digits on the left hand. She had bi-phalangeal fifth digit on the left hand . She had not previously been investigated for this condition and was otherwise healthy without any remarkable events in the medical and obstetrics history. The first child of the couple who was aged 2 ½ years old at the time of consultation had normal growth and development with no congenital anomalies. There were no other family members or close relatives affected with similar limb deformities or other congenital anomalies.
Peripheral venous blood samples were obtained from the baby and the mother with informed written consent. Genomic DNA was extracted from the blood samples and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was performed to identify rearrangements of the BHLHA9 gene (Chr17:1173858–1,174,565, hg19)(Ref Seq BHLHA9:NM_001164405). The RPPH1 gene (NR_002312) was used as the gene of reference. The qPCR results showed a BHLHA9/RPPH1 ratio of 1.46 in the baby and 1.50 in the mother confirming the BHLHA9 gene duplication. The unaffected sibling was not available for genetic assessment of her BHLHA9 status. Genetic counseling was offered to the family.
At the time of reporting, the baby was 10 months of age. Her body weight was 7.95 kg (25th centile), length was 72 cm (above 50th centile) and head circumference was 44 cm (between 25th and 50th centile). She had age-appropriate developmental milestones. Hearing and visual assessments were normal. Repeat ultrasonography of the brain and the abdomen showed no abnormalities. 2D-echocardiography showed a structurally and functionally normal heart. She is currently being followed up at the pediatric tertiary care hospital and awaiting reconstructive surgery.