A 20-year-old Caucasian female visited the Emergency Department (ED) with complaints of fever, constant left abdominal pain and generalized profuse fatigue. These symptoms had occurred at rest few days before the ED admission. She also mentioned an episode of dysuria and fever ten days before, which had been treated with ciprofloxacin in the suspect of cystitis. Moreover, she reported having assumed three oral contraceptive pills containing ulipristal acetate in the 30 days before the symptom onset. At the time of presentation, she denied nausea, diarrhea, or constipation, contact with animals, trips abroad, insect, or tick bites.

In January 2022, the patient had had SARS-CoV2 infection which had required anti-inflammatory therapy with ibuprofen and paracetamol without hospitalization need. She denied previous surgical interventions, autoimmune diseases, or chronic disease for which any chronic therapy was required. She reported no allergy toward drug and environmental allergens. Her relatives had never suffered from liver or biliary disease. In addition, she denied any relationship with hematologic disorders such as hemolytic anemia. Regarding her social habits, she confirmed no excessive assumption of alcohol, and she denied smoking cigarettes. However, she reported a minimal physical activity as well as a high intake of sugar-containing beverages and food.

On admission, the patient’s initial vitals included blood pressure 100/60 mm Hg, pulse 75 beats per minute, respirations 15 breaths per minute, temperature 37.5°C and an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. Physical examination revealed an alert, oriented female with grade III obesity (weight 115 kg, height 160 cm). Physical examination revealed severe jaundice involving the muco-cutaneous surfaces and the sclerae. No lymphadenopathies were palpable superficially. Head, ears, eyes, nose, throat (HEENT), neck, cardiovascular, respiratory, musculoskeletal, and neurological examinations were all grossly unremarkable. The abdominal examination revealed mild upper left abdominal pain exacerbated by deep palpation, without tenderness. Murphy and Courvoisier signs were absent. No flapping tremor was elicited.

Initial blood tests indicated leukocytosis with white blood cell (WBC) count 28460/mm3, normochromic normocytic anemia with hemoglobin 7.9 g/dL, platelets count (PLT) 212000/mm3, hyperbilirubinemia with total serum bilirubin 23.11 mg/dL composed prevalently of direct bilirubin 19.36 mg/dL, elevated liver function tests (ALT 244 U/L, AST 202 U/L), cholestasis index (GGT 372 U/L, ALP 300 U/L), and C-reactive protein (CRP) 17 mg/dL. Haptoglobin was depleted and Lactate DeHydrogenase (LDH) was significantly elevated (3190 U/L).

To better clarify the etiology of these findings, the patient was tested for various infections, including HIV, hepatitis A, E, B, C viruses, cytomegalovirus, syphilis, West Nile virus, Plasmodium malariae, all returning negative results. Furthermore, abdominal ultrasonography and CT scan ruled out biliary obstruction or pancreatic disorders. No evidence of autoimmune hepatitis was found. Interestingly, EBV serology test showed a probable acute infection phase: Virus Capsid Antigen IgM (VCAM) > 160 UI/mL, Early Antigen (D) IgG (EAG) 45.9 UI/mL, Virus Capsid Antigen IgG (VCAG) 47.4 UI/mL and Epstein-Barr Nuclear Antigen (EBNA1) 8.1 UI/mL. The infection acuity was confirmed by EBV DNA titer which was extremely high (123600 copies/mL). Moreover, the direct antiglobulin test for Complement 3 Factor (C3) and cold agglutinin test were positive. Lastly, liver and bone marrow biopsies revealed ring granulomas consistent with EBV infection and a pattern of acute intrahepatic cholestasis indicative of potential drug-induced liver injury.

These findings suggested liver failure due to EBV infection, CAS and a possible oral contraceptive pill toxicity.

Disease Management and Outcome
Based on her diagnosis, the patient was admitted to the Hematology ward. For her hemolytic anemia, she underwent a first-line treatment with high dose methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg intravenously daily and immunoglobulin 1 g/kg intravenously for two days. However, a progressive worsening of general conditions occurred during hospitalization, developing hepatic failure with bilirubin levels rising to 43 mg/dL, hyperbilirubinemia-associated acute kidney injury, and respiratory failure requiring high-flow-nasal-cannula support. Consequently, she was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), where she underwent central venous catheter placement due to poor venous access and her critical condition.

Given the complexity and the multifactorial etiology of the case, multiple clinical specialists were asked to carry out the best patient management. Initially, the patient was subjected to Plasorba BR-350 treatment, a selective adsorption mechanism for bilirubin and bile acid exceeding in plasma. Then, in consultation with nephrologists, continuous veno-venous hemofiltration (CVVH) was initiated to gradually improve kidney function.

She also started hepatoprotective therapy with ursodeoxycholic acid 300 mg orally twice daily, lactulose orally and K vitamin 10 mg intravenously daily.

Given her unresponsiveness to steroid therapy for hemolytic anemia and the concomitant EBV infection, in the context of secondary cold agglutinin syndrome, the patient received rituximab (375 mg/m2 weekly), a chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody effective against both disorders. Rituximab treatment proved effective in depleting EBV-infected B-lymphocytes and those involved in hemolytic pathogenesis.

After a few weeks and four rituximab administrations, we observed a progressive amelioration of the patient clinical condition, with no more need of dialytic and respiratory support. She was gradually weaned off oxygen therapy, and her jaundice resolved along with normalization of liver function tests. After rituximab therapy, the EBV-DNA titer resulted negative, as also were cold agglutinin levels. Her hemoglobin level gradually returned to normal values.

Finally, after one month of hospitalization, the patient was discharged in good general condition, with normal liver, renal and hemoglobin values.