On 24 January 2020, a 48-year-old male patient with a history of asthma was transferred to our department due to acute myocarditis of unknown origin. The patient described a sudden onset of high-grade fever without prodromal symptoms beginning on 12 January. Within a few days, he developed dyspnoea and haemoptysis requiring hospital admission.
Laboratory testing showed high levels of the inflammatory markers creatine phosphokinase (CPK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; see ). Ferritin was only marginally elevated. His differential blood count showed prominent eosinophilia (19%) and lymphopenia (18%). Testing for autoantibodies only yielded antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) at a very low titre without any detectable specificity against a broad panel of nuclear antigens. However, myositis-associated antibodies, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs), as well as antiphospholipid antibodies were negative. The measurement of vital signs revealed tachycardia (100 b.p.m.) with hypotonic blood pressure (90/65 mmHg) and fever (39°C). On physical examination, lower leg oedema was present. The auscultation of heart and lungs was unremarkable.
Thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed bilateral, patchy peripheral ground-glass opacities with a crazy-paving pattern, focal consolidations, and mild pleural effusions . Due to highly elevated cardiac markers [N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) and troponin T], echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed. Both showed highly reduced ventricular function [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 22%, right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF) 28%]. Furthermore, late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) of the entire left ventricular myocardium with intracardial thrombi was detected on MRI . T1 and T2 times were markedly prolonged, reflecting acute oedema following myocardial inflammation. In light of a multifaceted differential diagnosis, pulmonary and myocardial biopsies were performed. Histopathological analysis of the pulmonary biopsy showed interstitial alveolitis with capillaritis, necrosis, and mild eosinophilia. The cardiac specimen revealed active lymphocytic myocarditis . PCR analysis for usual cardiotropic viruses was negative. A few days after admission, the patient developed an acute renal injury with microhaematuria.
Based on these findings and the clinical presentation at that point, the diagnosis of an ANCA-negative small-vessel vasculitis was established. Given the known asthma, eosinophilia, renal injury with microhaematuria, and cardiopulmonary inflammation, the patient fulfilled the criteria for eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) despite the lack of ANCAs.
In accordance with current guidelines, pulse therapy with cyclophosphamide and high-dose steroids was initiated, and the patient recovered adequately after several weeks of treatment. On discharge, the patient was afebrile without dyspnoea, but a wearable defibrilator was prescribed. .
After discharge of the patient from our hospital, the COVID-19 pandemic had evolved to affect Europe as well. Individual cases were reported at the end of January and early February in France, Italy, and Austria. Owing to the initial broad spectrum of differential diagnoses, we revisited the complete medical history and contacted the patient, who reported a prior vacation in Tyrol, Austria, from which the patient and his family had returned 1 day before the sudden onset of his symptoms. It is of interest that Austria is considered the origin of the COVID-19 outbreak in Europe. The distance from Tyrol to our department in Germany is ∼500 km. One week later, the patient arrived at the hospital because of a progressive fever and weakness. Moreover, the patient reported that his 8-year-old daughter developed flu-like symptoms with a high-grade fever (40.7°C/105°F) ∼1 week after his first symptoms.
Subsequently, PCR testing for SARS-CoV-2 RNA was initiated on the histological specimens of the heart using quantitative reverse transcription–PCR (RT–qPCR) kits targeting the E gene and RdRp gene (TIB MOLBIOL, Roche Diagnostics, Germany), and the N2 assay (N gene). Unexpectedly, those tests were positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Therefore, we revised the diagnosis from small-vessel vasculitis to COVID-19-associated myocarditis and immediately stopped immunosuppressive treatment with cyclophosphamide. The steroid dose was also tapered. The course of resolving the intracardial thrombus was accomplished with a therapy that included coumarin-type drugs. The normalization of elevated laboratory inflammation markers, improvement of cardiac function on echocardiography, and the absence of cardiac inflammation on cardiac MRI confirmed the patient’s recovery.
The pulmonary specimen showed mild eosinophilia with parenchymal necrosis and alveolitis. Staining for CD31, factor VIII, and CD68 were positive, while all other staining experiments were negative. In the cardiac specimen, markedly elevated counts of lymphocytes (positive for LFA-1, CD45R0, and CD3) and elevated counts of macrophages (positive for MAC-1) could be detected along with the expression of adhesion molecules (ICAM-1). In contrast, perforin-expressing cytotoxic cells were not present. While PCR did not detect typical cardiotropic viruses, additional testing for SARS-CoV-2 RNA revealed a positive signal in the myocardium.