A 63-year-old woman with advanced pancreatic cancer was referred for a psycho-oncology consultation due to her response, which seemed like sudden onset of loss of consciousness.
On visiting her, we found her bedridden, staring at the ceiling without blinking, and responding minimally but correctly to our questions, including orientation-related ones such as date and location. Her family said that she suddenly became absentminded and stated to her husband, “It is over and I will probably die soon.”
Her clinical findings were as follows: blood pressure, 109/70 mmHg; heart rate, 78 beats/min; oxygen saturation, 98%; body temperature, 36.7 °C. Laboratory findings revealed that alkaline phosphatase and amylase values were slightly increased, but these could not explain her psychiatric symptoms. By electroencephalography, the basic rhythm was 8–10 Hz and slow waves were not evident, findings that did not suggest reduced consciousness. Neurological examination demonstrated that she maintained the position when the psycho-oncologist raised her hand (catalepsy).
She had no medical history of psychiatric illness or alcohol or drug abuse, and she was very kind to others. Her husband said that she was very shocked at her diagnosis of pancreatic cancer, and became anxious about treatment and admission to hospital. She had been afraid of cancer because her grandfather had died of cancer after a long period of suffering.
She had been diagnosed with advanced pancreatic cancer accompanied by multiple liver metastasis 4 months before the event, and gemcitabine was administered. Three weeks before the event she had been admitted to our emergency department with thrombosis of both pulmonary arteries and stenosis of the third portion of the duodenum due to disease progression. She frequently vomited. Insomnia and anxiety reappeared, and after much agonizing, she decided to undergo a gastrointestinal bypass. The surgery proceeded 3 days before the event, without complication and post-operative delirium was not evident.
Based on physical, neurological, and psychiatric assessment, we suspected brief psychotic disorder with catalepsy and substupor, and she was administered 2.5 mg of intravenous haloperidol.
On the following day, she could sit on the bed and respond to our questions more clearly. Two days later, she was able to make expressions and smiled at us. The symptoms disappeared 4 days later and did not reappear. One week later, she told us about this experience and said that it was very scary. We diagnosed a brief psychotic disorder based on these findings, and its features fulfilled the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th edition .