Premature newborn from a second pregnancy, from non-consanguineous parents, 27-year-old mother with no significant morbid history, 3 prenatal checks, with diagnosis of omphalocele, but without subsequent follow-up. Personal, pathological and toxic allergic history is unknown, peripartum STORCH examinations negative.

A newborn with undetermined sex was born at a gestational age (GA) estimated to be 33 weeks based on the Ballard test; with a weight of 2,300 g, a length of 43 cm, a head circumference of 32 cm, an anthropometric assessment of length/GA: -0.21 standard deviations (SD), weight/GA: +1.17 SD and head circumference/GA: + 1.11 SD; classified as adequate weight and length for the gestational age according to Intergrowth-21.

The initial physical examination highlighted a low anterior hairline, hypoplastic uvula, prominent lobes, broad nasal dorsum, anteverted nares, asymmetry with left hemifacial microsomia, absence of abdominal wall, giant omphalocele associated with vesicoureteral extrophy, epispadias, no palpable gonads, imperforate anus, a soft mass on the dorsum covered by skin at the lumbosacral level, bilateral club foot, hypoplastic nails, digitalized thumbs and halluxes.

The primary management was surgical correction of the omphalocele and ileostomy through an exploratory laparotomy. A defect of the anterior wall of the abdomen of a giant omphalocele of approximately 12 cm, centrally located, with an intact amnion containing the whole liver and some loops, associated with a vesical extrophia with exposed urethral orifices, a uterus didelphus (each hemi-uterus with its respective tube and ovary), a prolapse of approximately 15 cm of intestine through the cloaca, a small intestine ending in the cecum and the cecum in the cloaca, without evidence of the rest of the colon, and a diastasis of the pubis, were described at that time.

In the face of these malformations, an echocardiographic study was completed that reported a patent ductus arteriosus of 1 mm without haemodynamic repercussion, severe pulmonary hypertension of 65 mm hg. Radiological studies showed lower lumbar hemiverterbrae of the sacrum, butterfly vertebrae in the vertebral body of T9 and T12, hypoplastic iliac, without visualizing the coccyx.

Computed tomography of the abdomen showed a left diaphragmatic hernia (Bochdalek), with hypertrophy of the left hepatic lobe displacing the liver anteriorly and inferiorly, causing an abnormal position of the intestinal loops posteriorly and caudally, as well as an ectopic gallbladder, a rejected bladder to the right with diffuse thickening of the walls, extrusion of the soft tissue of the pelvis with bone malformations and myelomeningocele. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed myelocystocele.

With these findings, a high suspicion of OEIS complex with simultaneous presentation of Cantrell's pentalogia or 1p36 deletion was considered. In the genetic study, numerical and structural chromosome abnormalities were ruled out with a karyotype of 25 metaphase, G banding with a result of 46, XX.

As a management, the group of pediatric surgery and urology performed a colostomy, cloaca closure and midline vesical plaque, with adequate postoperative evolution, given respiratory stability during hospitalization, surgical correction of diaphragmatic hernia was deferred at that time and was planned to be performed later depending on clinical evolution.

The hospital stay was prolonged, however, she was discharged with indication of multidisciplinary outpatient control, but the patient died of intercurrent acute respiratory pathology shortly after.
