A 32-year-old man presented with a 6-month history of intermittent dysphagia. Barium swallow showed an extrinsic compression of the lower thoracic esophagus. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, which revealed a large submucosal mass in the lower thoracic esophagus without mucosal irregularity. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) and computed tomography (CT) of the thorax showed a large homogeneous tumor in the esophageal muscular layer, measuring about 5 × 6 cm, without paraesophageal lymph nodes and projecting into the right pleural cavity . Routine laboratory and clinical findings were normal.
The patient was intubated with a double lumen tube for one-lung ventilation and was positioned in the left lateral decubitus position. Three thoracic trocars were introduced . The camera port (10-mm) was placed at the ninth intercostal space, mid-axillary line. Two 5-mm trocars were introduced at the fifth intercostal space, anterior axillary line and the seventh intercostal space, posterior axillary line for using a "grasper" or coagulating device. The left lung was retracted to expose the lower thoracic esophagus. A simple hook was used to divide the mediastinal pleura overlying the esophagus. The lesion was then enucleated by careful dissection.
Intraoperative endoscopy with air insufflation was performed to confirm esophageal integrity . The esophageal muscle was re-approximated with interrupted 3/0 Dexon. The specimen was removed within an endobag through the camera port. A 28 Fr chest tube was inserted through the camera port for postoperative drainage. The operative time was 2 hours and intraoperative blood loss was minimal.
Barium swallow at day 3 after surgery revealed no leakage and the patient was started on a liquid diet on day 4. The pathological report showed a leiomyoma with mitotic figure 0–1 per10 high power fields (HPF). Immunoperoxidase stainings were positive for smooth mucle actin, and negative for S-100, CD34 and C-kit. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 6. The patient is currently asymptomatic three months after surgery.