A 55-year-old man was admitted to The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine (Hangzhou, China) in October 2021 with rapidly worsening heart failure.
The patient had been experiencing heart failure for 3 mo, but had begun to experience chest tightness, dyspnea, edema, and fatigue after activity.
The patient had undergone a pulmonary resection 20 years prior to address carcinoma in situ; his current disease state was considered stable.
The patient’s personal and family histories were unremarkable.
The patient’s blood pressure was 87/49 mmHg, pulse rate was 101 beats per minute with a regular rhythm, and O2 saturation was 97% at room air. Physical examination revealed that he had clear lungs and normal heart sounds with no murmurs or gallops on auscultation. His lower extremities showed mild bilateral pitting edema. No enlargement of lymph nodes, liver, or spleen was found.
Laboratory tests showed normal findings in a complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel. The levels of serum lactate dehydrogenase and β2-microglobulin were within normal limits. However, the levels of brain natriuretic peptide (385.7 pg/mL; normal: < 100) and troponin T (0.058 ng/mL; normal: < 0.014) were over the normal upper limits. Creatinine was within the normal range (at 51.9 μmol/L), while urine analysis was negative for protein. Quantitation of 24-h urinary lambda light chain showed a level of 365.2 mg. Quantitative serum immunoglobulin analyses demonstrated normal levels of IgG (at 10.5 g/L), IgA (at 2.01 g/L), and IgM (at 0.28 g/L). Serum immunofixation was used to evaluate an underlying gammopathy and showed lambda light chain proteinemia. The level of serum-free lambda light chain (FLC) was normal (at 15.56 mg/L), with the difference between the involved and uninvolved serum FLC levels being 6.75 mg/L. A bone marrow aspirate smear showed 5% infiltration of plasma cells, while flow cytometry analysis showed an abnormal population of plasma cells that accounted for 5.8% of normal cells, most of which were positive for surface CD38, CD56, CD138, and cytoplasmic λ light-chain. The fluorescence in situ hybridization test was negative, which included a 1q21 amplification, 13q14 deletion, p53 deletion, and translocation of t (4; 14), t (11; 14), t (14; 16).
Positron emission tomography/computerized tomography (PET/CT) was performed and showed no abnormal metabolic lesions. An electrocardiogram showed low voltages in the limb leads. Echocardiogram revealed severe left ventricular hypertrophy, a reduced left ventricle ejection fraction of 38.1%, and an elevated left ventricular filling pressure E/A of more than 2.04. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the morphologic phenotype of increased left ventricle wall thickness, while 99technetium pyrophosphate (99mTc-PYP) planar scintigraphy showed a heart-to-contralateral ratio of 1.31.
Cardiac amyloidosis was considered as a possible etiology of the cardiomyopathy due to the left ventricle thickness on echocardiogram and the heart-to-contralateral ratio of 1.31 on 99mTc-PYP. An endomyocardial biopsy was performed with electron microscopy, revealing fibroid deposits in the myocardium and after Congo-red staining, fibrous tissue with apple green birefringence visualized by polarized light microscopy . Immunohistochemistry analysis showed dominant positivity for monoclonal lambda light chains.