A duodenal mass that had been discovered 2 mo previously
A 47-year-old man was admitted to our hospital on November 20, 2015 because of a duodenal mass that had been discovered 2 mo previously. Electronic gastroscopy at another hospital revealed a duodenal papillary mass that had been considered to be a high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia and was left untreated. The patient reported having no significant, recent weight loss. We carried out relevant examinations, confirmed the diagnosis, and took further treatment measures.
The patient was healthy before.
The patient and families were healthy before.
The patient’s vital signs were: Temperature, 36.2 ℃; pulse rate, 75 bpm; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 110/70 mmHg. The physical examination revealed a normal countenance; absence of superficial lymph node enlargement and heart abnormalities; a flat abdomen; liver and spleen not palpated below the costal margin; hypogastric region tenderness; no shifting dullness absent; bowel sounds of 4 times/min, with no increase or decrease; and gurgles and abdominal vascular murmurs not audible.
Laboratory test results included: White blood cell count, 4.5 × 109/L; erythrocyte count, 4.42 × 1012/L; hemoglobin, 144 g/L; platelet count, 130 × 109/L; normal liver and kidney function; prothrombin time, 14 s; fibrinogen, 3.09 g/L; tumor marker CA-125, 7.19 U/mL (normal < 35 U/mL); CA-199, 7.07 U/mL (normal < 37 U/mL); alpha-fetoprotein, 3.17 ng/mL (normal 0.89-8.78 ng/mL); and CEA, 1.67 ng/mL (normal < 5 ng/mL). The rest of the parameters were within the normal range.
Abdominal computed tomography showed a space-occupying lesion at the head of the pancreas and the duodenal bulb . Due to the aforementioned imaging findings, a preliminary diagnosis of a duodenal papillary space-occupying lesion was made.
Two days before the operation, the patient was fed a liquid diet. After fasting for 8 h before surgery, an intravenous injection of 2 g cefazoxime sodium was given 30 min before surgery to prevent infection. A patient-controlled analgesia pump was provided postoperatively. The patient was treated by hemostasis, nutrition, and water and electrolyte supplementation. Routine blood and biochemical indexes were monitored.
After general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position, and then disinfected and trocar inserted. A laparoscopic exploration was then performed. As the gallbladder wall tension was not increased, the hepatoduodenal lymph nodes were not significantly enlarged, and there were no other significant findings in the peritoneal and pelvic cavities, we decided to perform a pancreas-preserving duodenectomy with a median abdominal incision. The gastrocolic ligament was opened to expose the duodenum, which was dissociated along the upper edge of the duodenum until the ligament of Treitz. The branch vessels entering the upper end of the duodenal bulb and the pancreas were ligated using USP 0 sutures. On turning the descending part of duodenum to the right and freeing the common bile duct and pancreatic duct on the inner side of the descending part of the duodenum , a 3 cm × 3 cm solid mass with a hard, firm texture was palpable. The mass was not found to involve the pancreas and hepatoduodenal ligament. The common bile duct was freed along the duodenal papilla upward, until no significant mass invasion could be found. The common bile duct was severed at the pancreas side and the pancreatic duct was freed from the head of the pancreas toward the inner side until no significant mass invasion was found. After the distal part of the stomach, duodenum, and the tissues surrounding the pancreas were freed, the stomach was transected 6 cm from the pylorus using an endoscopic linear cutter and the jejunum was also transected 5 cm under the ligament of Treitz using a 6-0 linear cutter. After removing the specimen, the distal part of the jejunum was lifted from behind the colon to the level of the porta hepatis. An incision with a length equivalent to the opening of the bile duct was made on the contralateral edge of the mesojejunum, 5 cm from the jejunal stump. Bilioenteric anastomosis was performed through full-thickness continuous sutures using 6-0 prolene sutures. The residual pancreatic body and tail were freed and lifted for placement of an infusion tube scalp needle with an opening on the side. The main pancreatic duct and jejunal mucosa were continuously sutured using 5-0 proline sutures, and the head of the pancreas and the seromuscular layer of the jejunum were sutured in an interrupted manner, using USP 0 sutures. A Frankenman 25 stapler was used for Billroth I in situ anastomosis between the pyloric part and the jejunum, and the serous layer at the anastomosis site was sutured using USP 0 sutures . The operation was successful and the tumor was completely removed. The operative time was 295 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 100 mL. There were no obvious postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged 14 d after the operation.
The macroscopic examination of the surgical specimen showed a cancerous tumor with a white-gray color and a hard texture in the duodenal papilla . A pathological diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the duodenal papilla with infiltration in the full thickness of the intestinal wall was made. The stumps of the pancreatic duct and bile duct and the lymph nodes were negative and thus an R0 resection was achieved. No atypical cells were found in the pancreatic tissues surrounding the pancreatic duct and bile duct (pT2N0M0).
A patient-controlled analgesia pump was provided postoperatively. The patient was treated by hemostasis, nutrition, and water and electrolyte supplementation. Routine blood and biochemical indexes were monitored. The patient refused to receive chemotherapy, and no obvious abnormalities were found in relevant examinations.