A 29-year-old Han woman presented with a chief complaint of a tumor under her right clavicle for 5 months, and right shoulder soreness and numbness of the exterior of her right upper arm for 10 days. At physical examination there was a red and warm mass over her right shoulder with mild pain and tenderness. The mass was tough, hardly moveable, and base-fixed. The strength of her right upper limb muscles was 4+. A chest X-ray showed a mass with a high density shadow at the superior posterior right clavicle . A right shoulder computed tomography scan showed a mixed density shadow in the serratus anterior, which correlated with clinical findings . A neck magnetic resonance imaging scan showed abnormal findings in the serratus anterior at the right-side of her chest wall, which also correlated clinically . An electromyogram showed a few positive sharp waves in muscles innervated by the brachial plexus upper trunk. Motor unit potential mixing interference patterns, compound muscle action potential, motor nerve conduction velocity, and sensory nerve conduction velocity were within the normal range. Her right brachial plexus upper trunk was slightly damaged. Based on the above examinations, the patient’s condition was diagnosed as a tumor beneath the right clavicle. She underwent surgery as a treatment. During the operation, the tumor boundary was found to be on the posterolateral side of the middle scalene; anteroinferior of the trapezius, levator scapulae, and postscalene; and behind the brachial plexus cervical nerves 5 and 6 (C5–6). The tumor invaded the serratus anterior. Anteromedial tumor adhered to the C5–6 nerve branches, posterolaterally adhered to the suprascapular nerve, and adhered to the rear edge of the brachial plexus sheath and omohyoid in the front. Under a microscope, the neurovascular and protective brachial plexus sheath, and the C5–6 nerve branches and the suprascapular nerve were carefully separated; tumor subordinates back below the upper edge of the scapula notch were detected; and the tumor of 7×4×3cm size was completely resected . Intraoperative suprascapular nerve stimulation and muscle contractions were normal; the brachial plexus upper trunk was able to be stimulated; contraction of deltoid, biceps, and flexor carpi were normal; and stimulation of the dorsal scapular nerve, scapular muscles, and rhomboid muscle revealed normal contraction. No intraoperative frozen section was obtained. A postoperative histopathological examination showed that lesions were consistent with myositis ossificans . The soreness of her right shoulder and right arm numbness disappeared completely postoperatively. After 1 year, she did not have any abnormalities.