A 57-year-old female presented with vision loss in the left eye during the restoration of consciousness after endoscopic DCR surgery for the left eye. In this case, the DCR surgery was performed under general anesthesia. Notably, 2 ml of 1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine was injected into the axilla of the middle turbinate and the frontal process of the maxilla using a dental syringe. In this case, the neurosurgical patties soaked in 2 ml of 1:1000 epinephrine were inserted between the inferior turbinate and the nasal septum and in the middle meatus to achieve topical decongestion. In the process of making mucosal flap and incision, the patient had a higher bleeding tendency than was noted with other patients, and a suction diathermy was used meticulously for the incidence of hemostasis. For this reason, it did not lead to a major bleeding in this case.
The patient’s medical history was notable for thrombocytopenia and MHA. Upon review, the patient denied temporal headache, pain, or flashes. When tested, the patient’s best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and light perception in the left eye. Her intraocular pressure (IOP) was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 16 mmHg in the left eye. Her visual field test result was normal for the right eye. However, the test could not be conducted for the left eye due to the incidence of poor vision. When tested with the swinging flashlight maneuver, a relative afferent pupillary defect was found in the left eye of the patient. Her extraocular movements were noted as being full and painless. However, mild periorbital bruising and swelling were detected in the left eye. Additionally, there was mild maxillary sinusitis noted as well. However, it was shown there was no underlying disease in the other sinuses. On the funduscopic examination, there were no obvious abnormal findings in the macula of either eye. The use of a fluorescent angiography did not reveal leakage or a filling defect at the disc. The baseline testing included blood tests to evaluate syphilis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and neuromyelitis optica. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein results were noted as normal. Her pre-operative platelet count was 61 × 103/mm3. A chest x-ray was performed to evaluate sarcoidosis. She was transfused with six units of platelets preoperatively, which increased her platelet count to 123 × 103/mm3. No other cause of optic neuropathy was found in this evaluation.
The pattern visual evoked potential revealed delayed P100 latency . Her electroretinogram showed normal electrical activity in the retina. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbit revealed a focal hyperintensity within the intra-orbital segment of the left optic nerve on the T2-weighted image (T2-WI) and flair image. At evaluation, the MRI showed an enhancement on the T1 post-contrast imaging . It did not show any demyelinating disease in the brain. The patient was diagnosed with left optic neuropathy and treated with 1 g/day of intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days, followed by 1 mg/kg/day of oral prednisone with subsequent dose tapering. It is noted that the patient’s BCVA improved to 20/30 after the treatment. Although her vision improved, she was left with a visual field defect in the left eye.