A 55-year-old Asian (Japanese) woman presented with low back pain and right leg radiating pain without any apparent cause. She received conservative treatment, such as pain killer administration and lumbar root block injection under the diagnosis of lumbar disc herniation at the right L5/S. However, her symptoms gradually worsened until she could not walk because of severe right leg pain and mild muscle weakness. She then referred to our hospital for surgical treatment.
Physical examination revealed a positive Lasègue sign and the range of the straight leg raising test was 20° on the right side. The right patellar tendon reflex was normal; however, the right ankle jerk reflex absent. On the manual muscle test (MMT), mild muscle weakness (4/5) was observed in the right tibialis anterior (TA), peroneal longus et brevis (PL et B), extensor hallucis longus (EHL), flexor hallucis longus (FHL), and triceps surae (TS). Although there was occasional mild numbness in the right lower leg, no obvious hypoesthesia was noted in the definitive area.
On plain radiograph, spina bifida occulta at the L5 neural arch was detected in the anteroposterior direction, and slight disc space narrowing at the L4/5 and L5/S intervertebral disc levels was seen in the lateral direction . Myelography and computed tomography (CT) following myelography (CTM) showed a defect in the right L5 and S1 nerve roots . Magnetic resonance (MR) images revealed a herniated nucleus pulposus (HNP) on the right side at the L5/S1 intervertebral disc level . Our preoperative diagnosis was right S1 radiculopathy originating from a usual HNP that compresses the right S1 nerve root in accordance with the findings of L5 radiculopathy suspected by muscle weakness of the TA, EHL, and PL et B.
We planned lumbar discectomy under a microscope. First, wide fenestration at the right L5/S interlaminar space was performed to identify the right S1 nerve root that was compressed by HNP. However, an anomaly of the conjoined right L5–S1 nerve root was observed. There was no adhesion between the yellow ligament and neural tissue. The epidural space was filled with sufficient adipose tissue. An HNP extruding from the right L5/S intervertebral disc space was confirmed beneath the conjoined right L5–S1 nerve root, which was severely compressed and shifted backward. Mild adhesion between the conjoined right L5–S1 nerve root and capsule of the HNP was observed. Next, to ensure safe discectomy, the area of the fenestration was enlarged while assuring that the facet joint was not disrupted. Although the conjoined right L5–S1 nerve root was very thick and less mobile, some pieces of HNP could be removed piece by piece from the axillary part of the conjoined right L5–S1 nerve root. After these decompressive procedures, the tightness of the conjoined right L5–S1 nerve root decreased, but its mobility did not improve much . The laterality of the thickness and exit angle of the conjoined right L5–S1 nerve root was retrospectively confirmed on preoperative T2 coronal MR images and MR neurography .
Postoperatively, right leg pain was immediately alleviated and complete improvement of muscle weakness was achieved 1 week later (5/5). At 6 months after surgery, she complained of mild pain at the back and the bilateral thighs, similar to myalgia but was able to walk without any support .