A previously healthy 16-year-old female presented with a four-day history of abdominal pain, vomiting, fever, headache, myalgias and cough. Her initial vital signs in the referring emergency department were temperature 39.4° Celsius, pulse 154, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 115/61, and oxygen saturation 96 %. Physical examination was notable for pallor and right lower quadrant (RLQ) abdominal tenderness without guarding or rebound. Initial laboratory testing significant for white blood cell (WBC) count 5.8 10^3/uL (reference range 4-10.5) with 93 % neutrophils, hemoglobin 11.9 g/dL (12–15), platelets 102 10^3/uL (150–450), C-reactive protein 11 mg/dL (0–1.0), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 26 mm/hr (0–20), and procalcitonin 0.50 ng/mL (< 0.09). Urine hCG negative. Urinalysis showed trace leukocyte esterase (negative), negative nitrites, and 1–5 WBCs (0). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen/pelvis showed mesenteric edema, dilation of the appendix (8mm), and fat stranding throughout the lower abdomen and pelvis. She received two intravenous (IV) fluid boluses, anti-pyrectics and was transferred to our pediatric hospital.
On arrival she was evaluated by the pediatric surgery team who felt her presentation was not consistent with acute appendicitis. Further history and exam revealed that she had mild bilateral conjunctival injection and neck tenderness in addition to RLQ pain and had a positive SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test one month prior (she was asymptomatic but underwent testing due to several family members testing positive).
Additional labs were obtained with concern for MIS-C and were significant for a positive SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibody test and normal troponin and N-terminal Pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide. Given fever, positive SARS-CoV-2 IgG, laboratory evidence of inflammation, and multisystem involvement she was hospitalized for further monitoring and treatment of MIS-C.
Overnight, the patient was persistently febrile and tachycardic. She also reported increasing RLQ pain and exhibited new abdominal rebound tenderness. The attending pediatric radiologist’s review of the prior CT concluded that the imaging was consistent with acute appendicitis as there was dilation of the appendix, measuring 8 mm, mild appendiceal mucosal hyperenhancement and adjacent mesenteric fat stranding . The patient’s care was re-discussed with pediatric surgery and together the multidisciplinary team was unable to definitively rule out appendicitis as a concurrent pathology. While a diagnosis of MIS-C generally requires exclusion of other etiologies, it was felt that she could have appendicitis and MIS-C simultaneously. Empiric treatment for appendicitis was started with piperacillin-tazobactam. The surgical team reviewed the risks and benefits of non-operative management with continued antibiotics versus diagnostic laparoscopy and appendectomy. Surgical management was selected. Echocardiogram was obtained to assess for cardiac involvement and showed normal cardiac function and no dilation of the coronary arteries. She remained stable on the acute floor on hospital day two and therapy with intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) and aspirin were ordered for treatment of MIS-C. However, given the timing of when surgery could take her to the operating room, she underwent diagnostic laparoscopy and appendectomy first. She was found to have a grossly normal appendix with no inflammation to suggest appendicitis . As a surgeon’s intra-operative “eyeball” assessment of appendicitis is not perfect and the risk of appendectomy while undergoing laparoscopy is low the decision was made to complete appendectomy. Histologic findings revealed only mild chronic serosal inflammation and edematous mesothelium; it did not show the transmural acute inflammation diagnostic of appendicitis. Piperacillin-tazobactam was discontinued and the patient was returned to the acute care floor for post-surgical monitoring and MIS-C treatment with IVIG infusion (2 g/kg) and aspirin (81 mg).
On hospital day three she completed IVIG therapy, and her blood pressure and fever curve improved. Repeat labs showed worsening lymphocytopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia and hypoalbuminemia. She then developed tachycardia and hypotension refractory to fluid resuscitation and given concern for refractory MIS-C, she was started on corticosteroid therapy (2 mg/kg twice daily). She was transferred to the intensive care unit and started on norepinephrine (0.02 mcg/kg/min) for hemodynamic support, which she required for 24 hours. The patient stabilized and was then transferred back to the acute care floor with improvement of her pancytopenia over the next two days. She was discharged home in stable condition on day seven of hospitalization to complete a course of low dose aspirin and a steroid taper.
At her follow-up cardiology appointment four weeks after discharge, she was asymptomatic, but echocardiogram showed moderately dilated right and left coronary arteries with normal ventricular function. She remained on daily aspirin with close cardiology follow up to monitor progression of her coronary involvement.