A 40-year-old man presented to the emergency department (ED) via emergency medical services following a high-speed motorcycle versus automobile collision. Due to respiratory distress and decreased breath sounds in the right lung field, needle decompression was performed on scene by paramedics. Upon arrival to the ED, the patient was hemodynamically stable with a heart rate of 89 beats per minute and blood pressure 120/74 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). His mentation was intact. Physical exam revealed extensive right-sided chest wall ecchymosis and tenderness.
Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) demonstrated reduced lung sliding on the right and no intraperitoneal free fluid; however, cardiac windows were suboptimal and non-diagnostic. Bedside chest radiograph showed multiple right-sided rib fractures with apical and lateral pneumothorax. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated fractures of right ribs 3–11 with accompanying pneumothorax, sternomanubrial joint dislocation with retrosternal hematoma, and pneumomediastinum . Additionally, the patient was found to have a grade 1 liver laceration and first lumbar (L1) vertebral body fracture with 10 mm of retropulsion.
A 14-French pigtail catheter was placed into the right hemithorax without immediate complication. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram was remarkable for ST-segment elevation in leads aVR and aVL with diffuse ST depression in leads II, III, aVF, and V1–V6 concerning for BCI and prompting cardiology consultation . An initial high-sensitivity troponin T returned at 225 nanograms/milliliter (ng/mL) (reference range: <19). During the cardiology team’s evaluation, the patient complained of worsening chest pain and difficulty breathing, becoming hypotensive with a blood pressure of 78/59 mm Hg and tachycardic with a heart rate of 119 bpm.
Repeat POCUS demonstrated bilateral lung sliding and no intra-abdominal free fluid; similarly, the chest tube and pleural drainage apparatus were functioning normally. Again, cardiac windows could not be obtained due to presumed air scattering. Because of significant pneumomediastinum seen on CT, obstructive shock physiology from the mediastinal free air was suspected. An emergent bedside percutaneous needle drainage in the left fifth intercostal space was performed, yielding 9 mL of blood with scant air bubbles. The patient’s blood pressure immediately improved, and cardiac windows were subsequently visualized on POCUS.
With high suspicion for acute myocardial infarction, the patient was taken for emergent coronary angiography. Transthoracic and transesophageal ultrasounds obtained in the cardiac catheterization lab did not demonstrate pericardial fluid or cardiac tamponade. Angiography demonstrated 95% thrombotic occlusion of the proximal left circumflex artery at the origin of the first obtuse marginal branch without evidence of coronary artery dissection . Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with aspiration thrombectomy and deployment of two drug-eluting stents resulted in complete restoration of coronary blood flow. The patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit.
Aspirin and ticagrelor were initiated immediately after PCI. Norepinephrine and amiodarone were administered for cardiogenic shock and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, respectively, both of which resolved within 48 hours. Following cardiac stabilization, the inpatient team addressed the patient’s spinal injury, although urgent operative intervention was deferred because of hemodynamic instability and the bleeding risk associated with antiplatelet therapy. Prior to spinal fixation on hospital day three, ticagrelor was changed to tirofiban infusion, which was held prior to the first incision and resumed postoperatively. Ticagrelor was re-started following the removal of a spinal drain on postoperative day two. The patient remained stable for the remainder of hospitalization and was discharged on aspirin and ticagrelor on hospital day 14.
On a follow-up phone call with the patient almost six months after the injury, he reported that he was back to working full time and feeling fully recovered. He recalled the accident and arriving to the ED, although he did not recall undergoing tube thoracostomy placement or percutaneous needle drainage. He was advised to continue aspirin and ticagrelor for at least six months.