A 58-year-old man, who had hypertension, hyperlipidemia and the past history of cerebral infarction and had past smoking and drinking history, visited his nearby hospital, complaining of hematemesis and tarry stools. As a family history, his mother had treated for colon cancer. Endoscopic examination showed a hemorrhagic esophageal tumor. Additionally, a contrast computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large hypervascular tumor of 4.8 cm in diameter in the left kidney. He came to our institution for further examination and treatment of the esophageal and kidney lesions. On blood examination, mild anemia of serum hemoglobin (12.7 mg/dl) was observed. SCC, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and cytokeratin 19 fragment (CYFRA) were within normal range. Serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) was not measured. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an easy bleeding elevated tumor of 2 cm in diameter at the left wall of the middle thoracic esophagus . Histopathological diagnosis from biopsied specimens was a poorly differentiated carcinoma. However, a precise diagnosis could not be obtained from the biopsy specimen. Long segment Barrett’s esophagus (LSBE) of about 4 cm in length was observed at the anal side of the tumor . Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a tumor with a combination of isoechoic and low echoic components infiltrating into the submucosal layer . Upper gastrointestinal contrast examination showed an elevated lesion of 2.2 cm in diameter in the middle thoracic esophagus . Contrast-enhanced CT examination showed the tumorous lesion occupying the esophageal lumen of the middle thoracic esophagus . Swollen mediastinal or abdominal lymph nodes and distant metastases were not observed. Additionally, a solid tumor of 4.8 cm in diameter was found in the left kidney medulla with hyperenhancement in the early phase and washout of contrast in the delayed phase . 2-[18F] fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) examination showed abnormal FDG accumulation in the esophageal tumor. The maximum standardized uptake values (SUVmax) in early and delay phases were 12.7 and 15.7, respectively. There was no suspected metastatic accumulation in the mediastinal or abdominal lymph nodes and other organs. Another abnormal FDG accumulation was observed in the left kidney lesion which was diagnosed as a primary renal cancer by its typical image findings . He was diagnosed with esophageal cancer [MtLt 2.2 cm Type 0-Ip cT1b N0 M0 cStage I] combined with a left renal cancer. His general condition was poor (ECOG-Physical Status 2) because of a left hemi-paralysis caused by cerebral infarction and was given anticoagulating agent. We preferentially performed esophagectomy to control bleeding from esophageal tumor prior to renal cancer treatment. Therefore, mediastinoscopic transhiatal esophagectomy and posterior mediastinal gastric tube reconstruction was performed as a first surgery.