An 87-year-old man presented with appetite loss and was referred to a neighborhood hospital. His medical history included angina pectoris after percutaneous coronary intervention, aortic valve stenosis, chronic heart failure, and stage 4 chronic kidney disease. He was taking antihypertensive and antiplatelet drugs (100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel). Plain computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed an incidentally large infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA).
The patient was transferred to our university hospital for further treatment. Contrast-enhanced CT was performed to examine the anatomical features of the AAA. The maximum aneurysm diameter was 55 mm × 65 mm. The proximal neck was 24 mm in diameter and 28 mm in length with an angulation of 40°. The right and left common iliac arteries were 16 mm and 16 mm in diameter, respectively, which were within the instructions for use and anatomically suitable for EVAR. In addition, the left kidney was supplied with double renal arteries, the inferior branch of which originated immediately above the aneurysm. The branch was then sacrificed.
EVAR with the Endurant stent graft (Medtronic Endovascular; Santa Rosa, CA, USA) was performed using a mobile C-arm imaging system. The bilateral common femoral arteries were surgically exposed under sedation and regional anesthesia. A 4F catheter was placed just above the renal arteries through the left brachial artery for intraoperative angiography. The main body (28 mm × 16 mm × 166 mm) was positioned through the left common iliac artery, by which the left inferior renal artery was consequently sacrificed. The main body was extended to the right common iliac artery with a contralateral leg (16 mm × 24 mm × 124 mm). Balloon inflation with a compliant aortic occlusion balloon (Coda Balloon Catheter, Bloomington, IN, USA) was performed in the proximal neck, component junction, and bilateral distal neck but not excessively. Angiography revealed an endoleak in the proximal sealing zone. An aortic cuff was placed inside the proximal neck zone, because the type IV endoleak was indistinguishable from type Ia endoleak. Completion angiography showed that the endoleak had almost disappeared and the procedure was completed.
A color duplex ultrasound was performed 7 days after the operation instead of a contrast-enhanced CT because of severe renal insufficiency and revealed a regular row of pulsatile blood flow from the main body and left leg (Additional file : Movie 1A and Additional file : 1B; Fig. A, B). The blood flow appeared to be bleeding from the stent suture lines because of its regularity. Type IV but not type IIIb endoleak was suspected, likely due to stent suture line fabric breakage. However, it was not treated surgically or endovascularly but was followed by CT because of the patient’s poor general health status and the expectation of spontaneous resolution of the leak. The patient was transferred from our hospital to a neighborhood hospital.
Six months later, the patient was readmitted to our hospital because of recurrent fever of unknown origin. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a deformation and enlargement of the aneurysm sac as well as oozing of the contrast medium on the main body and left limb , suggestive of persistent type IIIb endoleak. However, the patient was considered unsuitable for further surgical intervention because of his deteriorating general health condition. He experienced subdural hematoma due to a fall during his hospital stay and died of uncontrolled subdural hematoma 7 weeks after readmission. Autopsy was performed with the informed consent of his family; it showed no visible abnormal erosion or hole on the graft fabric, suggesting that tiny fabric breakage may have existed along the stent suture line at the time of the manufacturing process.