An 84-year old white male, presented at the Department of Dermatology (6th IKA Oncological Hospital of Athens) with a pale, ulcerated lesion (1.3 cm in diameter), on the middle of his lower lip. There was no associated lymphadenopathy and an excisional biopsy was performed. Histopathological and immunoistochemical features revealed a Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) but as the excision was incomplete the patient was sheduled for a wider excision in the following 2 months. In the meantime, the lesion recurred and the patient returned with a protruding white lesion of 1.1 cm in diameter. There was no associated lynphadenopathy and a wider excision, with an 8 mm margin, was performed. Histopathology confirmed the nature of MCC and the second excision was within healthy margins.
Two months later, the patient was referred to the Depatment of Plastic Surgery, for another protruding ulcerated lesion, 3 cm in diameter, on his lower lip . On examination, multiple palpable lymph nodes in the submandibular and cervical area (superficial and deep cervical lymphadenopathy) were present.
Past medical history revealed that 8 years earlier, the patient had been diagnosed as having chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), (nodular and intermediate type), but he didn't receive any treatment. CT scan of the head and neck area, showed a soft tissue lobular mass, 3 cm in diameter, on the lower lip, with a possible extension to the mandible. The past medical history of CLL with the recent occurence of MCC posed a problem in the differential diagnosis of the patient's lymphadenopathy. A W-excision (4 × 3.5 × 1 cm) of the lip lesion was performed, with an open biopsy of one submandibular lymph node.
Histopathology, confirmed recurrence of MCC. An undifferentiated small cell carcinoma with hyaluronated stroma was identified. The cells arranged in nodules or rosettes, had dense nuclear chromatin, with mitoses and nuclear debris which are regular features of MCC .
Immunoistochemical procedures showed Neuron Specific Enolase (NSE) positivity, while antibodies for Epithelial Membrane Antigen (EMA) and Chromogranin were negative. The excision was described as complete. The submandibular lymph node was positive for malignacy but was associated with the CLL (non Hodgkin's, B cell small lymhocytic lymphoma). There was no evidence of metastatic infiltration by MCC and this was confirmed immunoistochemically with the positive expression of CD5 and CD20 antibody and negative expression of CD10 antibody and NSE. Due to the age of the patient, chemotherapy was not considered.
A month later, a new CT scan of the head and neck, depicted a soft tissue mass, consistent with recurrence of MCC, between the left angle of the mandible and the hyoid bone. Multiple enlarged superficial and deep cervical lymph nodes were present. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the submandibular swelling was performed and confirmed MCC (small atypical cells were found, isolated or forming rosettes and exhibited dense core granules of chromatin and scanty cytoplasm). The patient underwent one month of neck radiotherapy with Cobalt 60, a total dose of 4600cGy in 23 days. A further boost of 600cGy in 2 days, on the left submandibular area was administered.
The treatment was successfully completed with full remission of the cervical lymphadenopathy. Two months following the radiotherapy, a new CT scan of the head and neck showed reduction and obscurrence of the pre-existing mass on the left mandibular area, while the lymph nodes were smaller too. The patient is on regular follow up and CLL status is stable with no evidence of progression or further recurrence of MCC 9 months post- radiotherapy.