This case report has been written in accordance with the SCARE 2018 criteria .
A 64-year-old female presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital with acute onset of a right-sided groin bulge that occurred earlier that day after doing heavy lifting. She had no significant past medical or surgical history. Her baseline functional status was exceedingly well. Her laboratory studies showed no leukocytosis or any electrolyte abnormalities. Initial radiologic studies included a transabdominal and transvaginal pelvic ultrasound, which showed a 2.4 × 2.6 cm fluid collection with some septations and absent visualized adnexal structures. A subsequent CT demonstrated a well-circumscribed 2.7 × 3.2 × 2.6 cm fluid collection containing echogenic debris. It did not have significant rim enhancement yet was noted to be most consistent with an abscess, complex seroma, or necrotic lymph node; its depth was amenable to percutaneous drainage. On further review with the radiologist, it was noted to contain the appendix, the tip of which was dilated and radiographically concerning for a cystic process, with mucocele remaining within the differential diagnosis.
The patient was kept nil per os, intravenous fluid resuscitation was initiated, and antibiotic therapy was begun. She was brought to the operating room for emergent surgical intervention. The patient underwent laparoscopic appendectomy with open femoral hernia repair. Intraoperatively, the appendiceal tip was incarcerated within the hernia sac . Due to the preoperative radiographic appearance and the suspicion for mucocele, extreme caution was exercised to avoid rupture and not to provide excess tension in an attempt to reduce it laparoscopically. It was easily removed through the open inguinal incision after the appendix base was divided laparoscopically . The femoral hernia was repaired in standard McVay fashion. Final pathology showed inflamed non-perforated acute appendicitis without evidence for neoplasm. The patient recovered well without notable complications and was discharged on postoperative day number two without antibiotics.