Our patient was a 76-year-old white female with a past medical history of chronic kidney disease (CKD), baseline creatinine 1.85 mg/dL (estimated glomerular filtration rate 27 ml/min/1.73 m2; creatinine range 1.5-2.5 mg/dL six months prior to admission), hypertension, gout and psoriatic arthritis, who was admitted to the hospital for evaluation of elevated creatinine (4.83 mg/dL). She had no previous history of major surgeries. She did have a remote history of therapeutic use of arsenic for psoriasis approximately four decades earlier. She also had past history of heavy nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs use up till three years earlier, when she had an episode of AKI. Her family history was unremarkable. She had only a remote history of smoking. Six weeks earlier, she has been started on orlistat 120 mg three times a day for weight loss. The rest of her medications included vitamin-C supplementation (500 mg/day) calcium carbonate, sevelamer hydrochloride and sodium bicarbonate supplementation for CKD, pantoprazole and monthly infliximab infusions for psoriatic arthritis. Physical exam was non-contributory, with a weight of 71 kg, height 1.55 m and blood pressure of 144/61 mm Hg. Her body mass index calculated at 29.5 kg/m2. Urinalysis with microscopy was unremarkable, except for 5 WBCs/high power fields with no crystals or cast formation. Extensive serologic work-up (antinuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, hepatitis-B and C studies, serum protein electrophoresis with measurements of serum free light chains) remained unremarkable. Uric acid was only mildly elevated at 7.2 mg/dL. Parathyroid hormone level returned within normal limits. During the diagnostic work-up, however, renal ultrasound noted multiple non-obstructing stones. Despite appropriate medical therapy, including volume expansion and correction of serum bicarbonate, creatinine rose to 5.40 mg/dL. Due to the ongoing diagnostic uncertainty a percutaneous kidney biopsy was performed, revealing calcium oxalate crystals within tubular lumens with associated interstitial inflammation with associated features of acute tubular necrosis (-). A subsequent, 24-hour urine collection confirmed increased oxalate excretion (69.5 mg/24 hour; normal for the laboratory: 9.7 - 40.5 mg/24 hour specimen). Heavy metal screen (arsenic, cadmium, lead, mercury) from blood and 24-hour urine collection was unremarkable. Renal replacement therapy with intermittent hemodialysis was initiated for 5 consecutive sessions in eight days, which she tolerated well. Initial serum oxalate was 45 mm/l (normal <27, reporting limit > 10; ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT/National Medical Services, Willow Grove, PA); subsequent values returned undetectable after renal dialysis begun. Repeated 24-hour urine collection before discharge documented ongoing excessive oxalate excretion (75 mg/24 hour) (.).
During follow-up, despite good medical compliance, she failed her per os calcium-carbonate therapy to achieve effective gastrointestinal oxalate chelation. Thereafter, being aware of the potential interaction between proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and reduced bioavailability of CaCO3 (,), she was changed to calcium citrate 1040 mg three times daily with meals for the purposes of gastrointestinal oxalate binding agent and to decrease urinary oxalate excretion . Twenty-two months after her initial hospital presentation she continues to do well and serum creatinine gradually decreased to the 2.01–2.32 mg/dL range (estimated glomerular filtration rate 20-24 ml/min/1.73 m2) . Urine oxalate excretion came under acceptable control with per os calcium-citrate dosed at 2080 mg, to be taken three times a day with meals .