A 63-year-old Caucasian man initially presented with an asymptomatic 55% stenosis of the right proximal ICA to another institution. The left ICA was found to be occluded; the vessels of the posterior circulation were not examined. Our patient underwent an endovascular procedure at the other institution, which included the deployment of two 7 mm/40 mm Wallstents (Wallstent, Boston Scientific Corporation, Natick, MA, USA) . The reason why two stents were inserted without balloon angioplasty remains unexplained. Then, three months later, our patient was referred to our hospital with clinical signs and symptoms of a transient left hemispheric ischemia, including global aphasia, right hemiparesis, and paresthesia of the right upper extremity. His cardiovascular risk factors included arterial hypertension, hyperlipidemia and non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Our patient was a non-smoker. Our patient's history included severe coronary heart disease, cardiac insufficiency (New York Heart Association stage II) and recurrent atrial fibrillation, which altogether resulted in an American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status of IV.
Magnetic resonance imaging and angiography including diffusion-weighted imaging did not reveal any ischemic lesions of the left hemisphere. Digital subtracted angiography (DSA) of the supra-aortic and intra-cranial vessels confirmed the occlusion of the left ICA and revealed a highly effective mechanical obstruction of the right ICA caused by two stents deployed in an overlapping side-by-side position . Further atherosclerotic lesions included significant stenoses of both proximal vertebral arteries (V1), a stenosis of the entire left V4 segment and a focal stenosis at the junction of the right V4 segment with the basilar artery. The anterior communicating artery and the right posterior communicating artery were widely patent and the left external carotid artery contributed to the supply of the left hemisphere via the ophthalmic artery. When giving his informed consent, our patient was informed of a peri-procedural and post-procedural mortality and morbidity rate of between 3% and 5%, and an increased risk of peri-operative bleeding due to the antiplatelet medication. Our patient accepted this, and the off-label use of both the Coroflex (Coroflex Please, B Braun Melsungen AG, Melsungen, Germany) and Enterprise (Codman Enterprise, Raynham, MA, USA) stents.
The first step of the treatment strategy focused on the posterior circulation stenoses in order to improve the potential collateral supply during subsequent stentectomy and CEA. Dual platelet antiaggregation with acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel was initiated. Under general anesthesia the stenoses of both vertebral artery origins were treated with short drug-eluting stents (Coroflex), followed by the stent percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of the left and right V4 stenosis using a combination of moderately undersized balloon dilatation and deployment of oversized self-expanding stents (Enterprise).
The surgical stent removal from the right ICA combined with CEA completed the treatment. Stentectomy and CEA were carried out under regional anesthesia.
As routinely, we operated using ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia (MicroMaxx, Sonosite GmbH, Erlangen, Germany) of the cervical plexus using 20 cc of lidocaine 1% (Xylocain, Braun Melsungen AG, Melsungen, Germany) and 50 cc of ropivacaine 0.375% (Naropin, Astra Zeneca GmbH, Wedel, Germany). The dispensation of analgosedation allowed our patient to be awake throughout the operation, while neurological function was monitored by assessing the level of consciousness and our patient's motor function on the left side. At first the proximal ICA was dissected circumferentially beyond the level of the carotid bifurcation after uneventful clamping. The removal of the proximal stent from the common carotid artery was then possible without any neurological deficit, and we decided to proceed with the eversion technique. The simultaneous removal of the two 'hugging' stents together with the atherosclerotic plaque in the proximal ICA was possible. The ICA and common carotid artery (CCA) were reanastomosed using a 6/0 polypropylene suture in a continuous fashion. Intra-operative angiographic assessment was performed to ensure patency and in order to control the distal end of the plaque removal. Our patient made an uneventful recovery with no additional neurological deficit.
Histological examination revealed a thickened layer of arterial neointima. Duplex scanning was within normal limits after five days and three months, and was confirmed by DSA after six months . Follow-up duplex scanning surveillance and neurological assessments were unremarkable after 12 months.