A 69-year-old male presented to his primary-care physician in March 2019 due to progressive dysphagia during a period of approximately one year. He was previously healthy, except for urolithiasis and benign prostatic hyperplasia. A barium swallow study was performed and showed a stricture at the distal esophagus. Further investigation with an upper-gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy revealed a tumor at the distal esophagus and biopsies confirmed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The patient was referred to our unit, Department of Upper Abdominal Surgery, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, which is a tertiary referral center for upper-GI malignancies. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) and fluorodeoxyglucose - positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) were performed. The case was thereafter discussed at our upper-GI multidisciplinary team meeting. The disease was classified as a 6 cm Siewert type-II tumor at the GEJ, with a clinical stage of T3-4a, N1 (due to a 15 mm lymph node alongside the lesser curvature of the stomach), and Mx due to equivocal lesions with elevated FDG-uptake at the ampulla of Vater and at two segments of the small intestine . Further investigation with duodenoscopy did not confirm any lesion at the ampulla of Vater.
The patient underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy in April 2019, which revealed three suspicious lesions involving a 25 cm-long segment of the proximal jejunum , starting approximately at 25 cm distally to the ligament of Treitz. There was no obvious, macroscopic, serosal invasion of the primary tumor, no signs of peritoneal carcinomatosis or ascites, and the duodenum was found to be normal. Because of risk for leakage by taking jejunal biopsies as well as to avoid future risk for bowel obstruction, the affected segment of the jejunum was resected through a mini laparotomy. The pathologic examination showed three separate, radically resected, poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas (3 × 1 cm, 5,5 × 1,5 cm and 3 × 1 cm, respectively, ). Immunohistochemistry suggested that these tumors were most probably metastases of the primary GEJ tumor. The cytology from the abdominal washout taken during the laparoscopy was negative.
As the jejunal metastases were radically removed and there were no other indications of disseminated disease, neoadjuvant chemotherapy was decided with the intent for subsequent curative resection of the primary tumor. The patient received four cycles of Docetaxel, Oxaliplatin, Leucovorin and 5-flurouracil (FLOT). The patient tolerated the oncologic treatment well, except for some diarrhea (Grade 1 according to the common terminology for adverse events version 5). A new PET-CT after the completion of chemotherapy showed remarkable tumor response with only weak FDG-uptake in the primary tumor and the previously described regional lymph node. However, a new site of focal FDG-uptake appeared in another part of the small intestine at the left flank. Furthermore, there was also diffuse FDG-uptake in the left colon probably due to chemotherapy-induced colitis. The patient underwent another diagnostic laparoscopy, which did not show any suspicious findings. The anastomosis from the previous jejunum resection appeared as erythematous and fibrotic, corresponding to the suspicious lesion in the PET-CT.
The patient subsequently underwent a minimally invasive Ivor Lewis esophagectomy with two-field lymphadenectomy and gastric tube interposition in August 2019. There were no complications intraoperatively. shows the surgical specimen. An enhanced recovery program was implemented postoperatively and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 15. The postoperative course was uneventful, until the patient was re-admitted due to paralytic ileus on postoperative day 18, which was treated conservatively with gastrografin. The pathology examination showed complete tumor regression (ypT0N0 with 37 lymph nodes resected) and confirmed an R0 resection. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with additional four cycles of (FLOT). One year and four months after the esophagectomy there were no clinical or radiologic findings of tumor recurrence. At seventeen months post esophagectomy, he developed left-sided weakness and mild cognitive impairment. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 2,5 cm parietal tumor. There were no other signs of recurrence on CT-scan of the thorax and abdomen. The patient underwent surgical resection of the brain tumor in February 2021. Histopathology confirmed a radically resected metastasis of his previous GEJ cancer. He is now slowly recovering and he is awaiting complementary radiotherapy.