A 45-year-old Caucasian male presented to the Emergency Department following 3 days of progressively worsening right lower quadrant abdominal pain and headaches. His past medical history was remarkable for long-standing back pain and erectile dysfunction. The patient was a social drinker and occasionally smoked. Initial clinical workup was unremarkable with normal blood pressure and renal function (BP 124/86; serum creatinine was 1.0 mg/dL with an eGFR of 90 mL/min/1.73 m2). A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis was performed with intravenous contrast was performed per local protocol, revealing a right lower pole renal infarct. There was also perivascular inflammation involving the celiac artery. Initially a thrombotic/hypercoagulable state was hypothesized as the etiology. An ECG, transthoracic echocardiography bubble studies, d-dimer and coagulation studies were performed with no abnormal findings. Serologic studies evaluating for systemic vasculitis including ESR, CRP, ANCA and ANA were also negative. The patient was admitted for 3 days and was discharged on apixaban 5 mg once daily with stable creatinine and eGFR.
The patient represented to the ED 16 days later with recurrent right flank pain, blood pressure 151/88 mmHg, temperature 36.7°C, serum creatinine of 1.3 mg/dL, eGFR 65.7 mL/min/1.73 m2, ESR 32 mm/h, CRP 12.32 mg/dL. Urinalysis was bland with no granular or epithelial casts. A CT angiogram of the aorta was performed to evaluate for aortic dissection, which revealed progression of the previously seen right renal infarct, now extending into the mid pole. There was also an acute dissection of the anterior and posterior divisions of the right renal artery, with several smaller branch occlusions in the mid and lower pole. In addition, there was new perivascular inflammation involving the main right renal artery and persistent inflammation involving the celiac artery, but no dissection or end organ damage. Interventional radiology was consulted for management of the renal artery thrombus to prevent worsening of the infarct. The patient was taken for a renal artery angiogram which confirmed the presence of a dissection and multiple segmental and smaller branch occlusion in the mid to lower right kidney. A decision was made to initiate catheter-directed thrombolysis, and the patient was monitored in the ICU overnight per protocol. Within 48 hours after the initiation of catheter directed thrombolysis, suffered fever and urinalysis was leukocyte esterase and nitrite positive and had 2+ blood and 2+ protein and was subsequently managed with Cefepime for urinary tract infection although urine culture ultimately showed no growth. The following day, the patient returned to IR for a repeat angiogram which revealed no significant reduction in arterial thrombus burden and a persistent dissection. Due to the patient having normal blood pressure, and significant pain improvement, thrombolytic therapy was discontinued and the patient was initiated on dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin (81 mg daily) and clopidogrel (75 mg daily). At the point of discharge, the sCr was 1.0 mg/dL, eGFR 89.0 mL/min/1.73 m2.
Twelve days later, the patient was readmitted, at that time complaining of gross hematuria and passing tissue on urination with elevated creatinine (1.63 mg/dL) and eGFR (50.1 mL/min/1.73 m2). A CT angiogram of the renal arteries was performed, showing a new left lower pole renal infarct and a left renal artery segmental branch dissection . There was a similar appearance to the perivascular inflammation involving the celiac and right renal artery branches with no increase in right renal infarct size. Genetic testing panels including COL3A1 for collagen disorders yielded nothing.
At that time other contributors to the acute kidney injury and gross hematuria, including variously: hypovolemia; post-renal obstructive causes; glomerular and tubulointerstitial nephropathies (eg, contrast-induced nephropathy, acute interstitial nephropathy, acute tubular necrosis; were considered but appeared unlikely given lack of obstruction found on imaging (renal ultrasound and CT) as well as profuse red blood cells and protein on urinalysis but otherwise bland urine microscopy). There was no albuminuria. Throughout his presentation, the patient maintained adequate urine output ~120–200 mL/hour (body mass 95.7 kg). At this stage and in light of the radiographic abnormalities including inflammatory changes involving the celiac and renal arteries with associated bilateral renal artery dissections and the absence of vasculitic-, collagen defect-, or thrombophilia-markers, the provisional diagnosis was a non-atherosclerotic non-inflammatory vasculopathy.
As there was no indication for surgical or additional endovascular management, the multidisciplinary team decided to manage the patient medically with atorvastatin (80 mg daily), Aspirin (81 mg daily), clopidogrel (75 mg daily), metoprolol (25 mg daily), amlodipine (5 mg daily) with blood pressure goals of <130/80 and counseling to adhere to a low sodium diet, home blood pressure monitoring and avoidance non-steroidal anti-inflammatories.
Within 2 weeks of this latter presentation, hematuria had been resolved, there was no proteinuria or albuminuria on urinalysis; however, serum creatinine remained elevated and eGFR depressed. At 15-month follow-up, his kidney function had stabilized with elevated creatinine (1.3–1.5 mg/dL) and eGR (58–63 mL/min/1.73 m2) levels meeting the KDIGO criterion for CKD stage G2/3. A Renal CTA at this time demonstrated chronic bilateral infarcts and persistent, but improved perivascular inflammatory changes of the celiac and renal arteries without recurrent or new dissection .