A 4-month, 20-day-old girl was admitted to the University of Chinese Academy of Science-Shenzhen Hospital on February 8, 2021, with a cough that had lasted six days and a fever for three h. She was a full-term child whose parents were not close relatives. There was no history of radiation exposure, smoking, or drinking during pregnancy. Additionally, there was no history of cold, fever, medication, nontoxic substances, or radiation exposure during early pregnancy. The child was the fourth fetus and second birth in the family. She was delivered vaginally at a gestational age of 39 + 3 weeks with a birth weight of 2.7 kg. During delivery, there was no asphyxia, umbilical cord around the neck, or premature rupture of membranes; the amniotic fluid was clear, and the placenta was normal. Her Apgar scores 1 and 5 min after birth were both 10. She had six fingers on her right hand . Two days after birth, after feeding poorly, moaning for half a day, and developing a fever for 1 h, she was diagnosed with neonatal purulent meningitis, sepsis, pneumonia, and hyperbilirubinemia. Nineteen days after birth, a swollen, dark tumor developed on the child's right thumb. Due to evident ischemia and necrosis, a multi-finger resection was performed, and she was discharged from the hospital 22 days later. She was hospitalized 98 days after birth because she was not eating. Before admission, she ate 20–30 mL per meal, six times a day. On the day of admission, her total milk volume was 50 mL. She was eating 40 mL per meal every 3–4 h 12 days later and discharged.
Before the present admission, she ate 50 mL per meal every 3–4 h. Physical examination indicated the following: head circumference 34 cm (unchanged from birth), body temperature 37.8 °C, pulse 146 per min, respirations 42 per min, blood oxygen saturation 95%, weight 4 kg (< 3rd percentile), and body length 53 cm (< 3rd percentile) . The fontanels were open. Her development was delayed (neck muscle weakness; could stand for 1 min, head height < 3rd percentile, could not support chest and abdomen for one minute on elbows). The pursuit of sounds and objects was normal. She was conscious, had an auricle deformity, warm limbs without cyanosis, and CRT 1.5 s. The patient has no cleft lip/ palate. Her sucking force was inferior, and muscle strength in both arms was slightly reduced, but both legs were normal and she could move her legs freely. The physiological reflexes were present, and no pathological reflexes were elicited. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated an abnormal signal in the bilateral occipital subarachnoid space, suggestive of leptomeningitis or subarachnoid hemorrhage. Considering the possibility of an abscess, an enhanced MRI was performed. There were no apparent abnormalities in brain ultrasound or MRI of the head . Color Doppler echocardiography showed a continuous 2.7 mm interruption in the middle of the atrial septum . Re-examination was recommended after one year of age to rule out a patent foramen ovale. The systolic and diastolic functions of the heart were normal.
Due to the postnatal growth and psychomotor retardation, auricle deformity, microcephaly, polydactyly, cardiac abnormality, and feeding difficulties, low-depth genome sequencing was performed at Shenzhen Huada Gene Research Institute with the consent of her family . This showed SEQ (grch37) del (8p21.2p11.22) chr8. A 12 MB pathogenic fragment, G.27228261–39230720del, was from an unknown source. The comprehensive ClinGen CNV score was ≥ 0.99, indicating a pathogenic lesion. The parents' and older brothers’ chromosomes were normal.
As a result of the chromosomal disease, the patient's postnatal growth and development were delayed, and she had muscle weakness, insufficient food intake, and severe pneumonia. As she was weakly positive for Mycoplasma, she was given erythromycin and atomization treatment. Her cough improved with rehabilitation and physiotherapy. At discharge, she could hold her head up, remain upright for 2–3 min, and support her chest and abdomen on her elbows for a few minutes. She consumed 50 mL of milk every 3–4 h.