This is a case of a 14-year-old male who sustained a twisting injury to his right leg during early phase of COVID-19 pandemic. He sustained a three-part lateral triplane fracture of the ankle with a concomitant ipsilateral displaced spiral fracture of the shaft at middle-lower third junction of his right tibia . The mechanism of injury was a twisting injury with external rotation of the foot while running indoors. The ankle injury was initially missed in the emergency. The orthopedic team examined the patient the following morning and ordered a CT scan of the ankle on clinical and radiographic suspicion. CT ankle reported the triplane injury pattern . The coronal, sagittal cuts revealed 2 mm gap and axial cut revealed 3 mm gap at the articular surface without any step. Conservative plan of management was decided as the displacement of shaft fracture was <50%, varus/valgus angulation <5o, recurvatum <5 degrees and shortening <1 cm and triplane ankle fracture was without any intra-articular step. The patient underwent close reduction under fluoroscopy and above-knee casting and was discharged on day-2. Regular follow-ups were done at weekly intervals for initial 3 weeks post-discharge to check for any fracture displacement and then at 6, 10, 14, 18, and 22 weeks, 6 months, 9 months, and 1 year. Above-knee plaster cast was converted to a patellar tendon bearing (PTB) cast at the 10th week for another 4 weeks and weight-bearing was started on PTB cast. The shaft fracture showed abundant callus at 14 weeks and follow-up X-rays (, , , ). The triplane fracture was uniting well with no disruption of the tibial plafond and an initially open anterolateral physis of the distal tibial gradually closed in the follow-up X-rays. The patient achieved a good functional recovery in 22 weeks and there was no limb length discrepancy at the end of 1 year. Evaluation was done based on modified Weber scale using the pre-operative and post-operative scores for pain, walking, activity, and ankle, subtalar function and awarded clinical demerit points with scores 15/24 at 10 weeks, 10/24 at 14 weeks, 6/24 at 18 weeks, 4/24 at 22 weeks, 2/24 at 6 months, and 0/24 at 9 months.