The patient presented with intermittent abdominal pain and bloating for six months and sudden shortness of breath and confusion during diagnostic colonoscopy.
A 58-year-old man presented with intermittent abdominal pain, bloating and reduced defecation in the past six months. To determine the severity of intestinal lesions and rule out intestinal tumors, the patient underwent a routine diagnostic colonoscopy using air insufflation under nontracheal intubation intravenous general anesthesia (propofol). Upon withdrawal of the colonoscope, the patient suddenly experienced shortness of breath and confusion and gradually developed cyanosis.
The patient underwent a colonoscopy 12 years prior, and colonic ulcers were observed. Because the patient had oral and perianal ulcers and the colonic ulcers were considered to be a manifestation of intestinal BD, the patient was diagnosed with intestinal BD by a rheumatologist. He had suffered severe pain in the right lower abdomen 11 years prior. Acute appendicitis was initially suspected, but spontaneous ileocecal perforation was confirmed during an emergency exploratory laparotomy, and surgical repair of the ileocecal perforation was performed. He still suffered from the recurrence of oral and perianal ulcers but did not experience unbearable abdominal symptoms after taking prednisone and leflunomide irregularly.
The patient had a 30-year history of smoking (1 pack per day).
The physical examination upon admission showed tenderness in the right lower abdomen. When cyanosis occurred, the oxygen saturation dropped to 68%, and the heart rate was 130 beats/min. Assisted mask ventilation was initiated with 100% oxygen, but the patient’s saturation did not improve. An abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen on palpation and drum sounds on percussion. On auscultation, breath sounds were absent on the right side and diminished on the left side of the chest.
The patient had an antinuclear antibody titer of 1:320 (granular type, cytoplasmic type) and a positive fecal occult blood test upon admission. The laboratory results were not available during rescue.
The computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis before colonoscopy revealed bowel wall thickening in the terminal ileum, ileocecal area and appendix, ileocecal stenosis and incomplete bowel obstruction.
Colonoscopy revealed deformation, mucosal hyperplasia and multiple deep ulcers in the ileocecal region . The possibility of perforation could not be ruled out. The colonoscope could not enter the small intestine due to stenosis and deformation of the ileocecal valve. Pseudopolyps in the ascending colon and ring ulcers in the transverse colon and descending colon were also shown on colonoscopy. Biopsies were taken from the ileocecal region, ascending colon and transverse colon. Pathology revealed chronic active mucosal inflammation in the ileocecal region and chronic mucosal inflammation in the ascending and transverse colon.
The CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis after chest drain tube insertion showed bilateral pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, pneumoperitoneum, pneumoretroperitoneum and subcutaneous emphysema of the neck, chest, abdomen, back and scrotum .