In January 2021, a previously healthy 7-months-old female was admitted to the pediatric emergency room for a poor sitting balance, which was completely achieved 3 weeks before, and abnormal involuntary and oscillatory movements spread to head, limbs and torso. Posture while sitting unsupported was very difficult to be maintained, with oscillations and falls. Symptoms had started about 48 h earlier. A contemporary history of fever and vomit was also referred, resolved at the moment of the admission to the hospital. Parents reported that she had received the second dose of MenB vaccination (Bexsero-Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics S.r.l., Siena, Italy) 72 h before the admission to the emergency room.
The patient's prenatal and perinatal history was unremarkable, with a normal pregnancy and good adaptation at birth. The patient was born via spontaneous gestation at 39 weeks gestational age, with a birth weight of 3020 g. She was full-term born by vaginal delivery with a 1-min Apgar score of 9 and an adequate birth weight for gestational age. Neonatal screening for congenital hypothyroidism, phenylketonuria, cystic fibrosis, and 17-hydroxyprogesterone resulted negative. The patient was exclusively breastfed at discharge, which occurred after monitoring for an episode of cyanosis on the second day of life. The patient's vital parameters were within the norm, and echocardiography was normal. A blood count at birth revealed mild thrombocytopenia, which was resolved on a follow-up control. The patient was discharged in good general condition with well-established breastfeeding. Developmental milestones were regularly achieved.
According to the patient's medical records, the patient had received the first two doses of the hexavalent vaccine (DTaP-Hib-IPV-HepB) and the first dose of MenB vaccine (Bexsero) without any reported side effects. The hexavalent vaccine was administered at the third and fifth months of life, while the MenB vaccine was given at the fifth month.
At the examination she was awake and manifested neither nystagmus or saccadic eye movements, and her optic fundi and cranial nerves were normal, as her tendon reflexes. In order to exclude an infectious meningoencephalitis, blood sample, CT scan, spinal tap and basal electroencephalogram were performed. The CT scan and the electroencephalogram did not reveal abnormal findings. Upon admission to the emergency room, a thorough diagnostic workup was initiated to identify all the potential causes of ACA in our patient. Blood chemistry, leukocyte count, acute phase proteins, and electrolytes were in normal range. Blood serologies for adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, coxsackie virus, herpes simplex virus, human herpesvirus 6, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, parvovirus B19 and came back negative. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis found a white blood count of 1/μL, protein level 17 mg/dL (n.v. 10–45 mg/dL), glucose level of 55 mg/dL (n.v. 40–70 mg/dL), lactate 1.9 mmol/L (n.v. 1.1–2.8 mmol/L), with no microscopic evidence of contamination. The workup included a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of both blood and CSF for a range of viral and bacterial pathogens that are known to cause meningitis and encephalitis. Specifically, we conducted PCR testing for all viruses and bacteria that are considered probable causes of these infections, as well as for mycoplasma pneumoniae and fungal infections. Both blood and CSF cultures were performed at the time of admission to the emergency room but did not yield any positive results.
To further investigate the potential viral etiology of ACA in our patient, we performed additional PCR testing for other viruses that may be associated with this condition. Specifically, we looked for Influenza (A H1, A H3, B) and Parainfluenza viruses, as well as other respiratory viruses such as SARS-CoV-2, rhinovirus, enterovirus, RSV, and adenovirus. Despite these efforts, the molecular and serological search for viral causes of ACA on nasopharyngeal aspirate, CSF and blood did not yield any positive results.
The electrocardiogram found normal sinus rhythm and repolarization. A magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and spinal cord were then performed, with no abnormal findings. A possible correlation between the clinical picture of ACA and the recent vaccination was then suspected as the first diagnostic hypothesis.
To exclude any possible correlation with a hypothetical paraneoplastic etiology, a chest X-array and a complete abdominal ultrasound were performed. Homovanillic and vanilmandelic acid urinary excretion did show any anomalies. The search for specific CSF and blood autoantibodies (anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase, anti-HU, anti-YO and anti-RI) did not find abnormal results. Plasma level of neuron specific enolase was first 21.3 ng/mL (n.v. < 12.5 ng/mL), but then decreased back off to range in the following days.
During the hospitalization her general conditions remained stable and started to improve. The neurological follow up during the hospital stay confirmed the positive evolution with an increased head and trunk control and seated posture maintenance with minimal sway. Acute phase proteins remained in normal range.
Therefore, in view of the temporal correlation between the second dose of MenB vaccine and the onset of symptoms, a pharmacovigilance report was sent. Symptoms gradually improved, and the patient was discharged after an 8-days recovery. Clinical full recovery was confirmed at the 10-days and 1-month follow-up, when she was completely able to maintain a stable seated position with no swinging movements and dysmetria.