A 43-year-old Caucasian woman, a mother of three sons, at 30 days post-partum after a full-term pregnancy without any complications and concluded by a vaginal delivery, suffering from diabetes on oral antidiabetic medication, presented to the emergency department with left flank pain with hematuria of one week’s duration. A clinical examination revealed an alert patient, febrile at 38°C, with blood pressure of 158 over 67mmHg, heart rate of 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, suffering from pain in the left flank (visual analog score (VAS) = 5), this pain was exacerbated by palpation, which found lumbar contact. Diagnostic studies in the emergency room revealed a urine analysis with 104 white blood cells (WBCs), gross hematuria, and a C-reactive protein level of 88. Her blood cell count revealed anemia at 9g of hemoglobin; blood electrolytes and renal function with serum creatinine levels were normal.
An abdominal ultrasound scan showed discrete pyelocalyceal cavities dilation with a slightly enlarged left kidney and without visible urinary obstruction. A CT urography and angiography scan was performed and showed an ectatic left renal vein, seat of a large hypodense thrombus extending from the segmental renal veins to the inferior vena cava, with a large heterogeneous and hypodense region located in the medium and lower poles of the left kidney without urinary tract dilatation or tumoral lesions; this aspect concluded in a perfusion abnormality (renal venous infarction) (Figures and
).
Anticoagulation heparin therapy was started and our patient was admitted to a medical center for further investigations. Her proteinuria and blood cultures did not show any abnormalities, and her serum albumin levels were normal. The thrombophilia assessment, with protein C or S deficiency, mutation of coagulation factors II and V, lupus and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) tests, were negative. The outcome was favorable with disappearance of pain and, after five days of hospitalization, our patient was put on oral anticoagulant therapy (acenocoumarol 4mg/day) and discharged.