A 56-year-old male with a past medical history of alcohol substance abuse with seizures, hypertension, and tobacco abuse presented to our urban Level I trauma center after falling from a ladder. He presented with left shoulder, elbow, and chest pain. Radiographs demonstrated displaced 3-part proximal humerus fracture ( and ). In addition, the patient was found to have a non-displaced ipsilateral radial neck fracture and ipsilateral non-displaced 4th–9th rib fractures.
Operative management of the injury occurred the following day. An anterolateral deltoid splitting approach was used, and the fracture was identified and reduced. A fibular strut allograft (LifeNet Health, Virginia Beach, VA.) was inserted into the humeral canal to augment the fixation. Fracture fixation was performed with a DePuy Synthes (West Chester, PA) 3.5 mm locking compression plate (LCP) proximal humerus plate ( and ). The greater and lesser tuberosities and associated rotator cuff muscles were sutured down to the plate using large non-absorbable suture. Total operative time was 75 min, and the estimated blood loss was minimal. The patient was then transferred to the post anesthesia care unit (PACU). There were no perioperative complications.
The patient was immobilized with a sling and instructed to be non-weight bearing. The patient was able to be range of motion as tolerated to his left upper extremity. The additional injuries were treated nonoperatively. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 5.
On post-operative day 11, the patient presented again to our trauma center after a fall down multiple stairs while intoxicated. The patient presented with the left shoulder pain, back pain, and left chest wall pain. The previous surgical incision showed routine healing. Radiographs demonstrated a displaced peri-implant proximal humerus fracture just distal to his original fracture fixation ( and ). In addition, the patient was found to have multiple vertebral superior endplate fractures.
Operative management of the injury occurred the following day. The same anterolateral deltoid splitting approach was used and extended into the anterolateral approach to the humerus. The peri-implant humeral shaft fracture was first reduced and provisionally held together with two separate lag screws. Then, the distal two screws from the proximal humerus plate were removed. A DePuy synthes (West Chester, PA) 10 hole 3.5 mm LCP metaphyseal plate with a thin proximal flare was placed so that the two most proximal screws were overlapped to link the two constructs (-). The greater tuberosity fragment had displaced from the fall and was fixed with an independent lag screw and an additional heavy gauge non-absorbable suture. Two proximal screws that were loosened from the fall were also replaced ( and ). Total operative time was 72 min, and the estimated blood loss was minimal. The patient was then transferred to the PACU. There were no perioperative complications.
The patient was immobilized with a sling and instructed to be non-weight-bearing. The patient was able to be range of motion as tolerated to his left upper extremity. The additional injuries were treated nonoperatively. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 1.
The patient followed up at 2 weeks postoperatively with a well healing incision and no complications. The patient had full passive range of motion, decreased active range of motion secondary to pain, and was otherwise neurovascularly intact. The patient was then lost to follow-up until 13 months postoperatively when he presented for repeat clinical evaluation. Clinically, the patient had no complications with full strength and range of motion. The patient reported very minimal pain and was not using pain medication. Radiographs at this final visit demonstrated stacked plate fixation with appropriate positioning, evidence of bony union, and no signs of displacement or hardware loosening. The patient was able to return to his previous level of activity.