A 48-year-old Chinese woman was administered a blood-activating and stasis-eliminating compound by a local physician for ankle pain. A “blood-activating and stasis-eliminating compound” is a type of traditional medicine that can be used as an analgesic and antipyretic. The ingredients of this blood-activating and stasis-eliminating compound include safflower, dog ridge (made), mistletoe, herba lycopi leaf, spatholobi, caulis trachelospermi, cocklebur, Cyperus rotundus, Periploca sepium Bge, and natural copper (calcined). It does not cause an autoimmune response, such as rash or vasculitis. Edema and skin rashes in both lower limbs appeared 3 days after this treatment. She was further treated for edema with furosemide and spironolactone at the same local hospital, and she was transferred to our hospital in September 2019. She did not have diabetes, nor did she have any relevant family, life, or allergy history. At admission, her vital signs on physical examination were as follows: body temperature, 36.5 °C; blood pressure, 127/90 mmHg; pulse, 71 beats/min; and respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min. Several round areas of the skin rash of varying sizes were seen on the arms, legs, and trunk. Pitting edema was observed in both lower limbs. Abdominal and cardiac exams showed no abnormalities.
The laboratory test results were as follows: urinary protein, 2+; blood protein, 3+; urinary protein excretion, 5.02 g/24 h; and creatinine, 385 μmol/L . Further assessment revealed that the patient was positive for ANCAs by indirect immunofluorescence (a titer of 1:10), positive for p-ANCAs (a titer of 3.1 as the antibody index) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and negative for both anti-GBM and anti-proteinase 3 (c-ANCA) antibodies after three repeated assays . Computerized tomography (CT) revealed scattered areas of inflammation in both lungs, with a small amount of pericardial effusion and bilateral pleural effusion. Half a month later, CT showed no inflammation in either lung, and the pleural effusion had disappeared . Renal ultrasonography showed normal-sized kidneys with elevated echogenicity.
Light microscopy on a Nikon ECLIPSE E-200 microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) revealed a total of 13 glomeruli, with three globally sclerotic glomeruli. Ten glomeruli had cellular crescents, and three had fibrocellular crescents, which suggested crescentic glomerulonephritis. The obliteration of Bowman’s capsules and segmental sclerotic lesions were noted in 5 glomeruli. In addition, tubular atrophy (30%) was accompanied by interstitial fibrosis (30%), with the interstitial infiltration of lymphocytes, monocytes, and plasmocytes . Immunofluorescence was observed under Olympus BX41microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) to assess five glomeruli, which showed IgG linearly deposited alongside the GBM . Electron microscopy (EM) performed with a transmission electron microscope (JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) showed the collapse and rupture of the GBM in the presence of foot process fusion. The absence of electron-dense deposits was another EM hallmark of the disease . Therefore, a diagnosis of anti-GBM disease with positivity for p-ANCA and another atypical ANCA was established, despite repeated negative serum anti-GBM antibody test results.
After the diagnosis of anti-GBM disease was established based on the clinical features and biopsy findings in our patient, treatment with methylprednisolone and plasmapheresis was initiated immediately. The treatment was initiated with 500 mg of intravenous high-dose methylprednisolone, which was administered three times, followed by oral prednisone at 50 mg per day. A hemodialysis catheter was implanted in the right femoral vein to enable plasmapheresis every 2 days (ten sessions in all). Interestingly, positivity for p-ANCA disappeared, but the patient was still positive for total ANCAs after the fourth session of plasmapheresis; the patient was negative for both c-ANCA and anti-GBM antibodies at admission. However, no signals for total ANCA or anti-GBM antibodies were observed after ten sessions of plasmapheresis.
The patient had good tolerance of all drugs and procedures and was successfully discharged after medical care. She was followed up via outpatient visits to continue treatment with prednisolone and cyclophosphamide. Additionally, her kidney function and lung disease were regularly monitored in specialized departments.