A 21-year-old male college student presented with no previous medical history or any drug intake. During a tackle at rugby practice, his forehead collided with the forehead of an opponent. Immediately after the collision remained asymptomatic and continued to play. However, several hours later of the same day, the patient started experiencing a mild headache with a gnawing pain all over the head. On the 2nd day, he took part in another rugby practice. However, during the rugby practice, experienced several episodes of transient left lower extremity paralysis reporting the event to the team trainer that suspected a concussion and immediately ordered him to stop playing. On the 3rd day of illness, he reported to the team doctor, who instructed him to visit our hospital.
The patient did not have headache or posterior neck pain. His Glasgow coma scale score was 4-5-6 and he did not have pupillary abnormalities, nystagmus, eye movement disorder, tetraplegia, sensory disturbance, or balance disorder. The finger-nose test did not reveal any abnormality in the patient. Similarly, his blood tests showed no abnormalities. His electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and a pulse rate of 56/min.
Computed tomography of the head did not show intracranial hemorrhage, but low absorptive changes were observed in the medial right frontal lobe. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed occlusion of the right ACA. T1-VISTA revealed an intramural hematoma (hyperintense intramural signal) that was consistent with the occluded artery [ and ]. Carotid artery echocardiography showed no abnormality. Based on the above-mentioned results, the patient was diagnosed with acute cerebral infarction due to traumatic ACA dissection.
He was admitted urgently on the 3rd day of illness and underwent thorough neurological examination and blood pressure monitoring. Since the CVI was caused by dissection, there is a possibility that an aneurysm may form in the future that could cause a cerebral hemorrhage. Therefore, the patient was not administered antithrombotic therapy. After admission, the patient was closely monitored for blood pressure, which was not high enough to require antihypertensive medication. He remained clear and conscious with no recurrence of headache or lower extremity paralysis. It was decided to evaluate his vessel with a minimally invasive MRI. If the MRI showed cerebral infarct enlargement or aneurysm formation, a digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was scheduled for a more detailed evaluation. T1-VISTA was repeated on the 10th illness day; it did not show recanalization of the occluded artery and no aneurysm had formed . On the 11th day of illness, he was discharged home with a modified Rankin scale score of 0. After discharge, he underwent a follow-up MRI.
T1-VISTA performed 1 month after the SRHI (i.e., on the 31st day of illness) showed recanalization of the occluded artery, but no aneurysmal changes were observed . In addition, the intramural hematoma had extended to the periphery of the artery. T1-VISTA performed 3 months after the SRHI (i.e., on the 82nd day of illness) showed maintained recanalization, but it did not show aneurysm formation or any other morphological abnormality of the artery. It also showed that the size of the intramural hematoma had decreased .
Our plan was to perform DSA if there were any changes in vessel morphology over time and to consider the need for additional treatment. In this case, he was able to be followed the changes in vascular morphology using MRI and T1-VISTA. Based on the above clinical and radiological course, we decided that the patient would continue to be followed conservatively and that detailed examination with DSA was unnecessary.