A 45-year-old man with a half-year history of hyperglycemia presented to endocrinology. The patient denied attacks of headache, hypertension, palpitation and sweating. He was kept for observation with 24-h electrocardiography (ECG) and blood pressure monitoring which was normal. His glycaemia returned to normal level under the action of insulin. Haematological and biochemical investigations were normal except for elevated serum and urinary catecholamines . Abdominal-pelvic CT scan with contrast injection had revealed a 7.2 × 6.5 cm inhomogeneous, right para-aortic mass located at the level of the inferior mesenteric artery . Both the adrenals were normal. With these findings, a diagnosis of POZ was reached. However, due to the patient's family economic reasons and the lack of MIBG scan examination equipment in our hospital, our patient did not undergo further MIBG scan examination. Then he was transferred to our center where attempts to preoperative preparation included expansion of intravascular volume and alpha blockade with phenoxybenzamine for 2 weeks even with the situation of normal blood pressure.
We made full consideration and preparation for possible conversion to open surgery before deciding to adopt laparoscopic surgery. If there were acute bleeding, small operation space, malignant tumor invasion or other parts of the injury that have to be converted to open surgery, we will use a longitudinal incision under the right costal margin for open surgery. In addition, we also communicated with vascular surgeons that if the aorta or the inferior vena cava were damaged, open resection and reconstruction of these vessels might be warranted.
The patient was placed in 70° left lateral decubitus position, and a 10-mm trocar was inserted above the umbilicus for telescope using. Another 10-mm, 10-mm and 5-mm trocar were placed under the right costal margin, right anterior axillary line and subxiphoid, respectively . A steep Trendelenburg position allowed the small bowel and omentum to be moved away from the mass. First, cut the hepatic triangular ligament and hepatocolicum ligament with an ultrasonic shears, and lift the liver to expose the upper pole of the right kidney. The ascending mesocolon is then longitudinally incised and pushed open to expose the right kidney and the right renal vein, and the descending and horizontal parts of the duodenum are separated and pushed open, showing that the upper pole of the exposed tumor is filled with nourishing vessels. Then the vessels of nutritional tumors were separated and ligated one by one. Uncovering the lower part of the tumor, it can be seen that the inferior vena cava and abdominal aorta, and the abdominal aorta send out a thicker vascular supply tumor, which was ligated by Hem-o-lock. The tumor and its surrounding tissues were then clipped along the tumor capsule and separated gradually. The well-encapsulated mass was excised. The mass was placed in a sample collection bag and removed through a 5-cm right upper abdomen incision that incorporated the incision made for the costal margin 10-mm port. Except for upon contact with the tumor blood pressure rose up to 160 mmHg he remained stable throughout surgery. The total operative time was 120 min and intraoperative blood loss was around 50 mL. The post-operative period was uneventful and he was discharged on post-operative day 5. The histopathology found the tissue was consistent with a benign PGL and DNA analysis of SDHB and SDHD revealed no mutation. During 6 months follow-up after post-operative, urinary and serum catecholamines were within normal range but glycaemia remained high level .