A 39-year-old, gravida 7, para 2, woman came to the local hospital with a complaint of lower abdominal dull pain for 3 h at 34 weeks’ gestation. Her obstetrical history began with two preterm spontaneous vaginal delivery (one at 28 weeks’ gestation; one at 30 weeks’ gestation) at the age of 18 and 19, respectively. Her third, fourth, and fifth pregnancies ended in abortion at early gestation with dilation & curettage treatment. In her previous pregnancy at 36 years of age, she received laparoscopic left salpingectomy and methotrexate (MTX) treatment due to ectopic pregnancy. No other surgeries on the pelvis or abdomen has been performed.
Her general condition was stable. Physical examination showed normal secretions, no vaginal bleeding or fluid, no cervical dilation, but irregular preterm contractions with a shortened cervical length. Ultrasonography revealed a decreased amniotic fluid index (AFI 4.0 cm) and a single intrauterine pregnancy with breech presentation and positive fetal heart activity. The placenta was located on the anterior wall of the uterus. Laboratory tests were performed at the time of admission and did not show any significant findings, and hemoglobin level was 120 g/L. Due to the risk of premature birth, dydrogesterone was used to relieve uterine contraction and dexamethasone was administered to accelerate fetal lung maturation. Over 2 days following admission, her symptoms gradually worsened. She presented with diffuse abdominal pain and distension. She also reported nausea and had problem in defecating. Ultrasonography of the abdomen represented intestinal dilatation and multiple intestinal contents and air-fluid levels in the colon. Therefore, an intestinal obstruction was suspected. Enema was used to help intestinal peristalsis.
As there was no improvement in her condition, the patient requested a transfer to our hospital. Clinical examination revealed epigastric tenderness and mild abdominal distension, with no signs of guarding or peritonitis. Bowel sounds were weak. Consulting with the surgeon on duty, an abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed after informed consent from the patient. CT represented dilatation of ascending colon and transverse colon . The symptoms were relieved after a nasogastric tube was inserted initially and enema was used. Since ultrasonography revealed oligohydramnios, a test for amniotic fluid crystal was performed, showing no signs of premature rupture of fetal membrane. On the fourth day following admission in our hospital, ultrasonography showed merely no fluid in the amniotic sac and the patient complained of no complete relief of bowel obstruction. Therefore, an emergency caesarean section (C-section) was performed. A healthy baby was delivered with no complications. Intra-operative assessment showed dense adhesion between the left wall of uterus and omentum, descending colon, and sigmoid colon. After adhesion dialysis and intestinal arrangement performed by a colon and rectal surgeon, uterine rupture with complete opening of the uterine wall at the site of left uterine cornua was found without active bleeding . The uterine scar was repaired using a double-layer closure.
Re-evaluation of the former abdominal CT was taken, revealing discontinuity of the uterine muscle layer in the left uterine cornua , which was consistent with intraoperative findings. Considering that the hemoglobin level didn’t decrease, her blood pressure remained stable, and no fetal distress happened during her labor of the birth, we assumed that the uterine rupture may occurred very early. Since omentum and colon were attached to the site of perforation, no clinical signs of uterine rupture were presented. As uterus enlarged, changes in the transit of intestinal tract decreased the intestinal peristalsis and then caused obstruction.
The patient recovered well without any complications and was discharged on the fifth postoperative day.