A 30-year-old healthy Caucasian male presented to the emergency room after feeling a pop while playing basketball. He had a history of recurrent intermittent posterior calf pain. He endorsed having recently trained for and completed a marathon two weeks before the presentation. His initial management was for a presumptive Achilles rupture; he was placed in a boot and advised to be weight-bearing as tolerated. He then presented to an orthopedic foot and ankle clinic for follow-up. His examination was notable for a palpable defect in the Achilles tendon, about 3 cm proximal to the insertion. There was asymmetry in the resting position of his feet when prone with his knees flexed, and Thompson’s test was abnormal. He was also noted to have a prominent bony mass in his posterior calf. The bony prominence was in close proximity to the Achilles rupture site. He was aware of the prominence and told during adolescence that it was a benign bony growth. The bone mass had previously caused irritation in his calf with restrictive shoe wear, the donning of boots, and activities requiring significant pushoff and forced dorsiflexion. The aforementioned irritants lead to a history of well-established symptoms of discomfort near the site of the current injury. The patient noted a “pulling” sensation at his Achilles tendon during symptomatic periods. Despite having known symptoms, he had not experienced discomfort or functional limitations significant enough to consider specialist care. The patient did not have a history of bony lesions at other sites and denied familial or hereditary genetic conditions associated with multiple bony lesions. We believe this solitary lesion was sporadic in nature.
Radiographic evaluation at presentation was significant for posterior bony prominence in the distal tibia with soft tissue irregularity at the Achilles tendon proximal to the insertion . The patient sustained an acute traumatic Achilles tendon rupture in the setting of a longstanding osteochondroma in the posterior tibia. On exam, the rupture site was very close to the site of the osteochondroma. We discussed treatment options, both operative and nonoperative, and ultimately, he elected to proceed with surgery. The surgical plan included Achilles tendon repair and excision of the posterior tibial osteochondroma to prevent future mechanical irritation at the repair site.
A posterior open incision was made and carried down through skin and subcutaneous tissue to the paratenon . The tendon rupture was identified . The edges were cleaned, and any nonviable portions were debrided. Next, we found the bony mass was immediately palpable and in contact with the tendon. The lesion had eroded through the anterior paratenon, and the posterior tip was visible through the rupture site . Therefore, we elected to proceed with the excision of the osteochondroma. We opened the deep compartment, mobilized the FHL tendon laterally, and dissected between the neurovascular bundle and the muscle belly. We exposed the bony mass, isolated it from all surrounding tissue, and then used an osteotome to remove it. Once the mass was no longer prominent, we used a rasp to smooth any sharp edges . We confirmed appropriate resection both clinically and fluoroscopically, irrigated the site, and placed bone wax on open areas to prevent regrowth and augment hemostasis from bleeding bone. The ruptured tendon was repaired using Suture Tape (Arthrex, Inc., Naples, FL) with a running Krakow proximal and distal. The tendon edges were approximated, and sutures were tied together to complete the Achilles tendon repair. This was then augmented with a running-peritendinous repair. The wound was closed in layers and splinted in resting plantarflexion. He was made non-weightbearing for 2 weeks, followed by the initiation of our usual functional rehabilitation protocol . The resected lesion was evaluated by pathology. The gross specimen was found to be partially surfaced with roughened cartilage. Histologic exam findings were consistent with exostosis with fatty marrow and focal partially acellular trabeculae .
At his first post-operative evaluation, 2 weeks post-surgery, his wound was well healed, radiographs were obtained, and he started physical therapy (PT) . He continued to do well with minimal pain and had made progress regarding range of motion with PT. He noted some subjective stiffness in the great toe range of motion, which was resolved by the final follow-up. At 3 months post-operatively, he was participating in PT and continued to do well. He has returned to work without issue and is resuming athletic activities. At the final follow-up, he reported no pain with activities and that he had returned to running 4 miles a day as well as playing basketball recreationally. He feels clinically improved and is particularly relieved to no longer feel the mass in his posterior calf.