A 26-year-old pregnant woman with a gestational age of 25 + 2 weeks was admitted to hospital for more than 2 months after the discovery of pancytopenia and increased creatinine. She was admitted to the hospital for further diagnosis and treatment and categorized as “acute kidney injury, pancytopenia, and pregnancy” by the outpatient clinic.
The patient reported that her gums bled when she brushed her teeth; she had large, long-lasting bruises when she collided with hard objects; and she experienced no lower limb edema or backache. In terms of previous medical history, the patient was healthy, with no history of surgery, food or drug allergies, substance abuse, or exposure to toxins, dust, or harmful substances.
The patient did not undergo genetic testing before pregnancy, and the disease was not discovered until the second-trimester. Concerning menstrual history, the patient had normal menstrual volume, no dysmenorrhea, and a regular menstrual period. She had no fertility problems, had not experienced menopause, and currently had no children. Furthermore, her family had no history of malignant tumors.
The patient’s physical examination results were as follows. Her body temperature was 36.5 °C, pulse was 76 beats/min, respiration was 20 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 140/88 mmHg. She was conscious with satisfactory mental wellbeing. She had a centered trachea and clear respiratory sounds with no abnormal sounds in either lung. Her heart rate was normal with no abnormal sounds. Abdominal distension; consistent with gestational age; no tenderness; rebound tenderness. Her liver was not palpable under the ribs, but her spleen was palpable 1 cm under the ribs and hard with no tenderness. No tenderness or percussion pain were noted in either kidney, and no tenderness was noted in either ureter.
The patient’s laboratory examination results were as follows: white blood cells: 2.32*109/L; hemoglobin: 65 g/L; red blood cells: 2.65*1012/L; platelets: 31*109/L; serum ferritin: 7.1 μg/L; and creatinine 246 μmol/L. CA19–9, CA-125 alpha-fetoprotein, and carcinoembryonic antigen were in the normal range. Blood electrolytes were normal. A bone marrow examination was performed on July 17, 2020, and the results were as follows. The bone marrow morphological description revealed active nucleated cell proliferation; active granulocyte hyperplasia, mainly in the myelocyte and metamyelocyte stages; active erythrocyte hyperplasia, mainly in the immediate and late erythroblast stages; and reduced nucleoplasm in some early erythroblasts. Her bone marrow morphology revealed iron-deficiency anemia.
The patient underwent ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) examinations. Ultrasonic examination revealed an enlarged left liver lobe and a moderately sized and abnormally shaped right liver lobe. The width of the main vein of the porta hepatis was approximately 1.7 cm with local tortuous dilatation in a “vermis” shape . Color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) indicated that the main portal vein was the signal of blood flowing into the liver, and its peak flow velocity measured by pulse-Doppler was approximately 35.8 cm/s; the accompanying dilated vein near the portal trunk was the signal of hepatic outflow, and its peak flow velocity measured by pulse-Doppler was approximately 21.4 cm. The spleen was approximately 5.3 cm thick; it was plump with a smooth outline, a strong echo in essence, and a dilated splenic vein, which was approximately 1.5 cm wide at the hilum of the spleen . Both kidneys were obviously enlarged, abnormally shaped, and covered with anechoic dark areas of different sizes ; no abnormal blood flow signal was detected by CDFI.
Regarding the fetus, the gestational age was approximately 25 weeks, which was consistent with the actual fetal age. No significant abnormalities were observed except for polyhydramnios. The limb structure and face of the fetus were normal. In addition, no abnormalities were observed in the fetal spine, intracranial pressure, heart, lungs, kidneys, gastric vesicles, intestines, gallbladder, or bladder. The amniotic fluid index was 24–25 cm (reference value is 8–18 cm) with a maximum depth was 10.2 cm.
Maternal MRI revealed that the liver was plump with disproportionate liver lobes. Furthermore, it revealed hepatomegaly as well as multiple tortuous dilated bile duct shadows near the liver surface, among which polycystic liver disease was identified near the top of the diaphragm. The T1 weighted image (WI) was the low signal, the T2WI was the high signal, and no dilation was observed in the common bile duct ; furthermore, the portal vein was widened and the spleen volume was enlarged. The volume of the kidneys had increased to an abnormal shape, with multiple, long, roundish T1 and T2 abnormal signals were observed . MRCP revealed that the intrahepatic cystic lesions were connected to the intrahepatic bile ducts . In conclusion, CD, polycystic kidney disease, cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and splenomegaly were revealed.
The patient’s venous blood samples were taken in July 2020 for genetic testing (whole exome sequencing, WES). The results revealed that the patient carried two heterozygous mutations in PKHD1: c.2854G > A, causing a change in amino acid P.(Gly952Arg), and in c.4682G > A, causing a change in amino acid P.(Cys1561Tyr).
According to the imaging examinations and genetic testing, the patient was finally diagnosed with CD with concomitant ARPKD. In this state, the ongoing pregnancy would lead to higher risks for both the mother and fetus. Iron sucrose was infused to correct the iron-deficiency anemia. In addition, methylprednisolone succinate (20 mg) was prescribed to increase platelets, supplemented by stomach protection and calcium supplement supportive treatments. Cesarean section was performed after 36 weeks of pregnancy, the baby is normal after examination. Three months later in October 2020, the baby underwent a genetic test (WES), the result showed that the patient carried one heterozygous mutations in PKHD1: c.2854G > A, causing a change in amino acid P.(Gly952Arg), which indicated the baby was a PKHD1 carrier.