A 44-year-old man was admitted presented to the emergency department with a complaint of right limb weakness and unclear speech for the past 10 h. Questioning medical history, he had also repeated fever and was diagnosed diabetes for one month before admission. At the time of physical examination on admission, the patient was delirious, with fever temperature of 38.8 ℃, muscle strength of the right limb was Grade IV, and other signs were stable. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed left basal ganglia and right parietal lobe cerebral infarction, which is consistent with embolic stroke .
Laboratory testing revealed that the blood white cell count was 14.31 × 10^9/L (normal range 3.5–9.5 × 10^9/L), absolute value of neutrophils was 11.16 × 10^9/L (normal range 1.8–6.3 × 10^9/L), percentage of neutrophils was 78.10%. Highly sensitive Troponin I increased to 0.08 ng/ml (normal range 0-0.0268ng/ml) and N-terminal pro-B natriuretic peptide increased to 207.9 ng/L (normal range 0-125ng/L). Chest Computed Tomography (CT) showed that the bilateral lung markings were heavier, the pleura was thickened, strip and nodular high-density shadows were visible, the heart was not enlarged, and calcified spots were visible in the aorta and coronary arteries. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed the aortic valve was bicuspid combined with calcification, moderate regurgitation and a possible paravalvular abscess (increased thickening to 5 mm in the right posterior sinus wall of the aorta) . A 16.4 mm*7.8 mm vegetation can be seen on the right posterior aortic valve. Based on the clinical, laboratory, and echocardiographic findings, the patient was diagnosed infective endocarditis (IE). According to the AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart disease, delaying valve surgery for at least 4 weeks may be considered for patients with IE and major ischemic stroke if the patient is hemodynamically stable , the patient was prescribed antibiotics with vancomycin 0.5 g per every 6 h. The transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed 10 days later revealed that the vegetation was smaller than before . He had no fever again and no complaints of discomfort and was hemodynamically stable, the blood cultures were negative twice.
However, TEE one month later after cerebral infarction revealed a large periaortic abscess led to formation of an aortic sinus pseudoaneurysm and flows were in from pseudoaneurysm and out to left ventricular combined with moderate mitral valve regurgitation.
Cardiopulmonary bypass and aortic valve replacement surgery via median sternotomy were performed. During the operation, it was confirmed that bicuspid deformity combined with vegetation, an aortic annular abscess eroding into the base of the anterior mitral leaflet making prolapse of mitral valve annulus . Aortic valve vegetations and perivalvular abscesses were completely removed. 5/0 Prolene suture was used to continuously suture bovine pericardium to reconstruct mitral aortic valve fiber connection and fix the anterior mitral valve annulus. The patient underwent mechanical prosthetic valve replacement and annulus reconstruction successfully. The tissue culture of the diseased aortic valve showed no bacterial growth and no pathogenic microorganism was identified. The patient’s condition was stable after operation. He was discharged two weeks later with antibiotics for six-weeks. During the one-month follow-up, the patient felt well, laboratory testing revealed that the blood white cell count and percentage were normal.