Our patient was a 37-year-old, 48 kg Yoruba woman, who developed impaired visual function while on treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis. She was diagnosed as having pulmonary tuberculosis based on a history of chronic cough, weight loss, positive acid- and alcohol-fast bacilli sputum examinations and reticulonodular chest features of pulmonary tuberculosis evident on radiology .
She successfully completed a two-month intensive treatment course on a daily four-drug combination comprising ethambutol 825 mg, isoniazid 225 mg, rifampicin 450 mg, and pyrazinamide 1200 mg. Our patient's weight improved to 52 kg. This two-month course was followed by a continuous phase of treatment. This comprised a daily two-drug combination including ethambutol 825 mg and isoniazid 450 mg. The two-drug combination was, however, substituted with only rifampicin about 11 weeks into the continuous phase when our patient reported blurred vision at the chest clinic where she was being managed. There was total withdrawal of the antituberculosis drug about two weeks later on account of persistent impaired visual function. By then, our patient had been receiving antituberculosis therapy for a period of five months, including the two-month intensive and three-month continuous phases.
She presented to our eye clinic about nine days after her antituberculosis drugs had been discontinued on account of her progressive painless diminishing vision of approximately one month's duration. Our patient also complained of a tingling sensation in her lower limbs. There was no record of a visual assessment before and during her therapy, however, our patient stated she had had normal vision previously. She had no family history of significant blinding ocular conditions and did not wear glasses. Furthermore, our patient had no history suggestive of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, sickle cell disease or HIV and/or AIDS.
A physical examination on presentation showed a wasted and concerned patient, however her vital signs were normal. Her visual acuity (VA) was 6/60 in her right eye and 1/60 in her left eye. She had red-green dyschromatopsia using Ishihara color plates and her pupils were sluggish in their response to light. Her optic discs were hyperemic. Her intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in both eyes. She had central visual field (CVF) defects . Biochemical tests to assess kidney and liver function were essentially normal except for elevated alkaline phosphatase . A screening for HIV was not reactive.
Except for multivitamins (Dolo-Neurobion® taken orally daily) taken by our patient for three weeks, our patient was not on any other medication. She was counseled and reassured of a high chance of visual recovery over time. Our patient was monitored in our eye clinic at two-weekly intervals. At each visit, aside from our patient's briefings on visual function, her VA, color vision, pupillary activities and funduscopy were checked and documented. Her VA initially got worse, declining to 1/60 in both eyes two weeks after initial presentation, but later improved steadily following the discontinuation of the antituberculosis therapy. Our patient was last reviewed by our eye clinic nine months after her initial presentation, and her VA was recorded as unaided VA right eye 6/24-1, left eye 6/12+2 and aided (using correction with lenses; right eye -2.75DS, left eye -1.00DS) VA right eye 6/9-2, left eye 6/6-3. A repeat CVF test performed eight months after her initial CVF showed that the CVF defects had disappeared.