A 33-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our department for sustainable foamy urine for more than one year. He also complained of intermittent hair loss and recurrence of oral ulcers.
Approximately one year prior, the patient was hospitalized at a local hospital for the same reason, and routine urine tests indicated microscopic hematuria and proteinuria. He did not pay much attention, and there was no further diagnosis or treatment because of a lack of conscious symptoms. One month prior, his blood pressure rose to 145/91 mmHg for unknown reasons; microscopic hematuria and heavy proteinuria were again detected.
The patient had no comorbidities.
The patient's father had asymptomatic microscopic hematuria and proteinuria, as detected in a routine physical examination approximately 2 years prior. The patient had a daughter and a son; the daughter (7 years old) had asymptomatic microscopic hematuria, and the son had microscopic hematuria and proteinuria. His son had ever been diagnosed with chronic nephritis at a local hospital.
The patient's appearance was normal, without edema. His systolic and diastolic blood pressures were 141 mmHg and 90 mmHg, respectively; his pulse rate was 81 beats per minute, and his respiratory rate was 19 breaths per minute. No obvious abnormality, including growth retardation, was detected during physical examination, and no specific nervous system symptoms were recognized. The patient was also subjected to audiologic assessments, but no hearing impairments were detected, even at high frequency. Furthermore, no symptoms were found in either eye by comprehensive ophthalmic examinations.
Microscopic hematuria and proteinuria were confirmed by urine tests. The results of other tests, including routine blood tests and serum immunology, are listed in Table .
No obvious abnormality was detected by abdominal ultrasound examination, X-ray diagnosis, or electrocardiographic examination. However, heart echocardiography showed a small amount of pericardial effusion.
To further analyze the renal presentation, a histopathology study of renal biopsy was performed. By light microscopy, a total of 13 glomeruli were observed, with one glomerulus being enlarged and lobulated. Para-aminosailcylic acid staining and Masson staining were positive, showing mild mesangial matrix proliferation. The basement membrane was thickened. Three glomerular fibroblastic crescents and pericystic fibrosis of glomeruli were observed . In addition, deposition of erythrotropin under the endothelium of the capillary loop was detected . Electron microscopy revealed obvious basement membrane lesions including variable thickness and reticulation of the glomerular basement membrane, as well as irregular subepithelial protrusion of the lamina densa. Fine particles and electron-dense bodies were detected in the stratified basement membrane . Immunological staining for IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4 C1q, К, and λ was positive in four glomeruli, with the signals being deposited in the vascular lumen and mesangial area in a granular or linear form .
A considerable investigation of family history was performed. The patient’s father had asymptomatic microscopic hematuria and proteinuria, as detected in a routine physical examination approximately 2 years previously. As mentioned above, the patient had a daughter and a son: The former had asymptomatic microscopic hematuria, and the latter had microscopic hematuria and proteinuria; his son had been diagnosed with chronic nephritis at a local hospital. Thus, three relatives had microscopic hematuria. Therefore, a diagnosis of ATS was highly suspected . For a precise conclusive diagnosis, the patient and his children were recommended to undergo genetic testing, and WES was performed. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples; WES was performed as previously described. After sequencing, the coverage of the target sequence was over 99.12%, and the mean sequencing depth was approximately 147. The sequencing analysis revealed a heterozygous substitution, NM_000091 c.2657-1G>A (p. V294fs) in intron 22 of the COL4A3 gene, which was confirmed by Sanger sequencing . The mutation was excluded from the single nucleotide polymorphism database but was included in the ClinVar database. As this mutation is located at an evolutionarily conserved splice site, this splicing mutation is thought to lead to the skipping of exon 23. In addition, this variant is classified as “likely pathogenic” according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics standards and guidelines .