A 44-year-old Chinese man, weight 55 kg and height 165 cm, presented to the neurosurgery department of our institution with an 11-month history of paroxysmal headache and weakness of the right limb without any other pertinent positive symptom. The patient had been diagnosed with NF1 for more than 30 years. His past surgical history included having undergone left parietal tumor resection in May 2016, the postoperative pathology of which indicated glial sarcoma (World Health Organization grade IV). In July 2017, the patient presented with paroxysmal headache with weakness of the right limb. Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed recurrence of left parietal glioma, acute cerebral infarction in the left frontal lobe and around ventricle. As a result, the patient received conservative treatment in the neurology department.
The only pertinent positive physical examination finding was multiple cutaneous neurofibromas and numerous café-au-lait spots of different sizes dispersed over the trunk and limbs . The results of the patient’s cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdominal examinations were all unremarkable. His baseline blood pressure was in the range of 120–140 mmHg for systolic blood pressure and 65–85 mmHg for diastolic blood pressure. He denied any current medication, tobacco, or alcohol use, and a family history of NF was also excluded.
The results of the patient’s preoperative laboratory examination were unremarkable, including blood and urine analysis. His electrocardiographic examination showed normal sinus rhythm. His chest x-ray revealed multiple nodules in the two lung fields, the largest being located in the upper right quadrant of the lung field and having a diameter of about 29 mm. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head revealed the recurrence of glioma. The patient was scheduled for resection of the recurrent gliomas.
During the preoperative examination, it was thought that general anesthesia application would be more appropriate for the patient. The patient was monitored with electrocardiography, heart rate (HR), invasive blood pressure, and pulse oximetry in the operating room. He was anesthetized with midazolam 3 mg, etomidate 14 mg, cisatracurium 20 mg, fentanyl 0.15 mg, and propofol 60 mg in sequence. When assisted respiration was started, the monitor showed a persistent increase in blood pressure. Within 40 seconds, it rose to about 310/140 mmHg, and the HR increased to about 140 beats per minute (bpm). We quickly eliminated the following possibilities: taking the wrong medicine, blood pressure monitoring equipment malfunction, or problem with venous access. To prevent the cardiovascular complications, we took measures to control the patient’s blood pressure and HR with phentolamine 2 mg, esmolol 30 mg, and remifentanil 80 μg when the blood pressure was about 310/140 mmHg and HR was about 140 bpm. The blood pressure values were stable during intubation, but the HR continued to be higher than 110 bpm.
The patient’s blood pressure was stable during the operation. However, there was a fluctuation of blood pressure during extubation with an increase to as high as 210/140 mmHg, which was aborted with phentolamine 1 mg. Nevertheless, the patient’s HR continued to be higher than 120 bpm, and he was not sensitive to β-adrenergic blockade.
During postoperative follow-up, no headache, nausea, or blood pressure change (especially hypotension) was observed, and the patient’s tachycardia disappeared 3 days after the operation. To investigate the causes of severe hypertension during anesthesia induction, we initiated a biochemical workup of his adrenal hormone 3 days after the operation, which revealed elevated 24-hour blood laboratory test results: epinephrine 3.57 nmol/L (normal range, 0.01-0.34 nmol/L), metanephrine 8.99 nmol/L (0.01–0.42), normetanephrine 2.25 nmol/L (0.01–0.71), and vanillylmandelate 160.41 nmol/L (0.01–62). Subsequently, CT of the abdomen with contrast enhancement demonstrated a 7.7-cm × 6.7-cm heterogeneous mass in the left adrenal gland.