We report the case of a 75-year-old North African woman with no notable medical history, admitted for pelvic pain lasting for the last 4 months and unrelieved by analgesics; the transit was undisturbed. The symptoms were aggravated by melena and asthenia that motivated the medical consultation. A clinical examination at admission found a patient with a stable hemodynamic status, an abdominal examination revealed a palpable and mobile pelvic mass. Laboratory tests showed a hypochromic and microcytic anemia with low hemoglobin and hematocrit levels rating at 7.3 g/dL and 21%. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large pelvic mass measuring 11 × 9 cm involving the distal small bowel loops, the bladder dome, and the uterine body without peritoneal effusion . After primary care, our patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy. The intraoperative finding was a brownish pseudoaneurysmal mass of the small bowel located 80 cm from the Treitz’s angle; this mass was invading the bladder dome and the left ovary and closely adhering to the uterus . Limited small bowel resection with 10 cm margins on both sides of the tumor extended to the left annexes and to a portion of the bladder with end-to-end anastomosis was achieved. The postoperative management was uneventful and our patient was discharged on day 6. The surgical specimen was 18 cm in length and included a black solid tumor with exophytic growth infiltrating the small bowel wall until the mucosa . A histological examination revealed a malignant proliferation of large cells with prominent round nuclei and a cytoplasm with eosinophilic spots or the seat of melanin pigments. Tumor necrosis was estimated at 30%, the rest of the ileum was the seat of chronic ileitis . The immunohistochemical profile showed an intense and diffuse cytoplasmic positivity for HMB-45 antigens and for PS-100, suggesting a malignant melanoma . An etiological investigation in search of a primary tumor of the small bowel melanoma was negative, an anoscopy, examinations of eyes and skin with multiple cutaneous biopsies were performed without finding any melanoma lesion.