A 78-year-old man presented to our Ophthalmology Unit of “SS. Annunziata” Hospital, Taranto, complaining a progressive bilateral decreased vision, repeated episodes of sudden onset of pain with redness, and foreign body sensation. Concerning ophthalmic history, he underwent previously conventional phacoemulsification with IOL implantation in both eyes, and trabeculectomy in right eye (RE). He was under topic antiglaucoma therapy in both eyes. His visual acuity was 20/100 in RE and 20/400 in the left eye (LE). Slit lamp examination revealed corneal erosions and relevant stromal opacities with branching lines in the inferior portion of the cornea of both eyes. The lesions spared the peripheral cornea and did not involve the limbus. No other pathological findings were observed. Ophthalmological examination of the family members of our patient revealed similar clinical findings in the patient’s daughter and son, supporting the diagnosis of RCEs in LCD with an autosomal dominant inheritance.

The Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the Ophthalmology Unit of “SS. Annunziata” Hospital, Taranto approved the study protocol. All clinical procedures were conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The patient provided informed consent for all procedures and their possible complications were explained. The patient gave informed consent for the publication of any case details and accompanying images. The IRB of the Ophthalmology Unit of “SS. Annunziata” Hospital, Taranto gave the approval for the publication of this case report.

Our first attempt was using autologous serum drops four times daily with no improvement at all.9 A treatment with amniotic membrane extract eye drops (AMEED) was started.10 Even in this case, the improvement in symptoms was temporary with no effect on the corneal opacities. The patient was subsequently placed under nerve growth factor (NGF) eye drops q.i.d.11 After a few days, there was an improvement in symptoms. After one month of treatment, the patient was uncomfortable, complaining again foreign body sensation. The slit lamp examination showed corneal epithelium irregularities, RCEs, and stromal opacities.

The combined treatment with PRK and PTK was scheduled in both eyes, firstly in the LE and, after 2 weeks in the RE. A trans-epithelial topography-guided approach using the iRes® excimer laser platform (iVIS Technologies, Taranto, Italy) was performed under topical oxibuprocaine anesthesia.

The customized treatment was based on refractive and morphological data including spherical error collected by the visual acuity examination; biometric data including anterior chamber depth, intraocular lens (IOL) power, and axial length; corneal morphological irregularity index (CMI) measured by tomographer (Precisio2®, iVIS Technologies, Taranto, Italy); target refractive zone and ablation zone defined by the projection of an ideal pupil, identified by dynamic pupillometry (pMetrics®, iVIS Technologies, Taranto, Italy), onto the ideal corneal surface. The Corneal Interactive Programmed Topographic Ablation software (CIPTA®, iVIS Technologies, Taranto, Italy) determined the volume of ablation as the intersection between the anterior shape detected by the tomographer and the ideal shape determined taking care of the total corneal astigmatism and of the high order of aberrations, by means of a ray tracing process.

The customized ablation profile obtained with PRK, had a refractive zone of 5.00 mm in RE and 3.8 mm in LE, and a connecting zone of 8.80 mm in RE and 9.1 mm in LE. The cumulative ablation depth was 34 μm in the RE and 90 μm in the LE. After surface ablation, PTK was performed using masking agents (1% hydroxy-methylcellulose) to smooth the ablated surface. Subsequently, 0.02% Mitomycin C (MMC, 0.2 mg/mL, diluted in BSS®) was applied over the ablated surface for a duration of 20 seconds. At the end of the procedure, a soft therapeutic contact lens was placed.

Postoperatively, topical dexamethasone and amikacin eye drops were administered four times daily for one week. The patient was then put on 0.1% fluorometholone eye drops and artificial tears eye drops for 12 weeks, which were gradually tapered afterward. The contact lens was removed after 1 week. At the 3-month follow-up, a slit lamp examination revealed a clear central cornea in both eyes.

The final visual acuity improved to 20/25 in the RE and 20/50 in the LE at 3 months after treatment. The keratometric astigmatism improved from −1.71 D to −0.92 D in RE, and from −5.43 D to −1.12 D in LE. CMI decreased from 16.04 µm to 7.84 µm in RE and from 53.07 µm to 37.04 µm in LE, and minimum corneal thickness was reduced from 570 µm to 508 µm in RE, and from 576 µm to 452 µm in LE. The postoperative follow-up was uneventful. The ablation map and topographic changes of both eyes were reported.