A 27-year-old male patient underwent annual health checkup, and a hyperechoic lesion was incidentally discovered in the tail of the pancreas via abdominal ultrasound. He was referred to our hospital for possible surgery with an inconclusive diagnosis of pNEN. He has no family history of diseases including pancreatic disorders. The blood cell count, biochemistry, and coagulation tests showed absence of abnormal findings. The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 4.4 ng/ml, while the carcinoembryonic antigen (CA) 19-9 level was 23.1 U/ml, both of which were within normal range.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a well-defined mass measuring 13 mm in the tail of the pancreas. The tumor showed slightly low density compared with the pancreatic parenchyma on plain CT , and enhancement in the arterial phase and equal density with the pancreatic parenchyma in the portal phase and equilibrium phase on dynamic enhanced CT . Tumor abutment to the splenic artery and vein without encasement was observed. The regional lymph nodes were not significantly enlarged, and distant metastases were not noted. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination revealed a homogeneous mass with low intensity on T1-weighted image (T1WI) and high intensity on T2-weighted image (T2WI) and diffusion-weighted image (DWI), and a slightly high intensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient-map (ADC-map) in the pancreatic tail . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a high-intensity irregular lesion with slightly indistinct margins without stenosis and dilatation of the main pancreatic duct in the tail of the pancreas . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed a slightly hyperechoic mass with distinct borders and homogeneous interior in the tail of the pancreas . Color flow Doppler imaging showed abundant internal blood flow inside the tumor . The tumor had no visible internal septum and cystic components. The cytopathologic findings by EUS-fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) revealed epithelial cells with poor atypia showing a glandular duct structure.
Although a definitive pathological diagnosis could not be obtained, the tumor was preoperatively diagnosed as non-functioning pNEN larger than 10 mm based on the findings of enhanced CT and MRI and EUS-FNA cytology; thus, minimally invasive surgical resection was indicated. Solid-type SCA was one of the possible preoperative differential diagnoses, since the EUS showed a slightly hyperechoic lesion that was a distinctive ultrasonographic feature of a microcystic SCA. As tumor abutment to the splenic artery and vein was observed and spleen preservation was desirable, laparoscopic spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy was performed following the Warshaw method. The operation was carried out using the 5-port approach. No extrapancreatic invasion of the tumor was observed. In order to preserve the splenic inflow, the distal part of the splenic artery was divided at the proximal site of the root of the left gastroepiploic artery. The operation was considered complete after confirming the absence of changes in the color tone of the spleen. The operation time was 300 min, and the estimated blood loss was 5 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 18.
Macroscopically, the tumor was a well-defined, round, and solid mass without cystic components measuring 15 mm . Microscopically, it appeared as a well-defined lesion with thick fibrous interstitium , covered by a membrane , and composed of epithelial cells with clear vesicles forming microcysts . The epithelial cells were positive for periodic acid Schiff (PAS) staining before the diastase treatment and negative for PAS staining after the treatment ; the tumor was pathologically diagnosed as microcystic SCA based on the World Health Organization (WHO) classification.