A 7-year-old Turkish girl with a history of a fall from a height of approximately 1.5 meters was seen on our ward. The patient had complaints of left shoulder pain and of being unable to move her shoulder. She preferred to stay seated in a slightly forward-leaning position, and was trying to support her elbow of the injured side with her other arm. A physical examination identified tenderness on her left shoulder, a slight swelling and limitation of movement. The patient was unable to perform movements with her left shoulder; her shoulder did not allow for passive movements as well. The patient’s neurovascular examination was entirely normal. On her radiography, a Salter–Harris type II epiphysiolysis at the proximal left humerus and a glenohumeral dislocation were identified . The epiphysis of the humerus appeared to be completely separated from the glenoid. After the preoperative preparations were complete, the patient was taken to the operating room.
After fluoroscopy-guided closed reduction under general anesthesia was not successful, open surgery was performed instead. With a deltopectoral incision, the fracture line and the joint capsule were exposed. It was observed that the humerus head had moved beneath the glenoid. The fracture was first reduced, and glenohumeral reduction was then performed after fixation was ensured with two Kirschner wires . The patient was postoperatively followed-up for 4 weeks in Velpeau bandage. After union at the fracture was identified on the radiographs taken at the end of the postoperative 4th week, the Kirschner wires were removed under sedation, and the patient was commenced on an exercise program in order to increase the range of motion of her shoulder joint. After an exercise program of 2 weeks, the range of motion of the patient’s joint was almost fully restored. Only a limitation in abduction of 15 degrees was observed. In the postoperative 12th week, it was observed that the range of motion of her joint was at the same level as her healthy side. No redislocations were observed during the 6-month follow-up period.