A 61-year-old male patient sought treatment for an infiltrating erythematous plaque on the nasal tip, which gradually enlarged with ulceration and haemorrhage over the prior 2 months. The patient developed a red papule on the nasal tip 2 months prior. The skin lesion gradually enlarged to the size of a broad bean. In the past 2 weeks, a plaque developed, with ulcerations and bleeding, and a black crust formed. The patient had a 40-year history of hepatitis B and had not received standardized antiviral therapy. Three years ago, a 2.0×1.5 cm space-occupying mass in the left lobe of the liver was found through a physical examination. Local surgical resection was performed. The patient was diagnosed with well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma and nodular cirrhosis based on postoperative histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations, and further treatment was not administered.
The patient’s systemic examination showed no obvious abnormalities. A dermatological examination showed that no obvious yellow staining in the skin and mucous membranes of the whole body. A red infiltrating nodule was seen on the nasal tip, without peduncles, with a hard and tough texture; the nodule was raised, ulcerated, and covered with a black crust . No similar lesions were found on the skin of any other area of the body. The alpha-fetoprotein level in peripheral blood was 260 μg/L (normal level ≤ 25 μg/L). Whole-body computed tomography (CT) showed irregular liver margins, an enlarged left hepatic lobe, a slightly low-density mass in the left hepatic lobe, an enlarged spleen, and a widened portal vein , findings that were consistent with liver cirrhosis and liver cancer. No space-occupying lesion was observed in other organs. Skin biopsy was performed after local anaesthesia. Histopathology showed epidermal necrosis with ulceration, a dense tumour cell mass in the dermis, with a sinus-like, nodular and cord-like distribution, and some atypical tumour cells . Immunohistochemistry of intradermal tumour cells revealed the following: HepPar-1(+), Arg-1(+), CK8(+), Villin(+), CK7(-), CK20(-), and Ki-67 positive (approximately 90%) . Based on the clinical manifestations, medical history, imaging results, and histopathology results, the patient was diagnosed with cutaneous metastases of hepatocellular carcinoma. The patient gave up systemic treatment and subsequently lost the visit.