An 82-year-old man presented at our emergency department because of aggravated dyspnea classified as New York Heart Association functional class IV. He has been diagnosed with severe AS 1 year previously, at which time surgical aortic valve replacement was recommended. However, the patient refused open heart surgery at that time. His physical examination showed a blood pressure of 94/56 mmHg, pulse rate of 110 beats per minute, and drowsy mental status. Electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation with occasional premature ventricular complex, and chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with bilateral pulmonary edema. Laboratory examination revealed acute kidney injury, creatinine level of 3.8 mg/dL, and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 16 mL/min/1.73 m2. His N-type pro-brain natriuretic peptide level was elevated at 20,774 pg/mL. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed low-flow, low-gradient tricuspid aortic valve stenosis (aortic valve area of 0.69 cm2 based on 2D planimetry, 0.86 cm2 based on the continuity equation, and mean systolic pressure gradient of 16.3 mmHg) with decreased left ventricular (LV) systolic function (LV ejection fraction, 34%). Annulus diameter measured by 2D-TTE was 20.6 mm.

With the clinical diagnosis of acute decompensated severe AS accompanied by cardiorenal syndrome, surgical aortic valve replacement was indicated. However, the patient was considered very high-risk candidate for open heart surgery based on the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality score (21.153%) [2]. Furthermore, his clinical status had not improved despite intravenous dobutamine infusion with furosemide infusion. Therefore, we ultimately decided to perform emergent TAVR.

The TAVR procedure was performed under general anesthesia. In general, CT should be required to determine the procedure approach and prosthesis size, but it might be dangerous for a patient with decompensated heart failure accompanied by cardiorenal syndrome. Before the TAVR procedure, we attempted to obtain accurate information about annulus diameter by 3D-transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). The TEE annulus diameter measurement of 23.5 mm corresponded to that of the CoreValve transcatheter valve (26-mm; Evolute-R™, Medtronic, NY, USA). We punctured the left common femoral artery using the standard percutaneous access techniques, and peripheral angiogram was performed using Judkins Right 4.0 coronary catheter. Fortunately, peripheral angiography showed adequate size of the right iliofemoral artery for vascular access for the CoreValve delivery. Coronary angiography also showed no significant luminal narrowing. Then, we inserted a 26-mm self-expanding CoreValve through the right common femoral artery sheath and deployed it at the aortic valve under fluoroscopic guidance without rapid pacing. The immediate post-procedural aortogram and TEE showed mild paravalvular aortic regurgitation. The patient’s vital signs were stable during the procedure.

The patient’s dyspnea was dramatically improved after the procedure, and chest X-ray showed marked improvement. The post-procedural TTE revealed improved LV systolic function (LV ejection fraction, 45%) with well-functioning CoreValve (aortic valve area of 2.15 cm2 based on the continuity equation and mean systolic pressure gradient of 3.22 mmHg). Urine output was also increased, creatinine level was decreased to 1.4 mg/dL, and eGFR increased to 52 mL/min/1.73 m2. He was discharged 7 days after the procedure, and his 3-month follow-up echocardiography showed no significant interval change from his immediate post-procedural findings.