A 63-year-old female patient was admitted to the Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University for abdominal pain, anal irritation, and repeated hematochezia. Her 31-year-old son was previously diagnosed with SRUS and underwent an inpatient examination.
Her symptoms started 1 year before the presentation of abdominal pain, anal irritation, and repeated hematochezia. Additionally, her 31-year-old son started to present with repeated diarrhea and intermittent hematochezia at the age of 26. He suffered from chronic diarrhea of up to 30 times a day, with the worst demonstrating fecal incontinence. He was subsequently diagnosed with SRUS 3 years ago and underwent surgical removal. The surgical pathology was consistent with the pathological features of SRUS . Hematochezia disappeared postoperatively, but his diarrhea remained. Chronic diarrhea causes his anxiety because his symptoms worsen as his mood changed.
The patients were healthy before the SRUS incidence.
The patient has two sons and one daughter. Notably, one of her sons was diagnosed with SRUS before her diagnosis and underwent partial rectal resection. The other son was healthy. Additionally, she and her son with SRUS like to eat mixed and coarse grains, and they have high-fiber eating habits and a sedentary lifestyle. Moreover, they are accustomed to squatting for a long time to defecate. Furthermore, they were healthy before the SRUS incidence, but are prone to anxious behaviors in life.
A physical examination upon admission revealed no obvious abnormality in both patients.
Laboratory tests of the female patient revealed high triglyceride (2.11 mmol/L), while others were all within normal ranges. Further, Epstein-Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus were negative. Blood routine, coagulation function and autoimmune tests were within normal ranges. Additionally, laboratory tests of the male patient upon admission revealed no obvious abnormality.
Her total digestive tract endoscopy results revealed a rectal solitary ulcer , the indicarmine dyeing demonstrated a clear boundary , and pathological results indicated the fibrous tissue hyperplasia in the lamina propria layer as well as glands destruction . Ultrasonic endoscopy revealed clearly demarcated mucosal layers, missing ulcerative mucosa and submucosa layers, and intact and thickened muscularis propria . Moreover, the intestinal computed tomography enhancement revealed segmental rectal wall thickening . The anorectal function test demonstrated a low resting pressure of the anal canal and normal contractile response and anorectal inhibition reflex but with increased anorectal sensitivity. Further, a colonoscopy of the male patient showed that the mucosa of his rectal anastomosis was smooth without any erosion or ulcer .
Whereas their complicate family history and next-generation sequencing of heritage whole exome sequencing was then conducted with their consent. The results exhibited a CHEK2 gene (c.1111C>T, p.His371Tyr) missense mutation in the patient and her son with SRUS, but not in the other son and the daughter. The CHEK2 p.H371Y mutation was reported as a kind of pathologic mutation. Then we conduct the immunohistochemical staining (IHC) to analyze the expression and function of CHEK2 (Antibody: CHEK2, CST#3440, 1:1600; p-CHEK2, CST#82263, 1:500; CDC25A, CST#3652, 1:100; p-P53, CST#9287, 1:100), which revealed a normal CHEK2 protein level but an impaired downstream gene protein level. As shown in Figure , CHEK2 protein levels and autophosphorylation CHEK2 protein levels showed no significant difference among the healthy control, inflammatory bowel diseases, rectal cancer and SRUS groups (including familial and sporadic cases). In contrast, the downstream gene of CHEK2, such as CDC25A and p-P53 (Ser 20), exhibit differential expression among these groups. CDC25A and p-p53 protein expression levels were the highest and the lowest in the SRUS group, while the differences between the SRUS and rectal cancer groups do not reach significance.
The SRUS groups contain familial patients in our case and non-familial cases (sporadic cases). The IHC results revealed that the CHEK2 mutation did not affect the expression of CHEK2 protein whether in familial SRUS cases or sporadic SRUS cases, but it would affect CHEK2 functions to different degrees. CDC25A expression level variations are more significant in familial SRUS cases, while p-p53 expression level changes are more pronounced in sporadic SRUS cases.