A 19-year-old unmarried Chinese woman presented to the anorectal surgery clinic with a complaint of congenital anal atresia from birth.
Abdominal pain and distension appeared again 6 d prior and could not be relieved.
The patient had a history of abdominal distension caused by constipation, and unformed loose stools were produced during defecation. At the age of 1 year, she was diagnosed but was not treated. Four months before admission, the patient was found to have abnormal bowel habits for 2-4 d a month, and the symptoms of abdominal pain and distension were relieved after resolving a large amount of loose stool. Computed tomography (CT) examination revealed intestinal obstruction, colon and rectum dilation with a large amount of contents, intestinal wall edema and thickening.
The patient denied any family history of intestinal diseases.
Physical examination on admission: There were no abnormalities in the general examination of skin and mucosa; however, the physical examination of the perineum showed that there was no anus in the normal anal position, but there was an anal incisure, and a red and swollen defecation fistula measuring 10 mm in diameter in the rectovestibular, and no abnormalities in the location or appearance of the labia majora, labia minora, vagina or urethra opening .
No abnormality was found in routine blood and urine analyses.
Auxiliary examination: (1) Abdominal CT: Rectal dilation with intestinal wall thickening, with a maximum diameter of approximately 10 cm ; (2) X-ray imaging: The distal end of the rectum was the blind end and located approximately 6 cm away from the anal notch ; (3) pelvic MRI: A gap was visible in the upper section of the transverse anal canal , the thickness of the internal sphincter of the anus was approximately 1 mm in the coronal position, some of the internal sphincter was discontinuous, the thickness of the external sphincter was approximately 2 mm in the sagittal position , the positions of the rectum, vagina and fistula were visible in the sagittal position, and the fistula was adjacent to the posterior wall of the vagina .