A 63-year-old man presented with a one-day history of shaking chills and high fever. He got wet in the rain 5 days before he came to the hospital, and had a occupational history of septic tank servicer. He had no underlying medical conditions, and denied travel to any areas of endemic. Physical examination revealed blood pressure (80/50 mmHg), a pulse rate of 105 beats per minute and oxygen saturation of 98% on oxygen mask air, and tachypnea with wet rales in both lungs, no conjunctival suffusion and no ictericsclera. Abdominal examination revealed a mild right abdomen tenderness and suspicious positive percussion pain in the kidney area. The rest of the examination, including nervous system, was also unremarkable. Laboratory results showed normal white blood cell (WBC) count 9.14 × 109/L with platelets 7 × 109/L, neutrophils 93.1%, and hemoglobin 85 g/L. Biochemical analysis revealed the increased levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) 209.19 mg/L, procalcitonin (PCT) 68.42ng/mL, interleukin-6 (IL-6) > 5000pg/mL, lactate 5.85mmol/L, creatinine (Cr) 301umol/L, total bilirubin 27.1µmol/L, aspartate transaminase 213.1U/L, alanine transaminase 66U/L, alkaline phosphatase 54U/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase 55U/L, and N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) 3650.97pg/ml (< 125). Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis showed evidence of type one respiratory failure with mixed respiratory and metabolic acidosis. Urinary analysis revealed the presence of numerous WBC and red blood cells (RBC). The transthoracic echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction of 60%, normal diastolic function and chamber sizes, and color Doppler ultrasonography showed mild mitral, tricuspid and aortic regurgitation. CT examination of chest and abdomen showed inflammation of the double lower lungs, and enlarged adrenal glands . The patient was diagnosed with pneumonia, and acute pyelonephritis with septic shock, and intravenous meropenem, fluid resuscitation and vasopressor were prescribed. We implemented the sepsis protocol following the complete hour-1 bundle .
On the second day of admission, the patient developed gradually worsening dyspnea with severe hemoptysis and life-threatening hypoxia. Endotracheal intubation was done and patient was put on a ventilator. Immediately, large clots of blood were extracted from the endotracheal tube (ETT). Bedside chest X-ray demonstrated newly developed bilateral diffuse alveolar shadows suggesting diffuse pulmonary hemorrhages . We gave the patient a symptomatic treatment with posterior pituitary hormone, hemocoagulase, as well as blood component therapy.
We performed further investigations regarding the etiology of the patient’s condition. Peripheral blood Metagenomic Next-generation Sequencing (mNGS) testing [RDP-seq®, Guangzhou Sagene Biotechnology Co., Ltd.], blood and endotracheal aspirate cultures were performed. The results of all cultures were negative after 2 days of incubation. The methods for mNGS were as follows. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples using the microbial DNA extraction kit (MAGEN, Guangzhou, China) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The library was constructed according to the protocol for library construction Kit [Nextera XT®, Illumina™, USA]. High-throughput sequencing was performed on the Illumina™ Nextseq 550 DX®, sequencing platform (sequencing strategy: SE75), which is an FDA-approved and CE-IVD-certified sequencer. The mNGS sequence results have been uploaded to the NCBI data (accession number: SRR24583305). The mNGS data identified Leptospira interrogans with sequence number 23 and confidence of 99%. The sequence results of identifying Leptospira interrogans were shown in Supplementary material 1. According to the clinical and microbiological findings, the antimicrobial therapy was switched to piperacillin-tazobactam (TZP) plus doxycycline.
Intravenous TZP 4.5 g every 8 h and doxycycline 0.1 g orally every 12 h were administered, and continued for 7 days along with supportive care. Ventilator support was offered for 5 days. Finally, the patient was weaned from the ventilator for successful extubation, and improved dramatically. Normal levels of renal function, cardio-respiratory functions, and hematological parameters were also improved by the end of ten days.