The patient was a 65-year-old male, on automated peritoneal dialysis for 14 months. Fifteen days before the start of automated peritoneal dialysis (break-in period), the catheter with a straight intercuff segment, 2 cuffs, and straight tips was placed with an open surgical technique through a left periumbilical incision. A mini-laparotomy was performed under local anesthesia. A purse-string suture was placed around the peritoneal opening. A craniocaudal suture of the rectal muscle was performed to let the catheter tip remain oriented toward the pelvis. The exit site was located approximately 4 cm beyond the superficial cuff.
The patient’s medical history showed hypertension and dyslipidemia on drug treatment. The underlying renal disease was nephroangiosclerosis. The patient had a residual kidney function with an eGFR of 4 mL/min/1.73 m2 and a diuresis of about 1,500 mL per day. He had an active life and was in good clinical condition. During a colonoscopy performed for the transplant waiting list, he was diagnosed with a polypoid lesion in the descending colon. The patient underwent endoscopic polypectomy, and the pathological analysis showed evidence of malignant transformation.
The staging CT-scan and MRI-scan of the liver showed two hepatic lesions (about 2 cm each in segments 8 and 7), which, on histological examination, turned out to be metastatic bowel adenocarcinoma. The following Positron Emission Tomography showed no areas of hyperaccumulation outside the liver.
The case was discussed at the tumor board, with decision to perform a “liver first approach” in the form of metastasectomy with robotic technique. The patient showed a strong determination to continue with peritoneal dialysis as long as possible. For this reason, the day before surgery, he underwent the placement of a central venous catheter in the right jugular vein for a temporary shift to hemodialysis.
The liver resection was performed with the DaVinci Xi robotic system. This platform, using articulated surgical instruments, allows performing technically demanding procedures with a minimally invasive approach. The surgeon controls the procedures from a console with 3D-magnified view. A cart is placed bedside with four arms connected to the surgical devices. The patient was placed on the operating table with legs apart, in the reverse Trendelenburg position, and with a left-side tilt. After sterile draping, the pneumoperitoneum was established. Then, five ports were inserted in the upper abdomen (four robotic and one assistant). After docking and targeting the robot, the whole liver was inspected with intraoperative ultrasound (US), and the two metastases in the right lobe were confirmed. Under US-imaging guidance, two separate wedge resections in segments 8 and 7 were performed. The vascular inflow to the liver was controlled with intermittent Pringle maneuvers, and the hemostasis during parenchymal transection was obtained with bipolar and radiofrequency instruments. The main vessels around the lesions were ligated with robotic clips and then divided. The procedure ended with the specimen removal through a mini-laparotomy and the placement of a sub-hepatic drain. Blood loss was minimal, around 200 mL. During the entire procedure, the dialysis catheter was not touched and left in place in the pelvis.
After surgery, the patient was monitored for 24 h in intensive care unit and then transferred back to the surgical ward. The postoperative course was complicated by a hematoma along the transection line that was conservatively treated with associated antibiotic prophylaxis (cephalosporin of third generation). The collection was monitored with US scans, and it spontaneously reabsorbed after 3 weeks. No further complications were observed.
Forty-eight hours after surgery, the “Luer-lock” and “Transfer-set” of the peritoneal catheter were replaced, performing a flushing of the catheter, and an empirical “lock-therapy” was started with Vancomycin 20 mg (¼ fl of 80 mg in 5 mL of saline). Peritoneal flushing and lock therapy were performed weekly. During this period, the patient was educated to have a reduced water intake, avoiding excessive ultrafiltration potentially deteriorating the residual renal function. Special care was also taken to avoid any nephrotoxic drug.
After 3 weeks, it was decided to resume the peritoneal technique. The start of the peritoneal treatment was delayed by a week as a precaution due to the presence of the hematoma. On the day scheduled to restart the peritoneal dialysis, the catheter showed a malfunction, probably induced by the presence of fibrin around the tube. A single dose of urokinase (100,000 IU diluted in 5 mL saline) into the obstructed catheter restored the flow without causing complications. Urokinase was left in the Tenckhoff catheter for 2 h.
The peritoneal treatment was restarted with low volume exchange (nightly cycler treatments with 8 exchanges of 1,300 mL over 8 h). The pre-surgery dialysis volumes were re-established after 10 days of regular sessions (5 exchanges of 2,000 mL over 8 h).
After 12 months from surgery, the dialysis method runs normally, without any sign of infection or mechanical complications. Peritoneal dialysis adequacy estimated by urea kinetics and total weekly creatinine clearance are comparable to those prior to liver resection, and comply with the international purification standards recommended by the guidelines. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).