An 86-year-old male, who had a previous history of hypertension and coronary artery disease had shortness of breath. He was admitted to our hospital due to heart failure (HF). He had undergone percutaneous coronary interventions in the circumflex artery in 2019 and the left anterior descending artery in 2020 both at another hospital. The patient was asymptomatic before admission. Blood pressure and heart rate were 176/91 mmHg and 85 b.p.m., respectively. Bilateral leg oedema was observed, with systolic murmur on auscultation. Chest X-ray revealed pleural effusion and congestion. Electrocardiogram (ECG) was within normal range. Blood test revealed elevated brain natriuretic peptide (150.4 pg/mL, normal range: <100 pg/mL). His STS and EuroSCORE 2 were 10.8 and 9.4, respectively. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 66% and a LV diastolic diameter of 41 mm. Calcified aortic valve was observed. The peak velocity of the aortic valve was 3.5 m/s, and the mean aortic valve pressure gradient (PG) was 33 mmHg. The aortic valve area (AVA) using the Doppler method was 0.78 cm2. The presence of a VSD can affect TTE-derived peak velocity and mean PG.1 Membranous VSD and double-chambered right ventricle (DCRV) were observed in cardiac computed tomography (CT). Trans-oesophageal echocardiogram (TOE), CT, and catheter-based AVA were 0.6–0.7 cm2. The calcium score was 2150 AgU. Based on these findings, we diagnosed his AS severe.

Cardiac CT showed his cardiac anatomy was suitable for TAV implantation (TAVI). Annulus perimeter, Valsalva diameter, and coronary heights of left coronary artery and right coronary artery were 66.1, 29.1, 14.6, and 18.7 mm, respectively. The VSD orifice was located 3.5–7.3 mm from the aortic valve annulus, and the orifice diameter was 3.8 mm. A thin sub-aortic band (thickness <1 mm) was attached to the LV outflow tract (LVOT). Coronary angiogram showed no significant stenosis and widely open stents. The catheter-based PG between LV apex and aorta was 27 mmHg. No PG was observed between LV apex and LVOT. The right heart catheterization showed normal wedge pressure (17 mmHg) and slightly decreased cardiac index (2.1 L/min/m2). Pulmonary hypertension (mean pressure: 38 mmHg) and a PG of 50 mmHg between high-pressure and low-pressure chamber of right ventricle (RV) were observed. The catheter-based Qp/Qs ratio was 1.9. We diagnosed severe AS in combination with left-to-right (L–R) shunt, due to VSD, as the leading cause of the patient’s HF. These findings fulfilled the indication for invasive treatment for AS and VSD based on the guideline.

Surgical aortic valve replacement, VSD closure, myectomy of the RV, and sub-aortic band resection treatment options were discussed with the heart team. The surgical team deemed not to be a surgical candidate because of the patient’s age, high risk of surgery and frailty (Clinical Frailty Scale: 5).4 As a result, a TAVI procedure with VSD orifice coverage using a valve skirt was planned as the interventional treatment option. We selected a 26-mm Evolut Pro Plus™ valve. Despite an increased risk of cardiac structural change due to pressing of sub-aortic band and/or injury of orifice of VSD and potentially deep implantation induced complete heart block, the valve could be deployed without complications. To treat AS and L–R shunt, the valve was selected because the valve has a long skirt at the bottom of the valve, which could cover the VSD orifice completely. Meanwhile, since the VSD orifice was located 3.5–7.3 mm below the annulus level, we deployed the valve 9 mm from the annulus level to cover the entire orifice of VSD with the valve skirt. We carefully deployed the valve by watching TOE to confirm no structural damage was made. The valve did not interfere with mitral valve movement. No leak across the valve and complete coverage of the VSD orifice with the valve skirt was observed by TOE. The amount of L–R shunt decreased. The catheter-based Qp/Qs ratio decreased from 1.9 to 1.2. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram–based aortic valve PG decreased from 33 to 2 mmHg. Post-procedural TOE revealed no leakage and a decrease in L–R shunt. The post-procedural ECG finding was unchanged (sinus rhythm, PR interval: 194 s and QRS duration: 70 ms). The patient was discharged from hospital 7 days after the procedure. He had not been admitted to hospital since discharge.