The patient was a 36-year-old female who presented with the complaint of a right-sided facial mass. She had noticed this painless mass two years before referral. On examination, there was a soft, round, and mobile mass in the right mandibular angle. The overlying skin was erythematous and adhered to the mass. Facial nerve function was normal, no lymphadenopathy was found, and a cystic lesion was reported on ultrasonography. Following that, the patient underwent mass resection surgery with a pre-operative diagnosis of lymphangioma and WT. Inflammation and infection in the cystic component cause the lesion to adhere to the skin. Therefore, adhesion did not necessarily mean a malignant lesion. In addition, in the classical approach, parotidectomy can be performed even in malignant lesions. Finally, due to financial problems, the patient refused to have a CT scan or fine needle biopsy. After general anesthesia, superficial parotidectomy was performed with the preservation of the facial nerve, and the lymph nodes of zone II were removed. The specimen was submitted for histopathological evaluation.
On gross examination, the excised tissue included the superficial lobe of the parotid gland and overlying skin measuring 6×5.5×5 cm. The cut surface showed a 1.5-cm soft gray-white area with partial circumscription and cystic spaces. In the microscopic view, the sections revealed salivary gland tissue with neoplastic lesions consisting of cystic structures covered by two layers of cells with nuclei of no significant atypia and eosinophilic cytoplasm. The underlying stroma contained lymphomononuclear cells with lymphoid follicle formation .
On the periphery of the neoplasm, another neoplastic lesion was observed with infiltrative borders composed of mucous-secreting glands with extensive cystic areas and few solid sheets of squamoid and intermediate cells with clear cytoplasms, mild to moderate nuclear atypia, low mitotic rate, perineural invasion, and no necrosis .
Accordingly, the diagnosis of MEC in the background of WT was established. Dermal and deep margin involvement was observed in some foci, and the lymph nodes showed reactive features. After surgery, the patient underwent radiation therapy, and in the 5-year follow-up, the patient was in good general condition and reported no problems with the physical examination; however, she refused to take further diagnostic procedures.