A 49-year-old healthy Greek man without any prior significant medical history, working as a cook on a merchant ship, drank accidentally a glass of 70% methanol rubbing solution, while he was on board. One day later he complained for blurred vision and painful eye movement in both eyes. The second day he woke up blind. He remained on board since the ship was heading to Australia and so treatment was impossible. When the ship reached Australia, he was hospitalized for a week. On arrival his vital signs were within normal limits and his examination tests revealed normal muscle tone. His initial laboratory evaluation included a complete blood count, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and serum glucose. All test results were within the normal range for the patient’s age. A urine drug test was negative for benzodiazepines, opiates, cocaine, amphetamines, phencyclidine, salicylates, and barbiturates. The blood methyl alcohol and formic acid values could not be determined. No treatment was given due to patient’s late arrival. He then was transferred to the University Eye Clinic of Athens. At presentation he underwent a complete ophthalmological examination. Visual acuity was no light perception in both eyes. The pupils were semi-dilated and unreactive to light. Fundus examination revealed an unremarkable retina in both eyes with the exception of pronounced pale, atrophic optic discs with “pseudoglaucomatous” thinning of the neuroretinal rim area. Electroretinogram (ERG) was normal in both eyes (Figure ). Visual evoked potentials (VEPs) were nearly extinguished (Figure ). Multifocal-visual evoked potential (mf-VEP) recording was also pathological in area 0 (right eye: 169 nV/deg2 and left eye: 186 nV/deg2) (Figure ). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the optic nerve head demonstrated abnormally low values of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness equal to 128 μm in the superior, 39 in the nasal, 108 in the inferior, and 72 in the temporal quadrant of the right eye (OD), and 134, 99, 92, and 58 correspondingly of the left eye (OS) (Figure ).
Neurological examination with the patient awake revealed no extrapyramidal motor disturbances and computed tomography (CT) scans showed no abnormalities. Anion gap was less than 30 mg/dL and no treatment was deemed necessary to initiate. The patient was discharged on the fourth day. He was reexamined one month later. The situation remained unchanged.