A 43-year-old female presented with a 10-day history of abdominal and lumbar pain accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and constipation (1 bowel movement per 2–3 days). She denied oliguria, dysuria, and hematuria. She had a history of right adnexa benign cyst surgery more than 5 years ago. Unfortunately, she could not provide her precise medical history. She specifically denied previous exposure to ergot, methysergide, or β-blockers.
Physical examination showed stable vital signs. Her abdomen was soft and flat with normal bowel sounds. No pain sensation was detected in the bilateral renal area, and the superficial lymph nodes were not palpable. Gynecological examination showed a solid and fixed mass (9 × 9 cm) in the right rear uterus. The anus examination showed a solid enclosed mass attached to the rectum and no blood on the fingerstall.
Laboratory tests showed white blood cell count of 14,790 cells/mm3 (normal 3500–9500 cells/mm3), hemoglobin of 9.1 mg/dL (normal 11.5–15.0 mg/dL), and eosinophil cell count of 2200 cells/mm3 (normal 20–520 cells/mm3). Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 64 mm/h (normal, 0–30 mm/h) and C-reactive protein was 127.08 mg/L (normal, 0–5 mg/L). CA125 was 313.4 U/mL (normal, 0–35 U/mL) and CA199 was 87.04 U/mL (normal, 0–39 U/mL). Urine routine examination showed microscopic hematuria.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed right-sided hydronephrosis and a low-density mass around the right adnexa. The imaging features strongly suggested an ovarian epithelial tumor . Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT/CT) showed slight atrophy of the right kidney, right-sided hydronephrosis, right kidney blood perfusion, mild damage to the glomerular filtration function, and irregular upper urinary tract. Ultrasound showed a cystic mass (8.8 × 7.5 × 8.6 cm3) in the right rear uterus, which was considered as an ovarian tumor . Abdominal ultrasound was normal. Urinary system ultrasound showed right-sided hydronephrosis and dilated upper section of right ureter . Ultrasound of the left kidney was normal. Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed level II chronic superficial gastritis. She was diagnosed with class I primary hypertension (low risk) using a 24-h blood pressure monitoring.
After a series of examinations and discussion, this patient was diagnosed with ovarian cancer, right-sided hydronephrosis, mild anemia, level II chronic superficial gastritis, and class I primary hypertension. Because the main treatment of ovarian cancer is surgery and the preoperative examination suggested right ureteral obstruction, a preoperative cystoscopy and exploratory laparotomy were performed.
Ten days after hospitalization, she was brought to the operating room. A preoperative cystoscopy was performed and a right intraureteral stent with a double-J catheter was inserted. Then, an exploratory laparotomy was performed via a midline incision. Upon entering the peritoneal cavity, slight bloody ascites and dense intra-abdominal adhesions were encountered in the right pelvic cavity. The classical glistening white, unyielding RPF was encountered. The plaque predominantly encased the pelvis, especially the right pelvis. The pelvic peritoneum showed thickening and edema, especially the retroperitoneum. The maximal thickness of the plaque was 1 cm. It formed a solid and fixed mass in the right lower pelvis. The omentum majus contractured and adhered densely to the anterior abdominal wall. The omentum majus densely encased the sigmoid colon and rectum. The sigmoid colon adhered to adjacent retroperitoneal structures densely and formed a stiff mass. The fixed sigmoid colon adhesion was 6-cm long with stiff wall, thickening and hardening of the intestinal wall, and obvious constricted lumen. The vermiform appendix was clearly visible and hard. The uterus was slightly expanded, with thickened serosa. The left adnexa was normal and the right adnexa could not be found. The Douglas pouch was closed because of dense adhesions. The right ureter was surrounded by dense fibrotic tissue with chronic inflammation and formed right ureteral obstruction. No abnormality was found when examining the liver, pancreas, spleen, stomach, small bowel, ascending colon, transverse colon, and descending colon. She underwent resection of the retroperitoneal mass, appendectomy, partial resection of the omentum majus, partial sigmoidectomy, proximal sigmoid colon fistula, and closure of the distal sigmoid colon. The patient recovered well after surgery. She was advised to go to the No. 1 Hospital of Peking University for steroid therapy.
The pathological diagnosis was idiopathic RPF. The fibrous component was interpreted as remarkable storiform fibrosis mixed with fibroblasts, neutrophil granulocytes, plasma cells, and lymphocytes . Immunohistochemistry showed that vimentin was positive , smooth muscle actin was partially positive, β-catenin was positive (cell membrane and cytoplasm), Ki-67 was very weakly positive (<1%), GIST-1 was equivocal, and desmin, CD30, anaplastic lymphoma kinase, CD117, CD34, α-inhibin, S-100, epithelial membrane antigen, and cytokeratin pan were all negative.