A 44-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital due to “Cognitive decline for 4 years and paroxysmal loss of consciousness with convulsion for 2 months”. Four years before admission, the patient had developed cognitive decline without obvious inducement, easily forgotten the names of her relatives and forgot what to do without headache and dizziness. Two months before admission, she had a temperature of 39.5 ◦C, and developed paroxysmal loss of consciousness with convulsion, mainly manifesting as her eyes turned up, foaming at the mouth, clenched teeth, limb twitching and unconsciousness, lasting approximately 15 minutes. She was unable to recall after the attack. This situation occurred three times. After that, she was easily distracted and could not concentrate on work. She felt depressed easily and her speech slowed, and was found incompetent for her job. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (plain scan) at a local hospital showed no abnormalities. She came to our clinic for further diagnosis and treatment. She had a history of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and hypothyroidism.

On admission, her neurological examination revealed decreased verbal fluency. Cranial nerve examination was unremarkable. Her muscle strength was normal, and no other remarkable physical findings of nervous system were observed. The Glasgow coma score was normal. Physical examinations of the heart, lungs, and abdomen were unremarkable. She scored 25/30 on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 24/30 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), showing that the patient had mild cognitive impairment. Mild depression (51 points) was found after evaluation with Self-rating Depression Scale (SDS). No anxiety was found after evaluation using the Self-rating Anxiety Scale (SAS).

Auxiliary examinations were performed. Lung computed tomography (CT) revealed chronic inflammation in both lungs. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (plain scan + enhanced) showed no abnormalities. No obvious abnormality was found in cerebral CT vascular enhancement. 24-hours ambulatory electroencephalogram was normal. The result of gynecological and abdominal ultrasound was normal.

Her intracranial pressure was 80 mmH2O. CSF analysis showed normal cell count (total cell 2× 106/ L, nucleated cells 1×106 /L), protein, glucose, chloride, lactate, and adenosine deaminase were within the normal range. Gram staining, fungal smear, acid-fast staining, ink staining, and pathogen culture of CSF were all negative. Cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal band was negative. CSF and serum samples were collected for examination of AE antibodies, including anti-NMDAR, anti-AMPAR1, anti-AMPAR2, anti-LGI1, anti-CASPR2, anti-GABABR, anti-DPPX, anti-IgLON5, anti-GlyRα1, anti-GABAARα1, anti-GABAARβ3, anti-mGluR5, anti-D2R, anti-Neurexin-3α, anti-GAD65, anti-GABAARγ2 antibody IgG (cell-based assay). The significant findings included a positive anti-GAD65 antibody (titer of 1:32) and positive anti-GABAARγ2 antibody (titer of 1:32) in the CSF, and both were negative in serum. In addition, high levels of homocysteine (16.9μmol/L; normal range:<15μmol/L), total cholesterol (5.57mmol/L; normal range:<5.18mmol/L), high-density lipoprotein (HDL) (1.8 mmol/L; normal range:1.29–1.55mmol/L), low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (3.68mmol/L; normal range: <3.37mmol/L) were presented. High level of thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPO-Ab) (228 IU/mL; normal range: <34 IU/mL) and low level of Vitamin B12 (119.4 pg/mL; normal range: 189–883 pg/mL) were presented. The results of other examinations were unremarkable.

After being diagnosed with AE with coexisting anti-GAD and anti-GABAAR antibodies, the patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg/d for 5 days), intravenous methylprednisolone (at dose of 1000mg/d, 500mg/d, 250mg/d, 120mg/d, 80mg/d for 3 days respectively) and levetiracetam (0.5g PO bid). Twenty days later, her symptoms, such as cognitive decline, gradually improved during the treatment and no seizures occurred. After treatment for 20 days, she scored 26/30 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment at discharge. Oral prednisone acetate tablets at dose of 1mg/kg/d, reduced by 5 mg every two weeks, were continued. At her 6-month follow-up, her epileptic seizures disappeared, cognitive function was normal, and speed improved.