Our patient was a 68 year old African American female who developed diffuse abdominal pain, associated with nausea and bilious vomiting, 24 hours prior to her emergency room visit. The pain was localized to the epigastric region and had a progressive course. Her last bowel movement was reported as four days prior and she denied any recent weight loss, wheezing, flushing, palpitation or change in bowel habits.
The patient's past medical and surgical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingoophorectomy secondary to fibroids.
The patient also reported a history of progressive loss of vision ten years earlier that was investigated by brain MRI after an extensive ophthalmological evaluation. The MRI showed a pituitary tumor and the patient benefited from a transphenoidal pituitary tumor resection. The pathological examination revealed a chromophobic pituitary adenoma.
The patient had a strong family history of cancer. Her father died from colon cancer, a brother died from esophageal cancer, an uncle died from brain tumor, one aunt had been diagnosed with breast cancer and one aunt with gastric cancer.
Upon physical exam, the patient had a tense, distended abdomen, with a well healed paramedian incision and no bowel sounds. There was non localized diffuse tenderness with positive rebound and voluntary guarding. Rectal examination revealed no masses and an empty vault. Laboratory values revealed no leukocytosis, however the lactic acid level was elevated. A computed tomography scan of the abdomen revealed a small bowel obstruction. Subsequently, the patient was decompressed with a nasogastric tube and fluid resuscitation, and brought to the operating room for an exploratory laparotomy. Intraoperatively, there was significant small bowel congestion with no necrosis. One adhesive band was found and lysed at the mid jejunum where it was fixed to the pelvic wall. The bowel was thoroughly inspected to look for any other points of obstruction or abnormalities. A serosal lesion was found on the surface of the jejunum ten centimeters from the adhesion . Also a suspicious hard draining mesenteric lymph node was seen. The serosal lesion, and the suspicious lymph node were both resected , and sent for pathologic determination.
Postoperatively, the patient did well, however, the pathological evaluation of both the serosal lesion and the mesenteric lymph node revealed carcinoid tumor.
Three days later, the patient was brought back to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy and small bowel resection. During the surgery, there was no intestinal lesion noted, and about 15 cm of small bowel on each side from the previous serosal lesion was resected with its corresponded mesentery . One enlarged and firm mesenteric lymph node, included in the specimen was marked with a stitch.
The pathological examination of the specimen revealed a carcinoid tumor approximately 0.4 cm in greatest dimension, penetrating subserosa five centimeters from the previously resected serosal lesion . A metastatic carcinoid tumor was seen in three out of 17 lymph nodes including the one marked with the stitch. The surgical resection margins were negative.
During the postoperative inpatient period, a 24 hour urine 5-Hydroxyindole Acetic Acid (5-HIAA) was within normal value and no focal area of increase uptake was noted on an octreotide scan.
There was no postoperative morbidity, and the patient was followed as an outpatient at two and six month interval. During these follow up visits, the patient reported feeling better and denied any weight loss, wheezing, flushing, palpitations or diarrhea.
A postoperative CT scan of the chest abdomen and pelvis six months after the surgery, revealed no evidence of recurrent disease, and no intra abdominal masses. A repeat octreotide scan at six months after the surgery did not show any area of increase uptake. Chromogranin A level was followed, and was decreasing from 142 ng/ml at two months post resection, to 64 ng/ml at six months post resection.