A 52-year-old female with a history of repeat PKPs was referred to the glaucoma clinic due to uncontrolled IOP. The patient underwent PKP five times in the right eye from 1989 to 2019. She constantly experiences corneal rejection symptoms after several years of keratoplasty. The contralateral eye was diagnosed with myopic macular degeneration, and with appropriate treatment and uncomplicated cataract surgery, a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 1.00 logMAR was achieved. Therefore, treating the right eye was the immediate concern. There was no documented history of IOP elevation in the patient’s medical history prior to the fourth PKP. During that period, the IOP was adequately managed with topical antiglaucoma monotherapy, ranging from 12–14 mmHg. One week after the fifth PKP, the patient complained of pain, redness, and halos around lights. She was referred to the glaucoma service for further evaluation and management. The IOP was 42 mmHg by applanation tonometry, and the BCVA was 0.25 logMAR with a clear graft and no signs of rejection. The patient was treated with maximum topical antiglaucoma medications; however, the IOP was still 36 mmHg. We suggested tube implantation due to the uncontrolled IOP and history of repeat PKPs with a current viable graft. However, the patient was unable to attend our care due to socioeconomic factors and continued care in a tertiary clinic with no resources for glaucoma tube implantation. The patient underwent trabeculectomy with mitomycin C (MMC), and the IOP was well controlled after 22 months without antiglaucoma medications. In April 2022, she came to our clinic with complaints of irritation, redness, and decreased vision in the right eye. On examination, we found an incarcerated bleb with a positive Seidel test, 5 mmHg IOP, and BCVA hand movement. We treated this as a blebitis with broad-spectrum topical and oral antibiotics. After the infection subsided, we performed a bleb revision with scleral patch graft. One month after surgery, the IOP was 22 mmHg on maximum topical antiglaucoma medications, wound closure was good, and the corneal graft was clear. We decided to insert an Ahmed Glaucoma Valve (New World Medical, Inc., Rancho Cucamonga, California, USA) to lower the IOP. The tube was inserted in the posterior chamber to protect the corneal endothelium. Six months after surgery, the IOP was well controlled (11 mmHg) without antiglaucoma medications, BCVA was 0.2, and the graft remained clear.