A 28-year-old Caucasian male presented with fever and myalgia at our emergency department (= day 1). The patient reported having been on vacation on La Réunion until nine days prior, where a medium-level dengue epidemic had been declared by the WHO. His past medical history was uneventful; he was not on any medication. Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 39.7 °C but was otherwise unremarkable. Routine laboratory investigations were without pathological findings except for a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 2.5 mg/dl. Tests for Dengue virus and Chikungunya virus were ordered. The patient received metamizole and was discharged with a daily follow-up schedule which, however, he did not comply with. The microbiological laboratory tests returned negative. After three days, fever subsided and was followed by watery diarrhoea which lasted for three more days. On day 7, the patient had fully recovered.
On day 8, the patient noticed a weakness in his lower limbs which continuously worsened overnight. Thus, he presented in our neurological clinic the next morning. Physical examination revealed flaccid tetraparesis with a level of strength of 4/5 (MRC scale). Muscle reflexes of the upper limbs and patellar reflexes were decreased, Achilles reflexes were absent bilaterally. There were no sensory deficits; position sense and vibration sense were intact. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was unremarkable. Electroneurography disclosed reduced amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials in tibial, peroneal and ulnar nerves. Half of the examined nerves displayed increased distal motor latency and total loss of F-waves, while sensory nerve action potentials were normal all over. Hence, pure motor axonal demyelinating polyneuropathy with acute onset, consistent with Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) was diagnosed. Furthermore, western blot for serum anti-ganglioside antibodies was highly positive for anti-GM2 IgM antibodies and borderline positive for anti-GM1 IgM antibodies, thus supporting the diagnosis of GBS. The occurrence of GBS raised the suspicion of a recent Campylobacter jejuni infection which was serologically confirmed (Mycoplasma pneumonia, another common trigger of GBS, and Zika virus infection were excluded).
As the clinical condition deteriorated rapidly with inability to walk occurring within the first 48 h, treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins was initiated (total dose 140 g over 5 days). Clinical nadir was reached after three days and the patient regained independent walking within the first week. He was transferred to a neurorehabilitation institution where he was treated for three weeks. Except for a temporary elevation of transaminases (ALT 661 U/l, AST 126 U/l) and a distortion of the left knee due to several falls, further recovery proceeded without complications.
In week 10, the patient presented at our clinic again. He complained of fever, loss of appetite, abdominal bloating, constipation and a dull pain in the right lower abdomen. He reported suffering from these symptoms periodically; they had first occurred three weeks ago and lasted for a couple of days, then completely disappeared and reoccurred six days ago. The onset as well as the disappearance of these symptoms was sudden. On enquiry, the patient could not think of any potential triggers preceding these episodes. Diarrhoea had not occurred.
The patient’s vital signs were all normal except for a body temperature of 38.8 °C. Compared to his first presentation, he had lost 11 kg (15% of his previous body weight). The abdominal examination was pertinent for tenderness on palpation in the right lower quadrant. Broad laboratory investigations were unremarkable apart from an elevated CRP of 8.5 mg/dl and a slightly elevated LDH. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a distinct mesenteric lymphadenopathy with > 10 pathological lymph nodes (max. 4 × 1.6 cm) . The largest mesenteric lymph nodes were found in the right lower quadrant and were painful when pressed with the ultrasound probe. Retroperitoneal, inguinal, supraclavicular, axillary and cervical lymph nodes as well as the appendix and colon appeared normal on ultrasound examination.
A broad microbiological testing was initiated. While stool cultures remained negative, serology was positive for Y. pseudotuberculosis . Antibiotic treatment was initially started with azithromycin (500 mg p.o., QD, for 3 days) and switched to doxycycline (100 mg p.o., BID, for 10 days) after receiving the serology results.
On control ultrasound two weeks later (week 12), the lymphadenopathy was clearly regressive in all affected regions with the largest mesenteric lymphnode measuring 2 × 0.7 cm. In a telephone follow-up two months later, the patient reported no further episodes of fever or abdominal symptoms. Regarding GBS, he had not regained his full physical capacity but continued to improve constantly.