A 69-year-old man was admitted to the internal medicine department for the exploration of a progressive deterioration of his general condition associated with inflammatory-like low back pain for several weeks. He also reported a progressive weight loss of 15 kg over the last 3 months. He is a former diplomat with a profession requiring frequent travel abroad. He lived in sub-Saharan Africa for 20 years in rural areas. His medical history included a HIV infection controlled with a tritherapy (emtricitabine, rilpivirine, tenofovir alafenamide). Among the complications of HIV, he suffered from severe osteoporotic fractures in the vertebrae and sternum, which were treated with oral bisphosphonates with good compliance. He was an active smoker with more than 50 pack-years, and he also had obliterative arteriosclerosis of the lower limbs, which was treated with a femoro-femoral bypass in 2016.

The initial clinical examination showed camptocormia with invalidating lumbar pains sometimes causing insomnia and preventing walking. There was no fever, no breath sound, no anomaly in the examination of the tegument, no adenopathy, or organomegaly. He had a moderate inflammatory biological syndrome with a CRP of 42 mg/L (normal < 5 mg/L) associated with a moderate inflammatory anaemia and a discrete neutrophil increase (8.73 G/L, normal 1.5–7.5 G/L) without lymphopenia. There was cholestasis without cytolysis with gamma glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase at 183 IU/L (normal 12–64 IU/L) and 245 IU/L (normal 40–150 IU/L). The HIV viral load was undetectable and the CD4+ T lymphocyte count was 474/μL. A thoraco-abdomino-pelvic scan revealed an abscessed L3–L4 spondylodiscitis associated with known vertebral fractures. An MRI confirmed this diagnosis of spondylodiscitis with left paravertebral abscess without epidural extension. The peripheral infectious samples with blood cultures were all negative. A transthoracic echocardiography did not allow visualisation of vegetations without formally excluding an infammatory endocarditis. To exclude this diagnosis, a positron emission tomography – computed tomography (PET-CT) with cardiac preparation was performed due to the patient’s refusal of a transesophageal echocardiography. This examination revealed a L3–L4 hypermetabolism (SUV L3–L4 8.1 vs. hepatic SUV 2.77), but also an intense fixation at the femoral-femoral crossover bridge (SUV crossover 4.14 vs. hepatic SUV 2.77). The absence of valvular fixation allowed the exclusion of associated infammatory endocarditis. A discolumbo-vertebral biopsy was performed with a negative bacterial culture and a negative universal PCR (16S RNA). Unfortunately, the histology could not be performed due to insufficient material. The search for Mycobacterium tuberculosis in PCR and culture was negative on the discolumbo-vertebral biopsy material.
In the presence of an endovascular infection associated with a culture-negative spondylodiscitis, serology for C. burnetii was requested. The result was in favour of a chronic Q fever (phase I, immunoglobulin G [IgG] 4093 with threshold > 800). The specific PCR for C. burnetii requested on the material of the disco-vertebral biopsy was positive while the blood PCR for C. burnetii was negative.
The diagnosis of chronic Q fever with an abscessed L3-L4 spondylodiscitis and a femoro-femoral bypass infection was retained.
After a medical-surgical discussion, the choice of a long-term treatment with hydroxychloroquine 600 mg and doxycycline 200 mg daily was initiated. The clinical evolution was favorable with a recovery of walking after a stay in the rehabilitation department. After two weeks of treatment, the biological inflammatory syndrome was completely negative. The IgG C. burnetii serology of phase 1 had decreased from a titre at 3 months and stabilised at this titre at the 6-month and 1-year check. The TEP scanner performed at 6 months showed a decrease in the vertebral hypermetabolism L3-L4 (lumbar SUV 4.4 vs hepatic SUV 2.74) but the persistence of a major hypermetabolism at the level of the bypass (bypass SUV 4.25 vs hepatic SUV 2.74). More than a year after the start of the treatment, the patient is still asymptomatic; regular monitoring alone was proposed.
