A 46-year-old never smoker Malagasy woman was referred by her family doctor to the emergency department due to dyspnoea with inspiratory stridor and inspiratory-expiratory wheezing with insidious onset over a 3-month period. The patient was treated for supposed asthma since 2 weeks without improvement. She had no fever, weight loss or night sweats. Physical examination revealed a heart rate of 96/min, a respiratory rate of 19/min, and an oxygen saturation of 89% on room air with normal chest auscultation. A non-tender mass was detected on the right side of her neck.
CT scans of the neck and thorax showed a large thyroid mass causing tracheal stenosis , and multiple cystic lesions with thin walls in both lungs . Cysts had a diffuse localisation, including the costophrenic recesses. Neither pulmonary nodules nor ground glass opacities were observed. Abdominal CT scan did not show any sign of renal angiomyolipoma.
Blood arterial gases showed mild hypoxemia (PaO2 82 mmHg). Laboratory investigations, including renal function, liver function tests, C-reactive protein, thyroid function tests, complete blood cell counts, and serum IgG4 levels were all within normal limits. HIV and immunological tests (anti-Ro/SSA and anti-La/SSB antibodies, rheumatoid factor and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor antibody) were negative. Plasma levels of vascular endothelial growth factor-D (VEGF-D) were low (347 pg/mL; normal range 0–450 pg/mL). Electrocardiogram (ECG) tracing and complete pulmonary function testing were normal (forced expiratory volume in 1 s - FEV1 94%, total lung capacity – TLC of 95% of predicted and normal carbon monoxide diffusing capacity - DLCO).
Surgical removal of the thyroid mass with subtotal thyroidectomy, tracheal segment (3.5 cm) resection and multiple adenectomies were performed . Microscopic study revealed extensive infiltration of all lymph nodes and the thyroid with partial replacement of follicular parenchyma by a fibro-inflammatory process of mixed cellularity, rich in histiocytes . The latter exhibited epithelioid to xanthomatous morphology and formed ill-defined clusters or confluent sheets without granulomatous pattern. An important fraction of the histiocytic population showed emperipolesis of neutrophil granulocytes and lymphocytes . Immunohistochemistry revealed co-expression of the macrophage-related epitope CD68 along with S100 protein, in the absence of CD1a, thereby identifying the histiocytic elements as of non-Langerhans lineage . Remarkably, storiforme fibrosis with signs of vasculitis was also observed and immuno-phenotyping of the infiltrate revealed a substantial participation of IgG4-bearing plasma cells. While their absolute density reached up to 50 per high power field, the IgG4:IgG ratio did not exceed 20% . Histological examination of the tissue biopsies for the identification of infectious organisms using several stainings for pathogens were negative. Based on these findings, a histological diagnosis of RDD was made.
Following surgery dyspnoea disappeared indicating that it was related to tracheal compression. The patient was asymptomatic in the absence of any specific treatment; clinical, functional lung testing and radiological follow up 4 years after surgery did not reveal any disease activity or progression underlining the excellent prognosis of the disease after resection.