A 43-year-old man, who had undergone hemodialysis therapy for chronic renal failure owing to diabetic nephropathy for 6 years and whose blood pressure had been under control (<140/80 mmHg), developed mild elevation of blood pressure (150/100 mmHg) for 2 weeks. He has not been treated with immunosuppressant agents. He suddenly showed weakness in both of his legs, and he realized that he had postural instability and that he could not walk. Subsequently, his consciousness level deteriorated. On admission, his blood pressure was 156/96 mmHg. Neurological examination showed a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14(E3V5M6). His facial expression was flat and his voice was barely audible. He had paraparesis in both lower limbs. Brain MRI demonstrated hyperintense lesions in the bilateral basal ganglia, bilateral frontal cortices, and left cerebellum on FLAIR images, and those lesions were hyperintensity on DWI and ADC maps . No arterial stenosis on MR angiography was found . He was treated with anti-hypertensive agents and continued hemodialysis therapy, and his blood pressure were controlled to 130/70 mmHg within 2 weeks. On the 7th day after admission, disturbance of consciousness and paraparesis improved, and he could walk by himself. However, we noticed that he showed parkinsonian signs including FOG, bradykinesia, and postural instability. His FOG fulfilled the criteria of “brief, episodic absence or marked reduction of forward progression of the feet despite the intention to walk” based on the 2010 workshop of clinicians and scientists interested in FOG . The score from part III of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) was 28 points. He did not show cerebellar ataxia. Concurrently, MRI showed hyperintense basal ganglionic lesions on FLAIR images, DWI, and ADC maps persisted, although lesions on bilateral frontal cortices were diminished . His FOG and postural instability gradually improved, and UPDRS part III scores were 22 and 5 points at 2 and 4 weeks after admission, respectively. Follow-up MRI at 4 weeks after admission showed significant alleviation of the bilateral basal ganglionic lesions on FLAIR . Thus, he was diagnosed as PRES based on the acute transient neurological symptoms and MRI findings. He was treated with 150 mg of amantadine, and a combination of 300 mg of levodopa and 30 mg of carbidopa at 15th and 22st day after admission for 7 days, respectively, but he did not show dramatic improvement of FOG. Thereafter, those anti-parkinsonian drugs were discontinued.