A 28-year-old female patient of Indian ethnicity was referred to our specialist gynaecology clinic after presenting to her general practitioner with a few weeks’ history of right-sided lower abdominal pain, radiating to the right flank. An ultrasound scan performed in primary care showed a right adnexal solid cystic mass, initiating urgent referral to the rapid access gynaecological cancer service.
The patient had no history of any medical conditions. She was nulliparous with a BMI of 27 and no previous gynaecological or surgical history. She described an unremarkable menstrual history with regular cycles, and no menorrhagia, dysmenorrhoea or intermenstrual bleeding. She was not using any regular medication or contraceptives, and had no family history of gynaecological conditions or cancer. Her 3-yearly cervical cytology testing was up to date and unremarkable. She was a non-smoker and consumed alcohol socially.
Abdominal and bimanual vaginal examination was deemed inconclusive but revealed no obvious abnormalities. Vaginal speculum examination demonstrated no abnormalities of the vulva, vagina and cervix. A transvaginal ultrasound performed in the expert, specialist clinic showed an anteverted, normal sized uterus, with an endometrial thickness of 16mm. Anechoic areas with Doppler colour flow were seen in the endometrial cavity, suggestive of endometrial polyps. The rest of the endometrium was regular and well defined with preservation of the endo-myometrial junction. . The left ovary appeared normal. In the right adnexa, a solid cystic mass measuring 74 x 58 x 63 mm was seen, with the solid component measuring 40 mm with shadowing . The mass had a colour score of 3, suggestive of moderate blood flow through the mass .
According to IOTA simple rules, the mass was indeterminate because of shadowing, a benign feature, and colour score of 3, which was a malignant feature .
The IOTA-ADNEX risk model was subsequently used to evaluate the ovarian lesion. This suggested a 44.2% risk of being benign and a 55.8% risk of ovarian malignancy, of which borderline was 36.7%, followed by a 12% risk of being stage 1 ovarian cancer. Risk of stage 2-4 ovarian cancer was 5.2%. Risk of metastatic ovarian cancer was 2% .
On subjective assessment, the mass was suspected to be a sex-cord stromal tumour.
Following initial assessment, due to the indeterminate nature of the adnexal mass, a plan was made to obtain serum tumour markers, perform magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and to discuss the case in the specialist gynaecological cancer multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting.
All tumour markers tested were normal (CA125 29, AFP 1, HCG <2, and LDH 153).
Pelvic MRI showed a polypoid lesion in the uterine cavity. The left ovary appeared normal. The right adnexal mass was identified within a pool of free ascitic fluid, which extended both behind and in front of the uterus. The mass had bright uptake on T1 weighted series and featured small cysts, suggestive of an enlarged, torted, solid cystic right ovarian mass . The MRI was inconclusive of malignancy because of the distorted architecture caused by the torsion. A staging computer tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis did not show any evidence of local or distant metastasis.
Hysteroscopy unveiled multiple polyps in the lower uterine cavity; the endometrium appeared normal at the uterine fundus. Transcervical resection of the uterine polyps was performed. Laparoscopy confirmed an 8cm right-sided, cystic and solid, torted mass with omental and peritoneal adhesions and minimal inflammatory ascites. Following removal of the ascitic fluid, careful examination did not reveal any other abnormalities inside the abdominal cavity. Adhesiolysis followed by uncomplicated right salpingo-oophorectomy was performed and the specimen was removed inside an Endobag without spillage. All the specimens were sent for histological analysis.
The endometrial polypoid tissue showed changes consistent with grade 1 endometrioid endometrial adenocarcinoma . Sections from the right ovarian mass showed features in keeping with a well-differentiated endometrioid ovarian carcinoma . Possible endometriosis was also identified. It was uncertain as to whether the endometrial and ovarian lesions were synchronous tumours or represented metastatic deposits. Immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair proteins (MMR) was undertaken on the right ovarian mass and the tumour cells showed normal nuclear staining for MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6.
The patient was re-discussed at the specialist oncology MDT meeting. Based on the histological findings, the MDT consensus was of a diagnosis of International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics stage 1A, grade 1 endometrioid endometrial adenocarcinoma, and FIGO stage 1A well differentiated endometrioid carcinoma of the right ovary, incompletely staged.