A 73-year-old right-handed Taiwanese man was admitted to our hospital after suffering syncope. On the day of admission, he had been well until 7:00 in the morning, when he was playing tennis. Specifically, he suddenly lost consciousness and fell to the ground. The patient promptly regained consciousness, but his verbal output was limited to saying the word “hao” (meaning “yes” in English). His friends took him to our emergency department at 8:39 am.
On arrival, the patient was E2VaM4. On examination, he was alert. He had impairments in speech fluency, comprehension and repetition. His only verbal output was the sound “hao” or “hum”. Gait, extraocular motion, motor, and sensory functions were all normal. He showed no eye ptosis nor facial palsy. Blood parameters, including homocysteine levels, lipid profile, diabetes, oncology and endocrine measures, were unremarkable. Brain CT with contrast revealed no apparent intracranial haemorrhage or mass. However, CT perfusion indicated poor perfusion over the left middle cerebral territory .
Tracing back his medical history, the patient was normostenic (body mass index was 18). He had hypertension for more than twenty years. He also suffered from hyperlipidaemia and coronary artery disease, and 7 months previously, he had received one drug-eluting stent. His daily medications included amlodipine 5 mg, aspirin 100 mg and rosuvastatin 5 mg. He played tennis twice a day and never smoked or drank alcohol. His highest education was senior high school and was fluent in Chinese, Taiwanese and Japanese. He used to work at an international trading company but had been retired for two years.
Under the impression of acute cerebral infarction with global aphasia, he then received a recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) injection at 9:26 am and was switched to our intensive care unit for further management. Brain non-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Fig. ) was conducted on day 5, disclosing an acute infarction in the territory of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA), just in the perisylvian gyri, the classic areas of Wernicke and Broca. After 12 days of inpatient treatment, the patient was later discharged under stable conditions with global aphasia status and no focal neurologic signs. He was able to resume playing tennis on a daily basis soon after discharge.
The patient then received speech rehabilitation, including verbal production, auditory comprehension training, augmentative communication training, phonetic placement and high-level cognitive function training at our hospital and another hospital. His language expression gradually recovered. The CCAT was then performed 14 months after the initial stroke. His average CCAT score was 5.6, indicating moderate to severe aphasia . Detailed analyses of his spoken language characteristics showed subnormal performances for both sentence intonation and sentence length , indicating he had fluent aphasia.
We subsequently checked is cerebral blood flow using regional brain single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT; Fig. ). No radioactivity was found in the left frontal and left parietotemporal regions, and instead, a relatively high level of radioactivity uptake was noted over the right thalamus, frontal and occipital lobes.