We report the case of a 36-year-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese man from Kandy, Sri Lanka, who presented to a tertiary care hospital with a 3-day history of an acute febrile illness. He had been in apparently good health and working as farmer involved in paddy cultivation. Three days prior to admission he developed high spiking fever with chills and rigors associated with severe arthralgia and myalgia. He could not mobilize due to severe muscle cramps in lower limbs. He developed shortness of breath at rest with a non-productive cough 1 day prior to admission and was anuric for 12 hours prior to hospital admission. His past medical history was unremarkable and there was no significant medical illness in his family. He was an occasional ethanol consumer and did not smoke tobacco.
On admission to our emergency unit, we found an averagely built man with a body mass index of 24 who was in severe distress and pain. He was severely dehydrated. He had mild icterus with injected and suffused conjunctiva. He had a temperature of 39.5 ºC with warm peripheries. His pulse rate was 140/minute with a blood pressure of 80/40 mmHg and he had marked postural symptoms on attempting a standing blood pressure. He was dyspneic with a respiratory rate of 32 cycles per minute on air saturation of 90%; it improved with 10 L oxygen via a face mask. On examination of his lung fields he had bilateral coarse crepitations. He had 3 cm hepatomegaly which was tender without palpable spleen or flank dullness. Although he was agitated and in distress, he was oriented in time, place, and person with normal neurology.
His laboratory results showed a leukocyte count of 24.6 × 109/l (90% neutrophils) with a platelet count of 86 × 109/l and hemoglobin of 14.5 g/dL. A peripheral smear showed neutrophil leukocytosis with toxic neutrophils, few myelocytes, and abnormal lymphocytes with thrombocytopenia. His aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level was 924 U/l (normal up to 31 U/l) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 331 U/L (normal up to 31 U/L). His serum bilirubin level was 55 mmol/L (normal 1–21 mmol/L) with direct fraction of 55%. His alkaline phosphatase level was 459 U/L (normal 64–306 U/L). His serum creatinine was 217 micromoles/L on admission with a potassium of 2.9 mmol/L and sodium of 136 mmol/L. His blood urea nitrogen level was 40 mg/dl (normal 8–20 mg/dl). His coagulation profile was normal. His C-reactive protein (CRP) was 379 mg/dl on admission. Arterial blood gas revealed a partially compensated metabolic acidosis (pH 7.26) with an arterial bicarbonate of 14.5 mmol/L and carbon dioxide partial pressure of 20 mmHg. His creatinine kinase level was 440 mcg/l (10–120 mcg/l). His arterial lactate was 5 mmol/L. A chest X ray on admission showed bilateral air space opacifications. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed T inversions in the anterior leads (V1–V6) with a troponin I of 0.16 ng/mL (0.04 ng/mL). Bedside two-dimensional echocardiography revealed global hypokinesia with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40% which was suggestive of myocarditis.
A working diagnosis of severe leptospirosis with multiorgan dysfunction was made based on the above findings in the background of significant mud exposure and epidemiology of the locality. He was immediately moved to a high dependency unit and oxygen was given via a face mask. He had 50 ml of concentrated urine after catheterization. After fluid resuscitation of 1.5 L of crystalloids, he was started on intravenously administered noradrenalin as his blood pressure remained low. Intravenously administered cefotaxime with orally administered doxycycline was prescribed after taking blood cultures. Acidosis was corrected with 8.4% sodium bicarbonate. An N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) infusion was started considering his elevated transaminases. Hypokalemia was corrected with intravenously administered potassium chloride. He was given 1 g of intravenously administered methylprednisolone.
On day 2 of illness, our patient was clinically improved with less myalgia. Inotrope requirement was reduced from 0.8 mcg/kg per minute to 0.2 mcg/kg per minute. His oxygen requirement improved from 10 L/minute via face mask to 2 L/minute oxygen via nasal prongs. His urine output was 525 ml/last 24 hours.
On day 3 of illness his blood pressure was normalized without inotropes and on day 4 of illness his saturation on air was 99%.
Over the subsequent 5 days his clinical condition gradually improved with gradual normalization of biochemistry.
Methylprednisolone 1 g continued for 3 days and intravenously administered cefotaxime and orally administered doxycycline for a total of 7 days. He was discharged after an uneventful recovery on day 7 of hospital admission.
His dengue NS1 antigen test was negative on day 3 of fever. Throat and nasal swabs taken on admission were negative for influenza A (H1N1) viral RNA. A microscopic agglutination test (MAT) for IgM and IgG against Leptospira was done on day 7 and was negative. It was done in the Medical Research Institute of Sri Lanka, which is the reference center which tests for all the common serovars of leptospirosis in Sri Lanka. Blood taken on day 7 was positive for IgM against hantavirus on 1:100 dilutions. Unfortunately, our patient did not turn up for subsequent testing at 4 weeks to demonstrate the rising antibody titers in convalescence.