A 24-year-old woman was referred to the ENT service with the presentation of a painless mass in the right supraclavicular region from 2 years ago. The mass had increased in size over that time. The patient had no history of trauma, surgery, inflammation, fever, nocturnal sweating, weight loss, dysphagia, shortness of breath, or hoarseness. Furthermore, there was no history of cutaneous neoplasms, visceral malignancies, or family members with similar presentation. In her past medical history, she had multiple sclerosis and is being treated with rituximab.
A physical examination revealed a 3×4 cm firm, semi-mobile, semi-compressible, none tender, round mass in the right supraclavicular region. The skin over the swelling was normal and non-adherent to the underlying mass.
There was no abnormal pulsation or bruit. Moreover, no cervical lymphadenopathy was appreciated. The CT scan of the neck with contrast revealed a heterogeneous solid mass measuring 40×25×20 mm infiltrated the most distal part of the right sternocleidomastoid muscle in the base of the neck containing mottled hyperemic foci. The CT scan report was compatible with mesenchymal sarcoma . FNAC showed benign-looking follicular cells. Then ultrasonography of the neck was performed, with a normal thyroid on both sides. A heterogeneous focus contained multiple tubular, tortuous foci and low flow without connection to the right thyroid in the inferior-lateral region of the sternocleidomastoid muscle insertion on the right. The first diagnosis was vascular malformation. Doubting the FNA's answer, the FNA repeated, which was bloody. According to the findings, the decision was made to perform surgery. The surgical dissection showed a thrombosed vascular mass of the supraclavicular region originating in the sternocleidomastoid muscle .
The pedicle of the mass in the muscle was ligated, and the swelling was excised completely. Furthermore, there was no recurrence of the tumor at the 6-month follow-up. Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of cavernous hemangioma.
A macroscopic inspection of the surgically excised specimen showed a well-defined mass lesion 4.3 × 3.2 × 2.5 cm, revealing a brownish-red solid cut surface with a soft consistency. Microscopic inspection showed a benign vascular lesion featuring cavernous hemangioma composed of large dilated vascular channels lined by flat endothelium .