A 65-year-old female with no medical history and no known cardiovascular risk factors presented with sudden onset chest pain whilst scuba diving abroad. She was a seasoned scuba diver with numerous years of experience.
The dive in question was her ninth in 5 days. She had just begun her descent with an air-only gas tank when, upon reaching a depth of 8 metres, she experienced sudden onset, central, oppressive chest pain. Despite this, she continued her descent to the target depth of 30 metres. However, due to the persistence of chest pain, she abandoned the dive and performed a controlled ascent as per recommendations. The total dive time was 30 min.
She presented to the local hospital ~90 min later where an initial ECG demonstrated a rhythm at ~70 beats per minutes with slightly widened QRS complexes and an absence of regular atrial activity, likely compatible with an accelerated idioventricular rhythm (, left panel). These modifications subsequently resolved 30 min later, with a return to sinus rhythm, but with fragmented QRS complexes, Q waves, and T-wave inversion now noted in inferior leads (, right panel). A blood test revealed normal levels of troponin and CK-MB—these tests were not repeated. An echocardiogram revealed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) with no regional wall motion abnormalities. The chest pain resolved ~2 h after onset, and the patient was discharged with aspirin and bisoprolol but no clear diagnosis.
One week later, having returned home, she presented with new-onset, central, respiration-dependant chest pain, distinct in character from the previous chest pain. The patient was haemodynamically stable with a normal clinical examination. A 12-lead ECG revealed inferior Q waves with marked infero-lateral T-wave inversion .
Blood tests revealed a high-sensitivity troponin T level of 78 ng/l (normal <14 ng/l), with repeated testing over the subsequent hours/days revealing a decreasing trend that reached a nadir of 33 ng/l. Of note, C-reactive protein was slightly raised at 14 ng/l (normal <10 ng/l), but leukocytes were in the normal range.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed an LVEF of 63% but with akinesia of the left ventricular mid-inferior wall and hypokinesia of the distal inferior wall .
Given the history and these findings, a subacute myocardial infarction (MI) was suspected with possible peri-infarction pericarditis. At this stage, the possible mechanisms of the MI included: a conventional type 1 MI (i.e., atherosclerotic plaque rupture) or a type 2 MI secondary to SCAD or coronary spasm, given the context of physical stress. Other differential diagnoses that were considered included myocarditis and coronary arterial gas embolism. However, the former was considered unlikely given the context, the acute onset of chest pain, and the absence of recent upper respiratory infection or gastroenteritis. The latter is phenomenon seen in decompression sickness and thus was deemed implausible given the onset of chest pain during decent, the profile of the dive, and the controlled nature of the subsequent ascent.
The patient was started on dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) (aspirin and clopidogrel) pending a coronary angiogram, with high-dose aspirin (500 mg tds) prescribed to manage the pericarditic chest pain. A proton pump inhibitor was also started for gastric protection.
Invasive coronary angiography revealed coronary arteries free of significant stenoses except for a subtle irregularity of the posterior left ventricular artery . Given the suspicion of SCAD, optical coherence tomography (OCT) was performed, revealing an intramural haematoma of the posterior left ventricular artery with a patent true lumen, thus confirming the diagnosis of SCAD .
Subsequent cardiac MRI (CMR) confirmed the presence of an MI of the mid-inferior wall [transmural late gadolinium enhancement (LGE)] with extension to the distal inferior territory (subendocardial LGE) . Additionally, LGE of the pericardium in contact with the zone of infarction was also noted, suggesting a localised pericarditis.
As per current recommendations , given the absence of haemodynamic instability, and the presence of normal flow in the culprit coronary artery, the SCAD was managed conservatively without revascularisation. To treat the pericarditis, high-dose aspirin was continued for a total of 2 weeks along with a 3-month course of colchicine as per current guidelines . Low-dose aspirin (100 mg od) was subsequently continued long-term. Clopidogrel was discontinued due to the lack of clear evidence for the use of dual antiplatelet therapy in this context. Due to the presence of a normal LVEF, ACE inhibitors and beta blockers were not prescribed.
The patient's symptoms resolved during the admission and she was discharged from hospital 6 days later. The follow-up period was unremarkable with an absence of chest pain recurrence. Of note, routine screening for fibromuscular dysplasia by duplex ultrasonography was negative. The screen was completed with computed tomography angiography in ambulatory care.