In April 2018, a 37-year-old Syrian female came to the surgical outclinic of our institute in Aleppo-Syria, complaining of a palpable mass in her left breast, with retraction and ulceration of the skin, pain and redness. The mass grew gradually over the period of four months .
The patient is an illiterate housewife that lives in a rural area. She has one child that she has breastfed him.
The patient reported hypothyroidism. She was on l-thyroxin 50 μg/day but stopped the medicine two months ago without medical consultation. Otherwise, her past medical, surgical and medicinal history is clear, including pulmonary diseases.
Review and examination of other systems was not significant. There was no history of weight loss, loss of appetite, night sweats or fever.
The patient performed an ultrasonography (US) a month earlier. It showed a (4 × 6) cm poorly identified structure, which infiltrates in the glandular tissue and distorted the normal structure of glandular lobes, but without observing an isolated mass. No dilation in the mammary ducts was observed. The US also revealed an enlarged left axillary lymph node, 2 cm in diameter. The right breast and the right axillary region showed no abnormalities. At that time, two biopsies from the mass were performed by an interventional radiologist to investigate the mass. Histopathologic examination revealed no malignancy with acute non-specific mastitis and foci of fat necrosis.
We performed another US and mammography for the two breasts. The mammography showed two dense and disproportionate breasts, and a (4 × 3.5) cm irregular mass located in the lateral upper quadrant of the left breast . For ultrasonography, the breasts were studied with a 7.5 MHz probe. We found a small, irregular, hypoechoic mass (4.5 × 3.6) cm located at 1 o’clock in the left breast, and an axillary lymph node in the left side was observed. We suspected malignancy.
Chest X-ray was normal.
The patient was admitted to our surgical department to be prepared for excisional biopsy of the mass.
Laboratory values were as follows: Hb: 10.8 mg/dl– WBC: 10800/mm3 - TSH: 31.4 μIU/mL- CRP : 31 mg/L - ESR : 1st h 46.
Hypothyroidism was corrected before surgery by l-thyroxin.
Echography of the thyroid gland was within normal limits with some degree of atrophy. Once the patient reached euthyroidism (TSH: 2.1 μIU/mL), we performed lumpectomy under general anesthesia .
The resected mass was tan and rubbery, measuring 13 cm. The cut section revealed irregular surface admixed with fat, and many dilated ducts with cystic formations and large areas of necrosis.
Microscopic examination revealed granulomatous caseating tuberculous mastitis in the left breast. .
Then the patient was put on (Rifampicinb150 mg, Isoniazid 75 mg, Pyrazinamide 400 mg, Ethamputol 275 mg) and after one month of treatment by ATT drugs:
HB: 14.5 mg/dl - WBC : 7500/mm3 -ESR : 34 1st hour - CRP : 6.8 mg/L - Iron : 70 mcg/dL.
The patient did not adhere to treatment because she lives in a remote village, with limited accessibility to TB treatment facilities due to war. She came after three months with 3 masses in her left breast, The patient was sent to a radiologist and the echography revealed the presence of three masses: the first mass was (2 × 1.5) cm above the middle of the surgical incision by (2) cm with irregular borders, the second was (2 × 0.6) cm with irregular borders below the end of the lateral line of surgical incision by (2) cm, and the third was (3) mm lateral to the latter described mass.
Near the place of pervious surgical incision, there was a hypoechoic tissue (2 × 2) cm and the Doppler showed a relative increase in blood supply. The rest of glandular tissue looked normal. Three axillary lymph nodes were seen (17–13–12) mm with a normal adipose hilum.
We performed another lumpectomy. Biopsies were sent to the pathology laboratory and the result was caseating tuberculosis mastitis with abscess and fibrosis of left breast with no malignancy.
The patient was successfully treated after the excision of the three masses and returning to the ATT drugs (Rifampicin150 mg, Isoniazid 75 mg, Pyrazinamide 400 mg, Ethamputol 275 mg) for 9 months with thorough follow-up. Another echography was performed after a year and was normal and the patient recovered.