In June 2018, a 57-year-old woman presented with a massive, painless mass in the right orbit which had developed over 19 years. As the tumor grew, vision in the right eye gradually deteriorated until it was completely lost approximately 15 years before presentation. Due to budgetary constraints, the patient avoided seeking appropriate medical care.
Upon ophthalmological examination, she had a best-corrected visual acuity of no light perception and 20/20 of the right and left eyes, respectively. In the right orbit, a large rubbery mass stretched horizontally from the bridge of the nose to the lateral canthus, and vertically from the eyebrow to the center of the cheek. The upper eyelid covering the tumor was pushed forward due to the large size of the mass. The vessels of the eyelids were dilated and tortuous . The palpebral fissure was elongated and widened; the eyeball, covered with soft tissue, was displaced anteromedially . No abnormalities were observed in the left eye. There was no associated lymphadenopathy and a systemic examination revealed no abnormalities.
Orbital CT revealed a huge mass in the right orbit measuring 10.6 × 9.5 × 11 cm. After administration of contrast material, inhomogeneous enhancement and vascular-like enhancing structures were observed. The mass was closely related to the internal rectus muscle. The eyeball appeared totally engulfed and compressed by the large mass and was displaced anteromedially. In the bone structures, no evident erosion or extension damage was found; however, the temporal orbital wall was observed to be slightly thinner than anticipated .
Orbital cavernous hemangioma was suspected. The patient underwent lid-sparing orbital exenteration under general anesthesia, a procedure that involved removal of the tumor, globe, orbital contents, and most of the upper eyelid. Using a preserved part of the normal eyelid skin, the orbital cavity was covered and sutured with a skin incision margin.
On gross pathological examination, the orbital lesion consisted of a 15 × 13 × 9 cm well-circumscribed solid tumor covered with a 16 × 14 cm flap . The cut surface was composed of gray-white or gray-red soft tissue with foci of hemorrhage identified in some areas. Nerve tissue of approximately 2.5 cm in length and 0.2 cm in diameter was observed in the adipose tissue next to the tumor. On microscopic examination, H&E staining showed that the tumor tissue constituted spindle-shaped cells arranged in bundles or irregular shapes. Cell nuclei were oval or spindle-shaped. No necrosis, mitoses, or nuclear pleomorphisms were present. .
IHC testing demonstrated strong and diffuse spindle cells with antibodies against CD34, signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) , B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2), and progesterone receptors (PR). Approximately 2% of these cells were reactive to Ki-67. Staining for antibodies against P53, glial fibrillary acidic protein, and S-100 was negative. These findings were compatible with a diagnosis of a benign SFT.
The patient had good cosmetic results and exhibited no symptoms of recurrence during the 4-year follow-up.