We present the clinical case of a 49-year-old male patient with a history of hypertension under treatment and smoking who consulted the emergency department for a 2-month-old picture of compromised general condition, significant weight loss, abdominal pain localized in the right hypochondrium and a non-quantified febrile sensation. On admission, a fever of 38°C, abdominal pain on deep palpation in the right hypochondrium and hepatomegaly were evident. In the admission laboratory, a normocytic-normokromic anaemia (Hb 11.2 g/gL, VCM 83 fL, HCM 27 pg) was evident; inflammatory parameters and leukocytosis with a left shift (leukocytes 24,900, absolute neutrophil count 19,860, PCR 156 mg/L, procalcitonin 5.1 ng/mL); elevated parameters of cholestasis (GGT 331 U/L, FA 267 U/L), discrete elevation of the transaminases (GPT 62 U/L, GOT 16 U/L) and total bilirubin levels (0.79 mg/dL) and direct (0.30 mg/dL) were normal. In addition, he presented a discrete shortening of the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT 23.2 sec), with normal prothrombin and INR (PT 13.7 seconds, 78%, INR 1.15). Tumour markers (AFP < 1.3 ng/ml, ACE < 0.5 ng/ml) and blood cultures were negative.

A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast (IVC) was requested, which showed a large solid mass in the left lobe of the liver, measuring approximately 6.6 cm in its major axis, and associated with hepatic hilar and portal-cavitary adenopathies. The study was complemented with an abdominal magnetic resonance (MRI) with IVC, which confirmed the hepatic mass, and was also associated with minimal dilation of the bile duct for that lobe. Its characteristics suggested a primary neoplastic lesion and, as a first possibility, an intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. In the context of the fever, elevated inflammatory parameters, cholestasis and dilation of the bile duct, the diagnosis of cholangitis was made, which was considered a tumor superinfection. Antibiotic treatment with Ceftriaxone and Metronidazole was initiated, with an adequate response, decreasing inflammatory parameters at 48 h.

In the face of the possibility of a highly aggressive neoplasm, such as intra-hepatic cholangiocarcinoma, in a patient with a low surgical risk and in whom a percutaneous biopsy with a negative result for malignancy could have corresponded to a false negative, it is decided in the first instance to resect the tumour completely. The patient undergoes an exploratory laparotomy, in order to rule out the involvement of the lymph nodes, in which case the tumour would be considered inoperable. The rapid biopsy of inter-cavo-aortic lymph nodes did not show any tumour involvement, so it was decided to carry out a segmentectomy (II and III), together with a lymphadenectomy of the loco-regional lymph nodes (porto-cavo space and the hepatic artery).

The histological result of the pieces studied informs that the hepatic tumor is composed of a lymphoplasmocytic inflammatory process, with immunoreactive plasma cells for CD138 and IgG, observing > 50 IgG4 positive plasma cells per field and some areas with IgG4/IgG ratio close to 40%, accompanied by stromal fibrosis. The rest of the ganglia do not present neoplastic pathology, observing expansion of the interfolicular zone, presence of numerous plasma cells, vascular hyperplasia, zones of involution of marginal centers and in the mantle zone, in addition to lymphocytes of disposition in concentric rings; morphological characteristics that can be found in the context of an IgG4-associated disease. The anatomical-pathological report is concluded as a diagnosis of a probable IgG4-associated disease (lymphoplasmocytic subtype). Serum IgG4 levels were not obtained.

As the tumor had already been resected, a wait-and-see approach was decided. The patient remains under follow-up to date (6 months after surgery) through clinical evaluation, laboratory tests and imaging control (abdominal MRI). He has shown a favorable evolution, remaining asymptomatic and without signs of local recurrence.
