A 26-year-old married Ethiopian women presented to renal clinic with 4 year history of progressive proximal symmetric weakness described as inability to get up from chair, walk upstairs, and comb hair, which eventually led to inability to ambulate without aid. She also complained of generalized bone pain, and easy fatigability. She also had a history of shortness of breath, palpitation, dizziness, tinnitus, and loss of appetite. Also gave a history of poor sunlight exposure. She did not provide history of urinary incontinence or retention, fecal incontinence, sensory loss, visual disturbance, headache, and loss of consciousness. She denied having fever, weight loss, night sweating, skin or facial rash, oral lesion, joint pain or swelling and other systemic symptom. Four years before current presentation she was evaluated for weakness, undergone blood work up and imaging, and told to have muscle disease. She was born and raised in the eastern part of Ethiopia; she is married and delivered a dead fetus because of prolonged labour. She did not use alcohol or tobacco. Family history was negative for any disorders of calcium or tumors. Her social functioning and activities of daily living were markedly affected which resulted in significant psychological distress.

On general examination the patient appeared to be chronically sick looking and walking with the aid of a stick. Vital signs were stable There was conjunctival pallor; skeletal examination revealed diffuse bony tenderness which was more prominent at pelvic and proximal tibia, chest wall deformity, and scoliosis. Nervous system examination revealed a hypotonic muscle tone, a proximal muscle power of 3/5 (both upper and lower extremity bilaterally) and a distal muscle power of 5/5 (both upper and lower extremity bilaterally), deep tendon reflex of +2, and down-going plantar reflex. Cranial nerve and sensory examination was normal. She initially presented as an outpatient to the neurology clinic for evaluation of weakness and later linked to renal clinic after blood work up revealed raised serum creatinine. With impression of SHPT further blood work up and imaging was undertaken.

Skeletal X-ray revealed sub-periosteal erosion of radial border of middle phalanx of second and third digits associated with acro-osteolysis of distal phalanx; generalized osteopenia, cystic lesion of distal metaphysis of both femur and proximal metaphysis of both tibia and insufficiency fracture diaphysis of left tibia; bilateral displaced femoral neck fracture; resorption and end plate sclerosis of lumbar vertebra with compression fracture; and osteopenia, lytic lesion, and sub-periosteal erosion of left humeral head, and lytic lesion of distal end of clavicle.

Laboratory test was performed. It showed; ionized calcium: 1 mmol/L, intact PTH: 1604 pg/mL, vitamin D: 10.2 ng/mL, creatinine: 3.8 mg/dL, ALP: 1780 iu/mL. Abdominal ultrasound revealed bilaterally shrunken echogenic kidney (right=6.7 cm and left=6.9 cm) with loss of cortico-medullary differentiation. Electromyography finding was consistent with proximal myopathy. Whereas, nerve conduction test and muscle biopsy results were normal. Laboratory investigations were carried out using the following kits and assays: hematology (HumaCount 30, Human, Germany), biochemistry (Humalyzer 3000, Human, Germany), and the assay method used for PTH was immunometric (IMA).

With the above findings a diagnosis of OFC due to secondary hyperparathyroidism associated with CKD was reached. Additional diagnosis was severe vitamin D deficiency, metabolic myopathy, and anemia.

The patient was started on dietary phosphate restriction, calcium carbonate 1 g/day with meal, vitamin D3 50,000 IU by mouth weekly for 8 weeks, ferrous sulphate 325 mg po tid, and paracetamol 1 g per need for pain control. Alfacalcidol 0.25 µg/day was prescribed, but it was not available in the city. She was counselled on prognosis, need for renal replacement therapy (RRT), and nephrologist evaluation. However, because of financial reason she declined referral and RRT. At 2 month follow up visit, she had some improvement in bone pain and weakness. On laboratory test, vitamin D level returned to normal (34 ng/mL), serum ionized calcium had risen to 4.8 mg/dL, and PTH became 58 pg/mL (this was due to laboratory error). At this point vitamin D and calcium dose was reduced to 800 iu/day and 500 mg/day respectively. At 5 months of follow up the patient developed severe symptomatic hypocalcemia and hyperkalemia, ECG revealed prolonged QT interval. Subsequently the patient was admitted and received intravenous infusion of calcium gluconate and potassium shift therapy. She was discharged on oral calcium 2 g/day and alfacalcidol 0.25 µg/day.