63-year-old male, smoker, hypertensive, presented to the emergency department with a history of left upper motor weakness and a new onset speech articulation disorder at 4:30 a.m. after a previously asymptomatic awakening at 4:00 a.m. with no other associated somatic or neurologic findings. Physical examination was normal and neurologic examination revealed mild dysarthria and a motor balance of 4/5 in the distal region of the left upper limb according to the Medical Research Council Scale of the United Kingdom; the rest of the neurologic examination was normal. He had a National Institute of Health Stroke Scale score of 2.

Blood tests for ion balance, renal and liver function, blood count and coagulation were normal. Cardiological examination with an electrocardiogram and transthoracic echocardiography was normal.

Urgent neuroimaging was performed by cranial computed tomography, which showed a chronic lacunar infarction in the outer capsule and the bilateral lenticular nucleus, and a small hypodensia lesion in the right posteroinferior frontal gyrus of acute chronology. Also, the neurosonological study did not reveal alterations.

The patient was discharged with the diagnosis of lacunar syndrome of dysarthria-torpe hand in the context of a minor right hemispheric ischemic stroke, clinically LACI (lacunar infarction), of probable hypertensive etiology, and it was decided to discharge him at home with secondary preventive treatment with double antiplatelet aggregation, antihypertensive and statins.

The patient returned to the emergency department 48 hours later with a sudden onset of pain and hypoesthesia in the left calf and posterior thigh, with no previous history of intermittent claudicatio. Physical examination revealed pallor of the extremity and weakness of the femoral, popliteal, and left lower limb pulses, with the rest of the physical examination normal.

Urgent neuroimaging study was decided to be extended by computed tomography angiography, which excluded extracranial and intracranial stenosis; however, a focal endoluminal replenishment defect was observed in the aortic arch apex with a slightly triangular morphology, occupying 20-30% of the vessel lumen, compatible with a floating thrombus in the aortic arch, with subsequent pathological confirmation. Ultrasound of the left lower limb showed absence of arterial and venous Doppler in the anterior tibial/posterior tibial region, without popliteal arterial Doppler signal and evidence of terminal embolism in the common femoral artery bifurcation, as well as in the origin of the superficial femoral artery and the deep femoral artery.

The patient was diagnosed with acute ischemic syndrome of the left lower extremity and a transfemoral embolectomy was performed. He was discharged with therapeutic doses of enoxaparin and dual antiplatelet therapy due to the embologenic mechanism.

However, he returned to the emergency room a third time 24 hours later with pain and numbness in the right upper limb. Vascular examination revealed a right humeral rebound pulse with no distal pulses, and ultrasound showed thrombi in the bifurcation of the brachial artery and in the radial artery. He was diagnosed with acute ischemic syndrome of the right upper limb and a transhumeral embolectomy was performed. Finally, in the follow-up computed tomography angiography performed one month later, the floating thrombus disappeared and anticoagulation was optimized.
