A 53-year-old nulliparous woman was brought to our hospital after resuscitation from cardiopulmonary arrest. She was found lying in the park and a rescue team attempted defibrillation. On admission, an electrocardiogram showed V4–6 ST elevation, transthoracic echocardiography showed apical wall hypokinesis, and a computed tomography (CT) scan showed no aortic dissection or pericardial effusion. Creatine kinase level was 149 U/L (normal range, 0–165), creatine kinase myocardial band level was 20 U/L (normal range 0.2–5.0), and cardiac troponin I level was 0.26 ng/ml (normal range, 0.01–0.05). Because myocardial infarction was suspected, we performed emergency coronary angiography. The distal left anterior descending artery (LAD) was dissected, and PCI was performed. After this procedure, the proximal LAD and left circumflex artery were found to be newly dissected, as confirmed by coronary angiography and optical coherence tomography , so PCI was also carried out in these arteries. Pericardial effusion collection was recognized by transthoracic echocardiography and increased gradually, and CT showed type A AAD with a primary entry tear from the left main coronary artery trunk (LMT), which had not seen when the patient was arrived at our hospital . The patient’s systolic blood pressure decreased to 60 mmHg, so we proceeded with surgery.
We performed a median sternotomy under general anesthesia. Bloody pericardial fluid and a hematoma in the fatty tissue of the right ventricle were present. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with left femoral artery cannulation and bicaval venous cannulation, then the body temperature was lowered. When the bladder temperature reached 26 °C, circulatory arrest was initiated and the ascending aorta was opened. No hematoma was observed in the false lumen or primary entry tear. We hollowed out the left coronary ostium from the ascending aorta and observed it carefully. We found the primary entry, which is the posterior wall of the LMT ostium, and the outer membrane of the LMT was blown-out . The distal end of the ascending aorta was sutured to a 24-mm artificial vascular graft, and antegrade blood delivery was started from the side branch of the vascular graft. Because the primary entry was at the LMT, it was impossible to perform ostial patch plasty, so we closed the LMT ostium by continuous suture and bypassed grafting to LAD and left circumflex artery. The hole in the ascending aorta (the LMT ostium) was closed using a trapezoid artificial vascular graft patch . The proximal ascending aorta was sutured to the artificial vascular patch and the clamp was removed from the ascending aorta. As the bladder was warming, we carried out a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) to the LAD and left circumflex artery using great saphenous vein grafts .
Weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass went smoothly. Bypass time was 192 min, circulatory arrest time was 17 min, cross-clamp time was 156 min, and operation time was 321 min. Postoperative transthoracic echocardiography revealed anteroseptal hypokinesis with an ejection fraction of 54%. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 24. However, on postoperative day 64, she was brought back to our hospital with cardiopulmonary arrest, but did not recover. The cause of death was not identified, because of her family did not expect autopsy.