A 74-year-old woman who was treated outside our hospital due to complaints of general weakness, hematuria, dysuria, and decreased renal function was transferred to Chosun University Hospital, Gwangju, Korea, as her renal function did not improve despite treatment.
Clinically, rapid progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) was suspected. Two days after admission, US-guided percutaneous renal biopsy was performed to confirm the pathologic diagnosis, before initiating steroid treatment. Contrary to expectations, the light microscopic examination identified diffuse infiltration of pleomorphic cells throughout the specimen. The pleomorphic cells were immunoreactive for CD20, bcl-2, bcl-6, and MUM-1, but negative for CD3, CD10, and Epstein-Barr encoding region in situ hybridization . No fluorescence deposit was identified during immunofluorescence examination. In electro-microscopic examination, no electron-dense deposit was observed, and the glomerular basement membrane appeared normal in thickness, contour, and texture. However, strikingly, diffuse prominent infiltration of atypical lymphocytes was observed in the interstitium. The cells displayed round to oval cleaved and non-cleaved nuclei with variable clumping of chromatin, and large prominent, marginated nucleoli . We diagnosed the condition as DLBCL, not medical renal disease. After pathologic diagnosis, radiologic re-evaluation was performed. Abdominal CT examination (with contrast) revealed diffuse homogeneous enhancement in both kidneys without definite visible cortico-medullary differentiation, and lymphomatous involvement was diagnosed. A few mild enlargements of lymph nodes in the pericardial and periaortic chains were identified, and such nodes were considered to indicate secondary lymphomatous involvement. On fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography CT, intense hypermetabolism (19.6) was identified in both kidneys, and some lymph nodes exhibited mild hypermetabolism . In the laboratory tests, serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was elevated to 376 U/L (125-220 U/L). The international prognostic index (IPI) was reported as 3 when the following laboratory data and clinicopathologic factors were considered [old age, 1; Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS), 1; Ann Arbor stages III–IV, 0; serum level > 1 × normal, 1; and > 1 extranodal site, 0].
The patient had no previous renal problems.
There was no specific personal or family history.
The patient looked ill.
After admission, the blood urea nitrogen (normal range, 7.0-20.1 mg/dL)/creatinine (0.57-1.11 mg/dL) levels on June 30, July 9, and July 11, 2022 were as follows: 27.7/4.09; 41.0/6.61; and 48/7.62 mg/dL, respectively.
Radiologically, renal US exhibited heterogeneously increased parenchymal echogenicity and a 1.43 cm-sized hypoechoic cystic lesion in the right kidney. Thus, the radiologist suggested probable medical renal disease with a right cystic lesion. During abdominal CT (contrast-free CT while admitted to the emergency room), no neoplastic lesion was suspected.