A 51-year-old Japanese woman presented to our facility for her regular physical examination. Chest radiographs showed pleural wall thickening on the right side of the apex and upper lung field, which had been seen for several years on her annual regular examinations . She had had a mild dry cough for two weeks without symptoms of a common cold such as sore throat and fever. She was a smoker (20 cigarettes per day for 20 years). She had no history of lung disease, such as bacterial pneumonia or pulmonary tuberculosis.
A chest high-resolution CT scan was performed for detailed examination and showed multiple nodular lesions (mostly GGOs) throughout the lung fields, approximately 1cm or less in diameter, which were not detected on chest radiographs . No cystic lesions, pleural effusions, or mediastinal lymph node swellings were observed. Bone sclerosis lesions were detected at Th3, Th6, and the first costal bone . The findings seen on the right side of the upper lung fields on chest radiographs were evaluated as old inflammatory changes based on the chest CT scan; their etiology seemed to be different from the multiple nodular GGOs (data not shown).
Our patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment. The differential diagnoses of the lung GGOs were atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH), highly differentiated adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS), lymphoproliferative disease, and MMPH. Her physical findings were normal. Breath sounds were normal, and no rales were heard on chest auscultation. No skin lesions such as facial angiofibroma and hypomelanotic macules were observed. A neurological examination showed no abnormalities. She had no intellectual disability and no history of epilepsy or other diseases. There was no family history of TSC. There were no abnormal laboratory test results at the time of her first visit to our hospital. Arterial blood gas analysis results were also normal. Pulmonary function tests were normal except for a mild decrease in diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO).
To further investigate the multiple nodular lung lesions, video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsies of the left upper lobe (S5) and the left lower lobe (S9) were performed. The lesions were found to be tinged white on macroscopic examination . Microscopically, the nodules were well demarcated and consisted of papillary growths of hyperplastic type II pneumocytes accompanied with nuclear inclusion bodies and fibrous thickening of alveolar septa accompanied with increased elastic fibers, resulting in the collapse of the alveolar space . Elastica van Gieson staining revealed increased elastic tissue fibers in the lesions . No cystic lesions were detected. Human Melanoma Black (HMB)-45-positive cells, a characteristic feature of LAM, were not observed on immunohistochemical staining (data not shown). These histological findings were consistent with MMPH.
A subsequent CT scan suggested that there were bilateral renal angiomyolipomas . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated multiple high intensity areas of cortical and subcortical tubers . All of these findings, including bone, kidney, and brain manifestations, are typical features of TSC , and the latter two findings are major diagnostic criteria for TSC .
Finally, from the comprehensive assessment including the histological findings of lung nodular lesions and the CT and MRI findings of TSC, such as renal angiomyolipoma, cortical and subcortical tubers, and vertebral bone sclerosis, our patient was diagnosed as having TSC with MMPH, though she had no typical classical manifestations of TSC such as seizures, mental retardation, skin lesions, or a family history of TSC. Our patient is now under routine follow-up with no medication, and is asymptomatic.