A 62-year-old female presented the outpatient department of our hospital with the symptoms of stomachache, frequent micturition, and urination pain.
Patient’s symptoms started 20 days ago, She had no symptoms such as lumbago, dizziness, headache, palpitation, chest tightness, nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, or other symptoms.
The patient was diagnosed with high blood pressure 1 year ago, administered Amlodipine besylate tablets 5 mg po qd occasionally, did not check blood pressure; terminal gross hematuria was observed once 4 months ago, the symptom disappeared, and no treatment was administered; denied any tumor observation in the family history.
After hospitalization, the patient’s temperature was 36.5 ℃, 80 pulses/min, 20 breathing times/min, blood pressure was 159/108 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. no bulge, pressure pain or percussion pain in either of the kidney area; no pressure or percussion pain in both ways of the ureteral region; no bulge in the bladder area but light pressure-induced pain.
Fasting venous blood glucose was 8.34 mmol/L, and other indexes were normal. Chest X-ray showed mild interstitial changes in both lungs, ECG: 102 times/min. Color ultrasound of the urinary system showed a 38 mm × 34 mm hypoechoic mass on the right side of the bladder with an uneven surface and a large bottom; multiple strong echo masses were observed. CDFI: in the masses, blood supply was sufficient. Cystoscope showed bladder occupying lesion . Biopsy diagnosis: papillary polypoid cystitis was suspected as a malignant change . Computer tomography urography(CTU) considered bladder cancer .
Cystoscopy and biopsy failed to define the nature of the lesions. the urethral bladder tumor biopsy was performed. During the operation, the right bladder wall adjacent to the neck of the bladder showed vegetations with a size of about 4.5 cm × 4.5 cm, with a broad base, easy bleeding, and local surface tissue ulceration. The tumor was found to be hard and calcified during electrotomy. The histopathological studies revealed a large number of tumor cells proliferated with abundant cytoplasm, tumor cells were arranged in small nests or strips, and the blood sinusoids between tumor cells were abundant . The immunohistochemical study was positive for the expression for CD56, chromogranin A, neuron specific enolase and synaptophysin. Immunostaining for the polyclonal S-100 protein showed a sustentacular pattern, thereby confirming paraganglioma. Therefore, another operation was needed. The patient regularly administered phenoxybenzamine 10 mg po tid and metformin tablets 0.5 g po tid for 2 weeks. Before the operation, laboratory workup revealed elevated plasma renin activity to 8642.76 pg/mL, elevated angiotensin I to 16113.5 pg/mL, and an elevated angiotensin II level of 252.91 pg/mL. Partial resection of the bladder was conducted, and the focus was removed. After the operation, the patient stopped using phenoxybenzamine and continued with metformin tablets. Consecutively, blood pressure and blood sugar were monitored. the plasma renin activity, angiotensin I and angiotensin II were within normal range (56.83 pg/mL, 447.46 pg/mL, 79.04 pg/mL, respectively). When the patient was ready to leave the hospital, her blood pressure was 128/86 mmHg, the blood sugar was 7.0–9.4 mmol/L, and the symptoms had improved.
Three and six months after the operation, no discomfort was reported. Blood sugar and blood pressure were at normal levels. No obvious abnormality was detected by cystoscopy. However, The patient was advised regular reexamination and lifelong follow-up, with respect to blood pressure, blood glucose, urinary catecholamine, ultrasound, CT, and cystoscopy.