In July 2006, a 41-year-old female presented with a swelling in the right preauricular region, which had persisted for the past two years, and was having difficulty opening her mouth for the past four months. The swelling was insidious in onset and progressive. In the first six months, the patient indicated the swelling was painless, only later becoming painful as the size increased.
Local examination found a diffuse 5 × 4 cm firm to cystic mass with restricted mobility in the right preauricular region. Examination of the oral cavity, ear, cranial nerves, and other systems was unremarkable. MRI analysis indicated a large mass in the right infratemporal fossa with significant infiltration into the adjoining muscles. This mass was hypo-isointense on T1 and heterogeneously hyperintense on T2 weighted images . The mass had significant enhancement in post-contrast MRI . Hematological and biochemistry analyses were normal. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) revealed a monotonous population of small, round lymphoid cells with regular nuclei, compact chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant basophilic cytoplasm. These findings were consistent with NHL. Diagnostic biopsy of the tissue confirmed small lymphocytic non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The patient was investigated further to determine the staging of the NHL, but no lymph node or other organ was found to be involved. The patient was scheduled for chemo-radiation treatment and given nine cycles of the CHOP regime (cyclophosphamide, doxarubicine, vicristine, and prednisolone) and a total of 55G radiation in 25 fractions over five weeks. The patient remained asymptomatic for seven months.
In Nov 2007, the patient again presented with similar symptoms. A computed axial tomography (CT) scan revealed a hypodense mass of 37 Hounsefield unit (HU) density and measuring 4.25 cm × 4.0 cm in the right temporal and infratemporal region. Post-contrast, this mass showed heterogeneous enhancement (66 HU density) and normal contents (muscles) were not identifiable from the mass. The tumor was excised and histopathology again confirmed the diagnosis of NHL. The patient was given six cycles of ifosfamide, metoxantron, and etoposide, with the last cycle on June 3rd, 2008. The patient was on regular follow up, and in Aug 2008 presented with increasing trismus. On examination, the infratemporal fossa was normal but there was a hard, irregular ulcer in the right retromolar area . A punch biopsy of the ulcer found it to be a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. The patient was advised to undergo surgery for this carcinoma, but she did not come in for further follow up.