A 24-year-old woman was referred in 2005 with increasing episodes of debilitating lower limb myalgia, since the age of seven. The attacks occurred every 1–2 years but had increased since 2005 to four per year. They were preceded by sore throats, and more recently, by cough or dysuria. During these episodes, creatine kinase (CK) ranged from 89 to 700 U/litre (normal range <175), normal between episodes. Her muscle pain responded to oral prednisolone within days.
Because of the sore throats and an elevated antistreptolysin O titre (ASOT), she underwent a tonsillectomy in 1992. Apart from the tonsillectomy, her past medical history and drug history were unremarkable.
We set out to fully investigate one of these attacks. In September 2005, an attack of muscle pains was preceded by cough and green sputum 2 weeks earlier. An examination was normal except for a slightly injected throat and tenderness of the calves and anterior compartment muscles. Biopsy of the right tibialis anterior muscle showed mild muscle fibre atrophy of uncertain significance. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was elevated (39 mm/hour), leucocyte count was 16.6 × 109/litre (4.0–11.0), with a neutrophilia of 13.6 × 109/litre (81.9%) and a monocytosis of 1.06 × 109/litre (6.4%). Lymphocyte, eosinophil, basophil counts, CK, renal and liver function were normal.
Serology was negative for influenza A & B, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), Mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia, Q fever, adenovirus, enterovirus, and ASOT.
Acute serology for Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) was less clear. Epstein-Barr Nuclear Antigen (EBNA) IgG, Viral Capsid Antigen (VCA) IgG and IgM were present. This may be due to a false positive VCA IgM, a primary EBV infection in the last 3–12 months, or a reactivation of EBV. Convalescent EBV serology 5 months later showed a positive EBV VCA and a negative EBV VCA IgM, consistent with past EBV infection.
Due to the uncertain significance of the EBV serology, further investigations were done during an episode in September 2006, triggered after 4 days of urinary tract infection.
On examination, she had a temperature of 38°C. Examination of her throat, skin, abdomen and cardiorespiratory systems was normal. There was marked tenderness of forearm, thighs and calf muscles. Testing lower limb power was inhibited by pain, but was otherwise unremarkable. Tendon reflexes were normal.
Blood tests showed an elevated CK (715 U/litre), leukocytosis of 31.1 × 109/litre (normal range 4–11), neutrophilia (88.6%), lymphocytosis (5.8%) and monocytosis (5.4%). ESR was 80 mm/hour and C-reactive protein was 287 mg/litre. Blood film showed normochromic normocytic red blood cells, leukocytosis with a neutrophilia and monocytosis, occasional atypical mononuclear cells and some rouleaux. Her mid-stream urine (after 7 days of trimethoprim) showed a white cell count of 284 × 106/litre, epithelial cells of 272 × 106/litre and lactobacillus at >100 × 106/litre (probably a contaminant).
Serology for EBV and cytomegalovirus (CMV) confirmed past infection only, with raised IgG and negative IgM. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for EBV, adenovirus, and CMV of EDTA plasma was negative. The monospot test for heterophile antibodies (a marker of primary EBV infection) in serum was negative. A throat swab was negative for EBV (by PCR).
Biopsy of the right tibialis anterior muscle showed marked interstitial inflammation mainly by CD4 lymphocyte with occasional fibre necrosis associated with CD4 inflammation, changes consistent with multifocal myonecrosis . PCR of muscle was negative for EBV and CMV.
Other investigations in between episodes were non-contributory. These included normal CK, full blood count, random blood glucose and autoantibodies. An underlying immunodeficiency was excluded, with normal immunoglobulins, lymphocyte subsets, in vitro lymphocyte proliferation in response to phytohaemagglutinin and pokeweed mitogen. When she was well, electromyography (EMG) of her right tibialis anterior and right medial gastrocnemius muscles in May 2006 showed myopathic changes.