A 69-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with a chief complaint of abdominal discomfort. She had no history of smoking and was a social drinker. She also had a history of hyperlipidemia, depression, and uterine myoma. Body temperature was normal. Physical examination revealed no swelling of superficial lymph nodes. The patient had regular bowel movements with normal stools. She had no B symptoms, including fever, night sweats, or weight loss. Laboratory data were unremarkable: white blood cell (WBC) count, 5890/µL; hemoglobin, 13.2 g/dL; platelet count, 254,000/µL; and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level, 217 U/L. Tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were within normal ranges. The serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) level was also within normal ranges.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a well-circumscribed hypoechoic mass, contiguous with the proper muscle layer, approximately 70 mm in size, located at the middle stomach on the lesser curve . Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen demonstrated an extraluminal tumor with heterogeneous enhancement at the middle stomach on the lesser curve, accompanied with one swollen lymph node approximately 10 mm in size and several small lymph nodes in the perigastric region . These lymph nodes were flat; therefore, we considered them to be non-metastatic. No liver metastasis, peritoneal dissemination, pleural fluid, ascites, or splenomegaly was observed. Endoscopy indicated compression of the anterior wall of the gastric body along with normal mucosa . Several biopsy specimens were taken, which showed evidence of erosive hyperplastic gastritis. Endoscopic ultrasonography and endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration were not performed for the diagnosis because a SMT greater than 50 mm in size is an indication for surgery regardless of the preoperative definitive diagnosis .
Surgical exploration of the abdomen revealed no evidence of ascites or metastasis to the liver or peritoneum. An extraluminal tumor arising from the middle body of the stomach on the lesser curve was noted. The tumor was removed via wedge resection. Soft and slightly swollen lymph nodes, which were compatible with the lymph nodes noted in the preoperative CT, were found near the main tumor in the fatty tissue at the lesser curvature of the stomach. An excisional biopsy of the largest lymph node, likely compatible with the swollen lymph node seen in the preoperative CT, was performed for the diagnosis. At this point, we believed these lymph nodes to represent reactive lymphadenopathy.
The resected specimen was 80 × 60 × 50 mm in size. The tumor grew exophytically. The cut surface of the tumor revealed a well-circumscribed yellowish-white solid mass . Hematoxylin–eosin staining disclosed a bundle-like growth of the spindle-shaped tumor cells with acidophilic cytoplasm . These were composed predominantly of tumor cells arranged haphazardly (Antoni type B) and secondarily of tumor cells with nuclear palisading (Antoni type A). A peritumoral lymphoid cuff was recognized . The mitotic count was 0 to 1 per 50 high-power fields (HPFs). The tumor contained no necrosis and atypical mitosis was not identified. The resection margins were free of tumor cells. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor was negative for KIT, CD34, and desmin and positive for S-100 protein . The MIB-1 labeling index of the tumor cells was 1% to 2%. Hematoxylin–eosin staining of the lymph node showed nodular proliferation of atypical lymphoid cells composed predominantly of centrocytes with admixed scattered centroblasts . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the lymph node was positive for bcl-2, CD20, and CD79a and negative for CD3 and CD30 . These histopathological and immunohistochemical findings were consistent with a gastric schwannoma and FL. The centroblasts were noted 2 to 3 per 50 HPFs; therefore, histological grading of FL was Grade 1 .
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 9. Postoperative positron emission tomography (PET) revealed no significant accumulation of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose. Bone marrow aspiration indicated no bone marrow invasion of FL. The patient was diagnosed with a grading of stage I according to the Ann Arbor classification. The Groupe d’Etude des Lymphomes Folliculaires (GELF) criteria were applicable as low-tumor burden FL and the patient was asymptomatic; therefore, the watchful waiting approach was decided upon as follow-up . The patient is doing well without recurrence of either the gastric schwannoma or FL 28 months postsurgery.