A 57-year-old Chinese man presented to our hospital for further management of a laterally spreading tumor (LST)-like lesion in the proximal rectum accidently discovered on colonoscopy over 1 mo prior.
The biopsy results indicated an inflammatory hyperplastic polyp. The patient had no obvious symptoms and received screening endoscopy as part of a routine health examination. Gastroscopy showed chronic atrophic gastritis and inflammation of the cardia.
The patient had a history of diabetes mellitus for more than 6 mo and was administered metformin and other drugs to control his blood sugar. He also had a history of hypertension for more than 1 mo without medication.
He had a long smoking history of over 30 years, with an average of 20 cigarettes per day. He also had a drinking history for more than 30 years, with half a catty of liquor per day.
Physical examination upon admission showed that the patient was 1.82 m in height and 94 kg in weight. He had a blood pressure of 139/84 mmHg with a heart rate of 68 beat/min. He had clear lungs and normal heart sounds with no murmurs or gallops on auscultation. There were no obvious pathognomonic signs during physical examination of the abdomen.
No significant abnormal laboratory results were recorded in this patient.
Colonoscopy in our hospital also revealed a 25 mm × 20 mm, LST-like slightly elevated lesion in the proximal rectum with a red color . To observe the microstructure and capillaries of the lesion, magnifying endoscopy with narrow-band imaging (NBI) was carried out. It showed enlarged and dilated branch-like vessels on the surface of the tumor similar to those of gastric MALT lymphoma . The margin of the lesion became clearer, and a type II pit pattern was observed on magnifying endoscopy after indigo carmine staining . Gastroscopy revealed atrophic gastritis and cardia mucosa erosion with irregular microstructure and capillaries on magnifying endoscopy. The biopsy pathology indicated cardia inflammation with mild glandular atypia in the absence of H. pylori. Therefore, there were no endoscopic and pathological findings indicating gastric MALT lymphoma. Abdominal computed tomography showed no obvious abnormalities.