A 43-year-old female presented in outpatient clinic with a history of a left adnexal cyst associated with foul-smelling PV discharge for the past 3–4 months. The patient was also under medication, tab. Thyroxine sodium-50 μg per day for hypothyroidism since 2 years. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities on per-abdominal assessment. The lesion in the liver was accidental finding during the ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis. Ultrasonography (USG) and CT scans identified a 9 × 8.7 × 8.4 cm well defined hypodense lesion in the right lobe of the liver, with a differential diagnosis of focal nodular hyperplasia in CT scan. The patient got admitted and surgery (hemihepatectomy) was done.

Histopathological findings
In pathology department, a hemihepatectomy specimen was received. Gross examination of the specimen revealed a well-defined nodular growth measuring 9 × 7 × 5 cm within the liver, with a cut surface displaying a grey-white to brownish appearance. No areas of necrosis were observed.
Microscopic examination of multiple sections from the tumor mass revealed a well-circumscribed lesion characterized by spindle-shaped tumor cells arranged in fascicles and concentric pattern around numerous thin-walled capillaries. The tumor cells were exhibiting elongated nuclei and moderate cytoplasm. No atypia, mitosis, or necrosis were observed. All submitted margins were free of tumor cells. Surrounding liver parenchyma did not reveal any significant morphological changes.

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical staining done were Smooth Muscle Actin (SMA), h-Caldesmon, Desmin, CD34, STAT6, DOG1, S100 and ALK. Our differentials include neural tumors like schwannoma, so S100 was negative, solitary fibrous tumors, CD 34 and STAT6 were negative and vascular tumor, CD 34 was negative. Positivity for SMA and h-caldesmon, confirmed the myopericytic nature of the tumor. CD34 highlighted blood vessel endothelial cells. DOG-1, ALK and Desmin were negative, which ruled out the close differentials like GIST, Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor and leiomyoma and further supporting the diagnosis of myopericytoma.

Diagnosis
Based on the clinical, radiological, and histopathological findings, the diagnosis of myopericytoma of the liver was established.

Therapeutic intervention
Based on the radiological findings, hemihepatectomy was already done. No further intervention was needed after histopathological report.

Follow-up and outcomes
As the lesion was benign and completely resected, the patient was completely recovered. There were no clinical signs and symptoms related to disease and ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis was normal on follow up at 6th months.