79-year-old female with presented to emergency department with one day of abdominal pain.
She described the pain in the right upper quadrant of abdomen as sudden onset, moderate to severe in intensity, non-radiating aching associated with chest discomfort. Patient also reported more about 8 pounds weight loss over the past 5 months and poor appetite.
Her medical comorbidities include Hypertension, hyperlipidemia, Gastroesophageal reflux disease, Osteoarthritis, Rheumatoid arthritis, paraesophageal hernia. Patient denied any toxic habits.
Over the last two years’ patient had the hospitalization for the abdominal pain and dizziness. She is noted to have large HH and managed for the same. She did not report the dysphagia.
Her surgical history included right breast lumpectomy for breast cancer and status post chemotherapy and radiotherapy, left eye surgery for macular degeneration and lumbar laminectomy. She denied any thoracic surgery. Family history was negative for any gastrointestinal cancers.
On presentation her vitals were temperature: 97.1 degrees °F, pulse of 66 bpm, respiratory rate of 19/min and blood pressure of 154/77 mmHg.
On general physical examination she looked cachectic and dehydrated. Abdominal examination revealed non-distended, soft, non-tender abdomen with no rebound tenderness and normal bowel sounds. The bowel sounds could be perceived on the right chest. Exam of the cardiovascular, pulmonary and Neurological was unremarkable. Retrospectively we were not able to corroborate the radiological finding on the physical exam.
The hemoglobin of 13 gm/dL with interval decrease due to intravenous hydration. There is no significant leukocytosis and had thrombocytopenia. The renal function was well preserved. Patient was noted to have the elevated lipase at the time of the presentation. She had transaminitis and elevated alkaline phosphatase with the interval improvement during the hospitalization . Her lipase was normal at the normal at the prior hospitalization before 3 mo.
During the index hospitalization she had computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen with oral and intravenous contrast were for the further evaluation of persistent chest discomfort. CT chest revealed interval enlargement of a massive HH, containing stomach and much of the bowel as well as pancreas and distal extrahepatic biliary duct, probably responsible for obstructive effect upon same. Increased prominence of the pancreas consistent with pancreatitis. Compressive atelectasis in portions of lung adjacent to the hernia, and mass effect upon mediastinum. CT of the abdomen and pelvis with IV contrast reported as large HH causing obstructive effect with dilated biliary system along gall bladder wall edema and pancreatitis.
Ultrasound of the abdomen showed distended gallbladder, with layering sludge, and continued visibility of intrahepatic biliary ductal dilatation; extrahepatic ducts which were seen to be dilated and massive HH.
The CT of the chest performed during the prior hospitalization revealed the large HH with herniation in to chest with the stomach and colon in the its content. The pancreas was not present in the hernia content.
The final diagnosis of the presented case is Pancreatitis and hepatitis as a complication of HH.
For the management of the acute pancreatitis patient was treated with Intravenous hydration with Lactated Ringer's Solution, analgesics along and intensive care monitoring during resuscitation. We acquired surgery consultation for large HH. In view of no signs of bowel obstruction and acute pancreatitis, no emergent or urgent intervention was recommended. The hydration therapy, monitoring the tolerance of the oral dietary intake and the incentive spirometry were the mainstay of the conservative management. The spirometry induced positive pressure is expected to reduce the HH. In view of the advanced age and the high risk from surgical complications, patient and the family perused palliative care. The interval CAT scan to review the reduction hernia content was planned but could not be done.