An 87-year-old female patient with no history of diabetes or other conditions causing blood glucose abnormalities was brought to our emergency department due to an acutely altered mental state after a few-week course of headaches and decreased left vision. Notably, 2 months before admission, she was incidentally found to have a sellar mass . Initial workup revealed severe hypoglycemia (17 mg/dL), and the administration of glucose restored consciousness. Given the mild hyponatremia (131 mEq/L), relatively low levels of serum cortisol (13.3 μg/dL) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (39.7 pg/mL) despite the acute sick condition, as well as a known history of sellar mass, central adrenal insufficiency was suspected, and the patient was initiated on hydrocortisone. Further, the endocrinological evaluation revealed hypothyroidism (thyroid-stimulating hormone level, 0.36 μIU/mL; free T4 level, 0.58 ng/dL; and free T3 level, 1.5 pg/mL). Her visual field was significantly narrowed, with mildly decreased visual acuity (20/200) on the left side, although these deteriorations were deemed to be attributable to glaucoma rather than the mass, considering the mild compression of the optic apparatus as well as the atypical pattern of visual field disturbance. Given her senility, she and her family initially refused surgical intervention and imaging surveillance with cortisol replacement was initiated. Two months later, however, she complained of rapid deterioration of her left eye vision and loss of light perception. Repeat magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed rapid mass growth [ and ]. Imaging studies demonstrated a T1-isointense, T2-hyperintense, heterogeneously enhanced, and irregularly shaped mass with restricted diffusion in the sellar and suprasellar regions [-]. Marked bony erosion of the posterior clinoid process and dorsum sellae was noted . On 18fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography, the mass exhibited a maximum standardized uptake value of 6.2 . After a thorough discussion with the patient and her family, we decided to proceed with the surgery.
During surgery, a transnasal corridor was created using endoscopic visualization. The mass had destroyed the sellar floor. After opening the dura in a U-shaped fashion, the mass was piecemeal removed. It was soft, grayish, and gelatinous, compressing the normal pituitary gland to the left and invading the right cavernous sinus . Notably, the bony dorsum sellae was absent, and the sellar side of the dural membrane was almost completely torn by the mass . A bony prominence was observed on the left side of the sellar floor , which also lost its covering dura. The bony prominence was removed using a high-speed drill to access the tumor behind it. Finally, the suprasellar mass was removed while preserving the surrounding dural membrane and diaphragm. Although intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage was not apparent, we decided to reinforce the diaphragm in a multilayered fashion since the diaphragm was already thin, and we were considering postoperative radiotherapy for this patient. The sellar defects were reconstructed using in- and on-lay fascial grafts with abdominal fat pieces. The dura covering the dorsum sellae was sutured with a 4–0 STRATAFIX Spiral (Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, NJ, US) in a non-watertight fashion and was covered with pedicled sphenoid mucosa.
Postoperative imaging revealed no residual masses [ and b]. Her visual acuity improved significantly (20/40). Histological examination revealed the presence of physaliphorous cells with a background of myxoid stroma and positive immunostaining for brachyury , leading to a diagnosis of conventional chordoma. Although the Ki-67 index was not extremely high (3%), the patient was treated with upfront adjuvant stereotactic radiosurgery (20 Gy in a single fraction), given the previous rapid progression and possible minor tumor remnants around the right carotid artery. She has been free from tumor progression for 12 months.