A 55-year-old man, with severe left main coronary artery disease (CAD), and with short stature (150 cm height) and 76 kg weight, was referred to our center for coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). The patient scheduled for off-pump CABG (OPCAB).
Due to unstable hemodynamic condition, an IABP catheter (Datascope, procure, state, dual lumen, 9.5F, 34 ml, Datascope Inc., Montreal, NJ, United States) was inserted percutaneously through the right femoral artery, and was attached to the Datascope system via a console. Immediately after device insertion, with a counter pulsation and 100% augmentation, and a ratio of 1:1, the systolic blood pressure increased up to 90 mmHg, and urine output increased.
The patient underwent an OPCAB operation using conventional grafts such as the left internal thoracic artery and saphenous vein grafts. Following the extubation, urine output was decreased that managed by diuretic and fluid therapy. Although, laboratory examination showed abrupt increasing of the following test: blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 70 mg/dl, creatinine (CR): 1.6 mg/dl, aspartate transaminase (AST): 80 IU, alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 70 IU, and acetate dehydrogenase (LDH): 350 IU. AST, ALT, and LDH values elevated seriously to 1200, 3500, and 5500 IU, respectively. The BUN and creatinine also increased to 80 and 2.1 mg/dl, respectively. The mean elevation of total bilirubin was also noted (total bilirubin: 2.5 mg/dl).
The distension caused the failure of Doppler to reveal the condition of portal and liver venous and arterial flow blood flow, but showed the reduction of renal arterial blood flow. However, in a thoracic X-ray catheter’s tip was not detected, and an abdominal X-Ray showed that the balloon pump catheter’s tip was displaced distally; uncovering of catheter dressing in right thigh revealed loosing of fixation suture of catheter to the skin in its correct position .
The improper mismatching of the IABP catheter size with the patient length may be another possible cause of the liver, renal, and mesenteric arterial malperfusion in this specific case. After IABP removal, the patient urine output was abruptly increased on the following hours. Then, the liver function tests, including ALT, AST, LDH, total bilirubin, and prothrombin time continued to reduce, and recovered drastically at the 10th day of catheter removal; liver function tests returned to normal value at time of hospital discharge, too.