The patient was a 34-year-old Korean man who visited our emergency department complaining of intractable insomnia and progressive dementia. The patient suffered from intractable insomnia and irregular, coarse breathing during sleep, which began 9 months before admission. He consequently developed excessive sweating, bilateral action tremors, and restlessness. Memory disturbance and poor executive function were noticed 2 months before admission. Delusions of persecution and social withdrawal were also present. Three days before admission, the patient began to show gait disturbance with mild postural instability.
The patient had been in good health before disease onset. He had 16 years of education, majored in law, and worked as a civil servant at the district court until he lost his job due to memory disturbance.
His vital signs showed a marked fluctuation in blood pressure, tachycardia, and tachypnea. His initial body temperature was 38.0°C, which was stabilized after controlling his pneumonia.
Neurologic examination revealed disorientation and anomic aphasia with paraphasia. The Korean version of the Mini-Mental State Examination score was 17 out of 30. Hypophonia, dysarthria, both resting and action tremors, and akathisia were present. His gait was ataxic with a tendency of tilting backwards. Otherwise, cranial nerve functions, muscle volume, tone, and power as well as sensory functions were normal. Extrapyramidal signs such as rigidity or bradykinesia were absent. Deep tendon reflexes were normoactive without pathologic reflexes.
Routine blood labs showed no abnormalities. Both plasma and urine catecholamine levels were elevated. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was unremarkable and the patient was negative for 14-3-3 protein.
The patient's four-generation pedigree is presented in fig. . The patient's mother (III:7), who was a physically and mentally healthy 70-year-old woman, had the same mutation. An asymptomatic brother of the proband (IV:12) was negative for the PRNP gene mutation. The son of the patient's great-aunt (II:1) had gradually developed hypersomnia, gait disturbance, ataxia, and dysarthria. His cerebrospinal fluid study was positive for 14-3-3 protein. The genetic analysis of subject II:1 revealed a PRNP gene mutation at codon 178 (D178N) and homozygosity for methionine at codon 129. Total disease duration was 27 months.
Magnetic resonance imaging and electroencephalography findings were unremarkable. Polysomnography revealed reduced total sleep time, absence of slow-wave and REM stages of sleep, severe periodic limb movement, and heavy snoring.
Neuropsychological tests were performed using the Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery . The results are summarized in table . Forward and backward digit span were markedly reduced. The Boston Naming Test showed severely impaired confrontational naming ability. Other language functions were intact. Gerstmann syndrome, buccofacial and ideomotor apraxia were observed. The Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test revealed visuoconstructive dysfunction. The Seoul Verbal Learning Test and the Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test showed that both verbal and visual memory functions were severely impaired. Frontal surveys revealed poor frontal executive function, generative naming abilities, and inhibitory control.
Genomic DNA isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes was used for analysis. Direct sequencing of the PRNP gene identified a heterozygous p. Asp179Asn mutation homozygous for methionine at codon 129 and for glutamate at codon 219.
The patient's FDG-PET scan showed mild hypometabolism in the bilateral frontal cortices and bilateral thalamus . Using SPM analysis, the patient's PET scan was compared with those of 7 healthy male controls . The results of the SPM analysis showed marked hypometabolism in the patient's deep cerebral nuclei including the bilateral thalami, caudate nuclei, and hypothalamus. In addition, the hypometabolism affected association cortices including the frontal, lateral temporal, inferior parietal lobule, and posterior cingulate gyri; among these, frontal association areas including the dorsolateral, medial and orbitofrontal areas were more dominantly affected than the other lobes. Lastly, in addition to cerebral lesions, the midbrain was also affected.