A 43-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with a 20-day history of fever, predominantly at nights and headaches. His previous medical history is unremarkable; he only referred to a 20-year history of smoking and denied use of intravenous or recreational drugs, any prior sexually transmitted diseases, or blood transfusions. At presentation, the patient had a blood pressure of 109/75 mmHg, heart rate 87 bpm, respiration rate 24 breaths/minute, temperature 38.5°C, and oxygen saturation of 70% at atmospheric pressure. Physical examination revealed pale skin and mucosa; tongue and soft palate had lesions consistent with oral candidiasis and congestive pharynx. Pulmonary fields revealed decreased sounds without crackles or wheezing and painful hepatomegaly and extremities with hyperchromic nodular lesions on both ankles, suggestive of Kaposi sarcoma. Due to these findings, initial blood tests included HIV serology that came out positive; CBC: Hb 11.1 g/dL, hematocrit 33.8%, WBC 7,100/mm3, lymphocytes 3%, and neutrophils 95%; IgE 788.2 UI/ml; VSG 77 mm/hr; TGO 91 UI/L; TGP 66 UI/L; and DHL 2250 UI/L. Chest X-ray revealed disseminated infiltrates in both lungs. Medical management was initiated with omeprazole, metamizole, and oxygen with nasal prongs 3 L/min. On day 2 of hospitalization, the bronchoscopy fluid examination resulted positive for C. albicans and negative for other pathogenic bacteria and fungi. However, we decided to start dexamethasone 6 mg IV, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 160/800 mg, nebulization with ipratropium, and budesonide due to high suspicion of P. jirovecii infection. On day 3 of hospitalization, HIV infection was confirmed with a viral load of 531,000 copies/ml and CD4+ T-cell count of 11 cells/mm3. Other studies were performed including a PPD (negative test 0 mm) and anticytomegalovirus serology (IgG positive). On day 4 of hospitalization, the infectious disease division started ART with ritonavir/lopinavir, tenofovir, and emtricitabine. During the subsequent days, the patient showed clinical improvement. However, on day 13, his clinical condition declined with progressive dyspnea, severe dysphagia, and abdominal pain. Auscultation showed basal rales in both lungs; a new chest X-ray demonstrated no changes compared with the previous one. New blood tests included CBC: Hb 14.5 g/dl, hematocrit 44%, VCM 90 fL, platelets 284,000 × 103, WBC 18,400/mm3, neutrophils 89%, and lymphocytes 5%. Serum electrolytes, glucose, BUN, and creatinine had no alterations. He developed dysphagia and episodes of oxygen desaturation partially corrected with nasal prongs. On day 19 of hospitalization, due to continuous episodes of low oxygen saturation, a chest CT-scan was ordered , showing generalized lung involvement and mediastinal adenopathy (Video 1 in Supplementary Material ).
Supplementary Video 1 showed digitalized CT-scan of the thorax in coronal sectioning.
Later that day, an endoscopy showed chronic reflux esophagitis (Grade D of the Los Angeles Classification System), with ulceration . On day 23 of hospitalization, dyspnea worsened; oxygen supply was administered with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). A pulmonary biopsy was performed on day 24, which reported CMV pneumonia ; the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to persistent hypoxemia and was started on methylprednisolone 500 mg IV (maintained for 2 days) and ganciclovir 500 mg IV, and ART was changed to efavirenz, emtricitabine, and tenofovir, to decrease pill intake (1 pill/day). Intravenous sedation was initiated and oxygen supply was maintained with CPAP. The patient had 2 episodes of heart failure that required management with furosemide and nitroglycerin. He developed fever and respiratory distress with episodes of delirium treated with antipsychotics; we suspected the development of IRIS due to a paradoxical worsening of his condition despite being treated with ART and ganciclovir. Therefore, we started methylprednisolone and thalidomide 100 mg/day for immunosuppression and immunomodulation, respectively. After 17 days in the ICU, the oxygen requirements began to drop and the mental status improved. He remained hemodynamically stable with clinical and radiological improvemt. A new viral load reported 12,800 copies/ml. A new CBC reported hemoglobin 8 g/dL, hematocrit 26.4%, MCV 29 pg., platelets 366,000, WBC 7,400 mm3, neutrophils 86%, and lymphocytes 6%. Patient was discharged from the hospital after 45 days of treatment .