A 68-year-old woman was referred to our hospital on December 2011, due to right upper quadrant pain and a 5-pound weight loss.
Other symptoms were not presented and she did not drink alcohol, smoke or have a history of surgery.
Physical examination revealed a soft abdomen, no tenderness, no rebound tenderness, and no palpable lymph nodes or abdominal mass.
The following laboratory data were recorded: hemoglobin of 125 g/L; white cell count of 5.5 × 109/L, with 72.5% neutrophils; platelet count of 234 × 109 L; alanine aminotransferase of 25 U/L; serum total protein of 75 g/L; albumin of 37.2 g/L; total bilirubin of 11 μmol/L; direct bilirubin of 9.5 μmol/L; α-fetoprotein of 5.23 ng/mL; and carcinoembryonic antigen of 4.5 ng/L. Serological markers for hepatitis B virus and HCV were negative. The indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 2.2%.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed there was a mixed echoic mass measuring around 10 cm × 7 cm in the right hepatic lobe. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a similar finding, that the tumor was inhomogeneous density, with mild delayed enhancement, and had central necrosis . Gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy showed negative findings. Chest CT showed no mass over the lung.
Preoperative diagnosis was unconfirmed, exploratory laparotomy was performed 1 wk after admission, and no obvious effusion was found in the abdominal cavity. The entire liver VIII was occupied by a creamy white, firm mass measuring about 10 cm × 7 cm, which protruded into the abdominal cavity and appeared to invade the diaphragm and middle hepatic vein , making the tumor unresectable ; thus, a biopsy was performed. Rapid frozen-section biopsy analysis considered the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. Histopathological examination showed a hepatic mass that consisted of spindle-shaped cells with mitotic figures and nuclear atypia . Immunohistochemical staining showed that spindle-shaped cells were positive for anti-smooth muscle actin and desmin but negative for keratin, S-100, CD34 and CD117. No obvious lesions were observed in the bilateral adnexa and uterus, and no palpable mass was detected in the superficial body.