A 28-year-old female with no significant past medical history was apparently healthy until presenting to the emergency department with 1 week of worsening diffuse abdominal pain. Her intermittent pain had suddenly worsened over night which prompted her hospital visit. This sudden escalation in pain was also accompanied with multiple episodes of vomiting. She had been constipated with no bowel movement for the entire week prior to presenting to the hospital. The patient stated to have a well-balanced diet and live an active lifestyle for most of her life.
Upon physical examination, the patient was in serious distress due to pain. Her vital signs were within normal limits. Her abdomen was very tender to palpations in all four quadrants. Rebound tenderness was also present. These signs and symptoms were of major concern, as they pointed towards the patient having developed peritonitis. A computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was conducted and was highly suggestive of a sigmoid colon volvulus. The CT showed a largely dilated colon with a pathognomonic “whirl” pattern present (see Fig. ).
Clinical suspicion for potential bowel necrosis was high given the patient’s peritoneal signs and sudden worsening of symptoms. Therefore, the patient underwent an emergent laparotomy. A sigmoidectomy of the distended portion of bowel was performed (see Fig. ). The remaining proximal and distal ends were inspected to be clean and a primary anastomotic continuity of the bowel was created. Intra-operatively, we noted an abnormally redundant sigmoid colonic mesentery.
The pathology report of the resected specimen revealed necrotic bowel with evidence of ischemic changes and focal ulcerations. Ischemic changes seen on microscopy included mucosal sloughing, mucosal hemorrhages, and fibrin deposition (see Fig. ). The patient recovered without complication with return to enteral nutrition and resumed bowel function. She was subsequently discharged on post operative day number five.