A 51 year-old male veteran presented with progressive lethargy, fevers and constant frontotemporal headache for past 3 weeks as well as 20 pound weight loss in past 6 months. Born in Guam, the patient had been stationed as part of the military in Texas, Arizona and Kansas. His medical history was notable for polycythemia vera (PCV) treated with ruxolitinib for 18 months. Three months before admission, he had recurrent mouth ulcers, followed by a dental root canal procedure complicated by ulcerative gingivitis, pulpitis and tooth erosions requiring antibiotics and multiple oral surgeries. All antimicrobials had been discontinued over a month prior to presentation.
On admission the patient was febrile to 103.5 °F, tachycardic, and saturating 95% on 2 l of oxygen by nasal cannula. Physical exam revealed somnolence, diminished breath sounds at the left lung base and diffuse abdominal tenderness. Neurologic exam identified no focal deficits. Initial laboratory studies (normal range) revealed hyponatremia to 125 (136–145) mmol/L and a creatinine elevation to 1.8 (0.67–1.17) mg/dL. He also had an elevated alkaline phosphatase of 208 (35–140) U/L and total bilirubin of 1.6 (< 1.2) mg/dL. White cell count was 8002 (4000-10,000) cells/mm3 with 74% polymorphonuclear cells and 13% lymphocytes. The C-reactive protein level was 3.89 (< 0.5) mg/dL and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 36 (< 30) mm/hr. Rapid HIV antibody testing, as well as HIV viral load, were negative.
The brain MRI revealed innumerable rim enhancing lesions at the gray-white junction consistent with pyogenic abscesses secondary to hematogenous infection . A lumbar puncture revealed 10 mononuclear cells and 9 polymorphonuclear cells/ml CSF. Glucose was 27 (40–70) mg/dL and protein was 72 (15–45) mg/dL. Vancomycin, ceftriaxone and metronidazole were initiated empirically.
The patient subsequently underwent chest and abdominal CT examinations to evaluate diminished breath sounds and abdominal tenderness. A retrocardiac mass was seen measuring 2.7 cm as well as bilaterally enlarged adrenal glands consistent with infiltrative infection or neoplasm.
CSF cultures grew no bacteria; however, cryptococcal antigen was detected with titer of 1:> 256 in CSF and 1:128 in the serum. Fungal CSF cultures grew Cryptococcus neoformans. An adrenal biopsy performed by interventional radiology revealed numerous fungal organisms on histopathology. Gomorri methenamine silver (GMS) and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stains highlighted budding yeast forms within macrophages, most consistent with histoplasmosis. Histoplasma capsulatum subsequently grew in fungal blood cultures. Histoplasma antigen was 11.9 (< 0.5) ng/mL in urine, 8.46 (< 0.4) ng/mL in the serum and 1.86 (< 0.4) ng/mL in CSF. Cryptococcal susceptibilities ultimately returned with an MIC of < 0.03 μg/ml to isavuconazole and 0.25 μg/ml to posaconazole; Histoplasma susceptibilities were < 0.03 μg/ml to both isavuconazole and posaconazole. The patient was diagnosed with concurrent cryptococcal meningitis as well as disseminated histoplasmosis.
Amphotericin infusion as Ambisome at 5 mg/kg every 48 h with flucytosine 1 g q6hrs were initiated for treatment of both identified fungal organisms with improvement of symptoms. Given limited evidence of the successful use of the newer azoles, posaconazole [–] and isavuconazole [–] for CNS disease, the patient was continued on amphotericin infusions for three months and transitioned to 372 mg isavuconazole daily when renal toxicity was noted with Ambisome. A follow up MRI at that time demonstrated diminishing rim-enhancing lesions. The retrocardiac mass was smaller in size on repeat imaging; however, the appearance of the adrenal glands remained unchanged. Cryptococcal antigen titers were 1:16 in serum and 1:8 in CSF. Histoplasmosis antigen in the urine was 0.83 (< 0.5) ng/mL and was no longer detected in the serum. A biopsy of the brain lesions was not performed; however, we hypothesized that the brain lesions were caused by hematogenous spread of histoplasmosis to the gray-white junction with resulting granuloma formation. At the time this case report was written, the patient was still being treated with isavuconazole.
Of note, once the patient was diagnosed with the two fungal infections, ruxolitinib was discontinued. Given the severity of his presentation, his primary oncologist believed that a re-challenge with ruxolitinib was contraindicated.
After further discussion with the patient, he had recollected a 2 cm ulcerative, painful tongue mass that first appeared three months after initiating ruxolitinib. This had been biopsied in the past and was not malignant, but had not been evaluated with fungal culture. Retrospective review of the pathology slides was suggestive of histoplasmosis, with small budding yeast forms noted within granulomas on GMS stain .