A British Caucasian girl aged 14 years was referred to our clinic with a double thoracic scoliosis. She was diagnosed with RTS-2 on the basis of clinical findings and genetic testing. A physical examination demonstrated down-slanting palpebral fissures, bilateral proptosis, divergent squint right eye, micrognathia and microcephaly, a high arched and narrow palate, dental crowding, ears posteriorly rotated, and arachnodactyly. As part of the underlying condition, our patient had marked nasal speech and mild to moderate right conductive hearing impairment. She had developmental delay and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. She had a learning disability (intelligence quotient (IQ) 60) and delay in fine motor skills. There was no history of recurrent chest infections or gastroesophageal reflux. There was no family history of syndromic conditions or scoliosis. The scoliosis was first noted at the age of 13 years during an assessment of a chest infection by her pediatrician. No treatment was given at that stage and the deformity gradually progressed. At presentation to our clinic, she was post-menarche with height 137cm, arm span 144cm, body weight 27kg, and body mass index 9.8kg/m2.
On clinical examination, our patient had a severe double left upper and right lower thoracic scoliosis. Her thoracic spine across the more severe right thoracic curve was rotated to the right, with marked ipsilateral prominence of her rib cage and scapula and associated hypokyphosis. There was also thoracic translocation and listing of her trunk to the right, with associated waistline asymmetry and prominence of the left side of her pelvis. Her pelvis was level with no evidence of leg-length discrepancy. There were no skin or soft tissue abnormalities overlying her spine. Our patient reported no neurological symptoms. A neurological examination confirmed normal tone, muscle power, sensation and tendon reflexes in her upper and lower limbs, as well as symmetrically elicited abdominal reflexes. There were no upper motor neuron signs. Moderate ligamentous laxity was noted.
Radiographs of her spine during the initial assessment revealed a right thoracic scoliosis extending from T6 to L2, measuring 46°, and a left upper thoracic scoliosis extending from T1 to T6, measuring 30°. The rotatory component of the deformity resulted in marked thoracic hypokyphosis, which in turn significantly reduced the anteroposterior diameter of her chest, as well as the space available for her lungs. There were no congenital anomalies affecting her vertebral column or chest wall. There were also no features suggestive of congenital spinal stenosis, with the interpedicular distance within normal limits across all spinal segments. Her Risser grade was 0 with open triradiate cartilage bilaterally, indicating that she had significant remaining skeletal growth.
Because of the severity of her scoliosis, we decided to proceed with surgical correction. In the presence of the underlying syndromic condition, a pre-operative assessment was organized that included spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) under general anesthesia as well as cardiac; anesthetic; ear, nose and throat; psychological; and respiratory reviews. We encountered extreme difficulty in concluding the pre-operative assessment because our patient’s anxiety, behavioral problems and poor cooperation resulted in severe delays.
The MRI of the spine demonstrated no intra-spinal anomalies, normal appearance of the pedicles and no spinal stenosis. There was no evidence of tracheal or bronchial obstruction. The psychological evaluation concluded that our patient was cognitively and emotionally younger than her chronological age and consistent with that of a child aged seven to eight years. The cardiac evaluation, including electrocardiogram and ultrasound, showed normal function. The respiratory review, including chest radiographs, capillary blood gas sample and sleep studies, demonstrated restrictive pulmonary disease with marked deterioration of lung functions, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 0.79L (38% predicted) and forced vital capacity (FVC) 0.88L (37% predicted). Pre-operative blood results were within normal limits. At the time of surgery, 10 months after her initial clinical presentation, the degree of scoliosis in the thoracic curves had progressed to 39° and 68° respectively. Both curvatures were significantly rigid on a supine maximum traction radiograph, with the flexibility index being 7% and 20% for the upper and lower thoracic scoliosis respectively.
Our patient was admitted to our hospital on the day of surgery and the plan was for her to receive a dose of midazolam as pre-medication before transfer to theater. However, she refused to take her pre-medication or go to theater, despite efforts and involvement of allied health specialists (specialist spinal nurse, learning disability nurse and health play specialist). This resulted in cancellation of the procedure. Additional psychological support sessions were offered to our patient and the surgery was re-scheduled with a different anesthetic plan. A peripheral intravenous access was secured when performing pre-operative blood tests that allowed us to administer propofol and remifentanil in the Surgical Admissions Unit. She was subsequently transported to theater with an oxygen face mask, where intubation was performed without complications. There were no difficulties during intubation related to our patient’s craniofacial anomalies.Our patient (now 15 years old) underwent a posterior spinal arthrodesis extending from T2 to L4 with the use of a pedicle hook, screw and single concave rod instrumentation . We performed subperiosteal exposure of the spine to the tips of the transverse processes with extensive facetectomies to mobilize the curve and allow for placement of the instrumentation and extensive decortication. This was followed by an interfacetal and intertransverse arthrodesis using locally harvested bone from the spinous processes and supplemented by allograft bone. Correction of the scoliosis was achieved through apical translation, rod de-rotation, and proximal or distal distraction of the construct. We monitored her spinal cord during the operation, recording cortical and cervical somatosensory as well as transcranial motor evoked potentials, and there were no problems. A nasogastric tube was placed at completion of surgery to allow early instigation of feedings. Our patient was transferred to our intensive care unit still intubated.Our patient was extubated on her first post-operative day and remained in our intensive care unit for two days. Feedings were achieved through a nasogastric tube with the addition of nutritional supplements. An underarm spinal jacket was applied for six months after surgery to provide additional support. Her total hospital stay was 17 days and overnight nasogastric feedings were continued at home. Post-operative radiographs showed satisfactory correction of both thoracic curves to 18° and 30° respectively and restoration of the sagittal balance of her spine .
At her latest follow-up, two years and three months after surgery, our patient had no complaints of her back and she had returned to her normal activities. She was skeletally mature and spinal radiographs demonstrated no loss of scoliosis correction, no non-union and no add-on junctional deformity above or below the levels of the fusion. Repeat pulmonary function tests demonstrated a mild improvement in her lung function compared with her pre-operative tests, with FEV1 of 0.86L (47% predicted) and FVC of 0.94L (49% predicted).