A 70-year-old woman of Iranian descent was referred to our trauma unit for a major scald burn. The exact mechanism of injury was inconclusive. The patient had a history of diabetes mellitus type 2, ischemic heart disease, hypertension, hyperparathyroidism, hyperlipidemia, chronic bronchitis, glaucoma, and mild depressive disorder. She had been receiving treatment on a regular basis with the following medications: amitriptyline, enalapril, glyburide, verapamil, omeprazole, aspirin, simvastatin, theophylline, furosemide, metformin, citropram, dorzolamide hydrochloride eye drops, and latanoprost eye drops.
On admission, the patient was disoriented. Blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg. Cutaneous examination revealed a second-degree superficial burn involving both breasts, lateral aspect of the flanks, anteromedial aspect of the arms, medial aspect of the thighs, and the right scapular region. Diffuse erythema was noted, especially of the upper extremity and anterior trunk .
A presumptive diagnosis of a second-degree, superficial major scald burn affecting 26% of the total body surface area (TBSA) was made. Fluid resuscitation was initiated according to the Parkland formula . A Foley catheter was inserted. Local treatment included wound debridement and application of saline-soaked gauze.
Physician examination 12 hours post-admission to the Burn Unit was remarkable for thin blisters in locations not affected on admission: back, neck, inguinal region, and both knees , ultimately effecting 35% of the TBSA. The worsened epidermolysis was accompanied by a positive Nikolsky sign.
On further questioning, burn was ruled out as a causal factor. The patient reported that 2 days prior to admission, she had been discharged from another hospital with a diagnosis of pneumonia, and she had been receiving ceftriaxone for 4 days.
The final diagnosis was TEN due to ceftriaxone intake. The mucous membranes were not involved. Treatment with intravenous hydrocortisone 500 mg was initiated. The hypoglycemia (glucose level-45 mg/dl) was successfully treated with intravenous dextrose 5%, and the oral hypoglycemic medications were discontinued. Laboratory studies revealed hypomagnesemia (1.32 mg/dl), for which intravenous MgS04 was administered. Local treatment included Vaseline gauze dressings that were changed once a day.
On the second day of admission, the patient's temperature began to rise. Complete blood count revealed leukopenia of 2,300 mg/dl. Incisional punch biopsy demonstrated widespread full-thickness epidermal necrosis . The dermis was devoid of inflammatory cells. Histopathological findings were compatible with the diagnosis of TEN. The patient was referred to our intensive care unit (ICU), and treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) was initiated (0.5 g/kg daily for 4 days, the total daily dose of IVIG was 40 grams). The hemodynamic instability was successfully treated with inotropic agents and mechanical ventilation.
Blood culture results, obtained during the patient's hospitalization in the ICU, were positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus mirabilis, Enterobacter, Enterococcus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antibiotic treatment included vancomycin, levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, ampicillin sulbactam, piperacillin tazobactam, and amikacin sulfate. The clinical course was complicated by adult respiratory distress syndrome, thrombocytopenia, and hypoglycemic episodes. Following prolonged ventilation, tracheostomy was performed. After 42 days in the ICU, the patient was found to be hemodynamically stable and afebrile, and was discharged to rehabilitation. Study of the cutaneous lesions demonstrated re-epithelization with successful wound healing. Mild pigmentary alterations remained with no residual scars. Despite the favorable course of TEN in this case, the patient succumbed to intracranial hemorrhage 4 months later. This outcome was entirely unrelated to TEN.