In this report, the case of a 27-year-old Italian woman (height, 164 cm; weight, 55 kg) was presented during the second month of her first pregnancy. She had no history of illness until 25 years of age, when she developed general fatigue and bleeding tendency and the symptoms led to diagnosis of Gaucher disease. The diagnosis was based on anemia, thrombocytopenia, elevated levels of serum acid phosphatase and angiotensin-converting enzyme, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, the presence of Gaucher cells in bone marrow aspiration. No other family members were suffering from the disease. DNA analysis of the GBA gene revealed that she was heterozygous for the c.1448T > C (p.L444P) mutation. The treatment for the patient started with 19-38 units/kg of imiglucerase (Cerezyme; Genzyme, MA, USA) every two weeks. The patient underwent elective splenec-tomy at age 26 years for massive splenomegaly. Menorrhagia improved, hemoglobin concentration and platelet count normalized, biomarkers of disease (chitotriosidase, acid phosphatase, and angiotensin-1-converting enzyme) improved, and liver volumes decreased. The patient became pregnant at 27 years of age and, with informed consent, continued imiglucerase treatment throughout all pregnancy, as previously described at Salesi Mother and Child Teaching Hospital of Ancona (Italy) in the year 2012. Genetic counseling was performed at the first obstetric examination and a prenatal testing for Gaucher disease and amniotic fluid sampling (16th week) were carried out, thereby, the existence of the disease and other chromosomic anomalies was excluded.
By the second month of pregnancy, monthly obstetric ultrasound and blood sampling were performed and by week 20 of gestation bi-weekly determinations of blood counts revealed that hemoglobin levels were ranging from 9.8 to 10.9 g/dl and platelet counts from 96,000 to 135,000/mm3. The prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time were normal. The biophysical profile studies, as well as Doppler analysis, were repeated every two weeks in outpatient clinic of our teaching hospital. In the 39th week of pregnancy, an elective cesarean section on maternal choice was carried out and a male baby of 3180 g was delivered. Epidural anesthesia was chosen with nasal oxygen throughout. No adverse neonatal outcomes and no congenital anomalies were registered. An uneventful recovery period was observed and the patient was discharged on the 4th postoperative day. No postoperative complications were observed after delivery. X-ray examination after delivery revealed no bone abnormalities and finally no further increase in the size of the patient's spleen was observed. The patient decided not to breastfeed.
This study was approved by the local departmental ethics committee and written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the case report to be published.