A 53-year-old Canadian Caucasian woman, who was a clerical worker, presented to her family doctor with a five week history of progressive pain and black discoloration of the distal right third finger. She was initiated on acetylsalicylic acid and warfarin and referred to a regional tertiary care hospital.
Her past medical history included depression and a diagnosis of Wolfe Parkinson White (WPW) syndrome, treated since childhood with verapamil. She was taking no other medications. She has never smoked and denied a history of Raynaud's type changes in her digits. Her connective tissue disease review of systems was also otherwise unremarkable.
On examination in the emergency room, there was obvious digital necrosis of the distal right third finger with an adjacent area of pale swollen tissue with ulceration . Allen's test was abnormal with poor refill bilaterally. Capillaroscopic examination of the periungal regions did not reveal dilated capillary loops. No peripheral bruits were audible. A teleangiectasia lesion was evident on the fifth digit. No other skin changes, specifically sclerodactyly, were present. She was admitted to hospital for further investigations and consultation with vascular specialists.
An angiogram revealed evidence of a bilateral obliterative vasculopathic process . Radiographs of the hands did not reveal any bony abnormality. Further investigations revealed a positive antinuclear antibody with titer > 1280 and anticentromere specificity. ACA were confirmed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) at greater than 100 U/mL. Anti-double stranded DNA, anti-Sjogrens Syndrome A, anti-Sjogrens Syndrome B and anti-ribonucleoprotein antibodies (anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-RNP), anti-Sm, anti-Scl-70, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anticardiolipin antibodies, cryoglobulins, C3, C4, C-reactive protein, complete blood count, electrolytes, creatinine, hepatic transaminases, alkaline phosphatase and urinalysis were all normal or negative. Associated underlying pathology including cardiopulmonary, gastrointestinal and renal involvement were excluded through cardiology consultation, chest radiograph, echocardiogram, pulmonary function testing, high-resolution computerized tomography (CT) of the chest, 24 hour urine for creatinine clearance, serum chemistry and urinalysis, barium swallow, and CT abdomen and pelvis.
In hospital she was initiated on clopidogrel bisulfate, pentoxifylline, topical nitropaste, a two week trial of prednisone, a seven day course of clindamycin and morphine for pain control. Nifedipine was later initiated as an out-patient. Gradually over the next two months the necrosis resolved with minimal tissue loss at the digit tip. She continues to be followed in the rheumatology out-patient clinic with periodic evaluations for potential evolution of connective tissue disease and in cardiology clinic for follow-up of her WPW.