A 56-year-old female was referred for a painless tongue lesion of three-month duration. The patient had unremarkable medical history, was normolipemic, nonalcohol drinker, smoker (6–19 cigarettes/day) for 30 years, and was taking no medications. On clinical examination, an asymptomatic pink-white, well-demarcated, sessile lesion with a granular surface and slightly raised margins measuring 1 × 0.5 × 0.3 cm was observed in the left lateral lingual border which extended to the ventral surface of the tongue. The lesion was soft in consistency on palpation and closely related to an area of combined white plaque and striae . Similar white striae in a reticular pattern were also observed in the right and left buccal mucosa consistent with the clinical diagnosis of OLP . There was no evidence of cervical lymph node enlargement. The extraoral examination performed by a dermatologist did not reveal any skin or genital lesions. Regarding the tongue lesion, the possibility of malignancy arising within OLP of the reticular/hypertrophic type was taken under consideration. An incisional biopsy was performed under local anesthesia from a region that included both the granular and the whitish tongue lesions.
Microscopic examination showed hyperparakeratosis and acanthosis with projections of the surface epithelium in a verrucous pattern, intense orange parakeratin plugs, and elongated thickened rete ridges . Epithelial cell atypia was not evident. Accumulation of foamy cells in the subepithelial connective tissue confined in the lamina propria papillae was noted with sparse inflammatory infiltrates . The oral mucosa adjacent to the lesion demonstrated histopathological features consistent with lichen planus. Specifically, the epithelial hyperplastic pattern in a transitional manner changed into a relatively thinner squamous epithelium that exhibited parakeratosis, basal cell hydropic degeneration, and a band-like subepithelial dense chronic inflammatory infiltrate mainly by lymphocytes (, inset). Based on the clinical and histopathological findings, a final diagnosis of VX with concomitant oral lichen planus features was rendered using the accepted diagnostic criteria for OLP .
Immunohistochemical evaluation on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections was performed using CD68 antibody (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) on a Ventana NexES automated immunohistochemistry system (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ). The foamy cells exhibited strong immunostaining for CD68 .
The postsurgical healing was satisfactory, and complete removal was performed approximately two weeks after the incisional biopsy. Since OLP lesions remained unchanged and asymptomatic, no medications were prescribed, but follow-up was recommended. There was no evidence of recurrence after excision in a 7-year follow-up period, whereas the bilateral reticular OLP lesions on the buccal mucosa remained unchanged after the initial presentation.