A 24-year-old man was referred to our center complaining of bilateral ocular irritation and progressive visual deterioration over the past 4 years. Past ocular history was negative for wearing contact lenses or previous ocular infections and there was no family history of ocular disorders. Previous records revealed no gross ocular abnormalities until 4 years ago. The patient reported pain, redness and swelling in the distal joints of his hands, and had been diagnosed with seropositive rheumatoid arthritis since the age of sixteen. The proximal interphalangial (PIP) and metacarpophalangial (MCP) joints in both hands were principally involved resulting in significant deformity in the fifth fingers . At presentation, rheumatoid arthritis was well controlled with hydroxychloroquine under observation of a rheumatologist.
On ophthalmic examination, uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/50 bilaterally which improved to 20/20 in both eyes with − 0.25 − 4.25@48 ° and − 0.75 − 2.00@100 ° in the right and left eyes respectively. Keratometric readings were 47.00×140, 43.25×50; and 43.00×100, 44.75×10 in the right and left eyes, respectively.
Slit lamp biomicroscopy revealed normal lid margins without any signs of meibomian gland dysfunction or blepharitis; the tear meniscus and tear break up time were within normal limits. The conjunctiva was slightly injected near the limbus but the sclera was normal. Marked corneal thinning and bulging was noted in the whole periphery of the cornea; this circumferential gutter was 1.5–2 millimeters in width with superficial vascularization but had an intact epithelium. Circumferential lipid deposition was detected in front of the leading vascular edge. The central cornea however, was clear and free of lipid deposits and vascularization . These features were similar to manifestations of Terrien’s marginal degeneration.
In addition to the above-mentioned findings, broad bands and vesicles were present on the corneal endothelial surface. The band-like lesions had parallel scalloped edges which did not taper toward the ends and were more prominent with retroillumination . The appearance of the lesions was typical for posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy.
The anterior chamber was deep and the lens and iris were normal with no sign of current or previous inflammation. Intraocular pressure measured with Goldmann applanation tonometry was 6 and 7 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Gonioscopy was unremarkable and the angle appeared open. Posterior segment examination was also unremarkable. Ultrasonic pachymetry revealed central and mean peripheral thickness of 450 μm and 390 μm respectively in the right cornea. Corresponding values for the left cornea were 506 μm and 250 μm. Corneal thickness was most significantly attenuated in the superior corneal periphery.