A 70-year-old Japanese woman presented with a history of neck pain for 14 days before visiting our hospital. She had not been exposed to tuberculosis and had no history of recent head or neck injuries or diabetes mellitus. Her neck motion was slightly limited and she did not present with any neurological abnormality. Plain lateral X-ray showed calcification in the interlaminar space at C5-C6. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed low signal on both T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) . Her neck pain was relieved gradually with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Two months after her initial admission, her severe neck pain recurred. She had a moderately high fever (37.5 °C) on her second admission, and her neck pain was so severe that she could not move her neck in any direction. She did not complain of any joint pain suggesting arthritis. A physical examination revealed a severely limited range of motion of her neck in all directions. Her motor strength and sensation of her upper and lower extremities were unremarkable, and she had normal deep tendon reflexes. Her visual analog scale (VAS) pain score was 100 mm at her second visit, white blood cell count was 7800/mm3 (normal range, 3500–9300/mm3), and C-reactive protein was 5.13 mg/dL (normal range, 0–0.3 mg/dL). Computed tomography (CT) showed a high-density area between the C5 and C6 laminae with suspected calcification of the yellow ligament . MRI showed intermediate-signal intensity on T1WI, and high-signal intensity on T2WI surrounding a low-signal region on both T1WI and T2WI with cord compression , suggesting pseudogout attack or epidural abscess. Although NSAIDs were administrated, her neck pain persisted. Surgical decompression with C6 laminectomy and removal of the C5-C6 yellow ligament was performed 2 weeks after her second admission. There was a turbid, yellow fluid collection in the yellow ligament at the time of operation. There were visible calcifications in the yellow ligament, and dura adhered to the yellow ligament. Histologically, CPPD crystals were found in the fluid , and she was diagnosed with a pseudogout attack of the yellow ligament. Our patient’s postoperative course was unremarkable. Her neck pain decreased, and laboratory data normalized 3 weeks after the operation.
Six months postoperatively she had no further severe neck pain. At a follow-up evaluation 7 years after initial onset, our patient had complete relief of neck pain, and there were no neurological abnormalities.