A 61-year-old Bedouin man presented to a local hospital in September 2021 with a history of a black scorpion sting to his right eye, when he suddenly felt severe pain in his right eye and flanks along with loss of consciousness. He was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit until his case improved. The scorpion was later found hidden within his clothes, identified as Androctonus crassicauda, commonly known as the Arabian fat-tailed scorpion, a type of arachnid that is widespread in the desert of Jordan.

Initial Ocular Presentation: February–March 2022
Two days after the bite, the patient described having severe tearing pain in the right eye, headache and loss of vision that lasted later for a month. Subsequently, he sought medical treatment from five different private ophthalmologists without improvement. Consequently, the patient was referred to our tertiary ophthalmic center, and he had been on atropine 1% eye drops twice daily, moxifloxacin eye drops 0.5% four times a day, acyclovir eye ointment 5% four times a day, oral acyclovir 400 mg four times a day, and oral Levofloxacin 500mg once a day.

Upon examination at our center, the patient was presented with visual acuity of counting fingers close in the right eye, crescent-shaped epithelial defect, central corneal thinning surrounded by infiltrate (5mmx5mm), severe ciliary injection and hypopyon (3mm), all consistent with signs of keratitis. The treatment plan was modified as follows: the initial treatment plan was maintained with atropine 1% twice daily - and oral levofloxacin 500mg once a day, while the frequency of oral acyclovir 400 mg was increased to 5 times/day. Newly added medications included fortified vancomycin eye drops 5% every hour, fortified amikacin eye drop 2.5% every hour and lubricant eye drops every 1 hour. Topical moxifloxacin and acyclovir ointment were discontinued, and the patient was discharged with a follow-up appointment scheduled after 2 days.

Two days later, the patient returned to the outpatient clinic with a deterioration in vision, presented with a visual acuity of hand motion. There was no improvement in clinical signs, including a hypopyon of 2.5 mm, a large central ulcer with thinning, ciliary injection, and mild eyelid swelling. Consequently, the patient was admitted to the inpatient department. After 3 days of no improvement, amphotericin-b fortified eye drops 0.15% were added every hour, alternating with fortified vancomycin 5% and amikacin 2.5% every hour. One-week post-admission, clinical examination revealed a 1.5 mm hypopyon and a corneal ulcer. Antibiotics were discontinued to obtain an eye swab and fungal cultures, which returned negative. Treatment was adjusted, changing the frequency of fortified antibiotics every 4 hours (amikacin 2.5%, vancomycin 5%, amphotericin b 0.15%). Loteprednol etabonate 0.5%, and chloramphenicol eye ointment 1% were then added to the treatment plan 1 week later.

Three weeks after presentation, his exam revealed a visual acuity of counting fingers close in his right eye, hypopyon 2 mm, ciliary injection, and a large area of infiltrates with an overlying epithelial defect. All fortified antibiotics and antifungal eye drops were discontinued after the corneal ulcer improved, with a significant reduction in symptoms, including less pain. The patient was maintained on lubricant eye drops every 2 hours, moxifloxacin 0.5% eye drops 6 times/day, chloramphenicol eye ointment 1%, and atropine 1% every 12 hours. Despite the improvement, the patient was not yet discharged due to the need for continued monitoring and treatment.

At discharge, the corneal ulcer continued to show signs of improvement, with resolved hypopyon, formation of a scar overlying the corneal infiltrate and reduced ciliary injection with a visual acuity of 20/60 for the patient was discharged on lubricants every hour, cyclopentolate 1% every 12 hours, loteprednol etabonate 0.5% every 12 hours, moxifloxacin 0.5% 4 times/day, and chloramphenicol ointment 1% at bed time.

Six months later (August 2022), he returned for a follow-up appointment with opacity in the right eye and old vascularization, but no signs of infection. His visual acuity was 20/100. He was maintained on loteprednol etabonate 0.5%, moxifloxacin 0.5%, and lubricating eye drops.

Last Presentation (July–September 2023)
In July 2023, the patient reported a gradual loss of vision in his right eye exacerbated by one heat wave, accompanied by right-sided headaches, burning sensation, itching, diplopia, tears, tinnitus and heat-induced severe pain. On July 31st, 25 days after the onset of symptoms, he presented to the hospital with another attack of keratitis in the right eye.

Ophthalmic examination of the right eye revealed visual acuity of Hand motion. Anterior segment exam revealed central scar with an overlying epithelial defect 3mm*4mm with corneal neovascularization in the right eye. Initially, the patient was treated with fortified vancomycin 5% every hour, alternating with fortified amikacin 2.5%.

On the 3rd of August, he presented again for follow-up with a visual acuity of hand motion, a central corneal scar with an overlying epithelial defect measuring 3 mm × 5 mm, and 360-degree corneal vascularization. The patient complained of irritation attributed to the fortified antibiotic eye drops. Consequently, fortified vancomycin and amikacin were discontinued, moxifloxacin was increased to once every hour, and chloramphenicol ointment was added. Nonetheless, on August 7th, his visual acuity remained hand motion. He additionally had a 0.5 mm hypopyon, a large ring corneal abscess, and an epithelial defect measuring 3 mm × 5 mm. As a result of these findings, he was diagnosed with recurrent fungal keratitis. His treatment plan was adjusted accordingly to include lubricant eye drops every 2 hours and fortified voriconazole 1% eye drops four times a day, due to the unavailability of amphotericin B. On 11th of August, his visual acuity was still hand motion, and examination revealed a ciliary injection and an epithelial defect measuring 3 mm × 3mm. The hypopyon had increased to 2 mm. As a result, all antibiotics were held, and cultures were taken again, which also came back negative. After culture collection, the patient was restarted on fortified voriconazole eye drops 8 times a day, moxifloxacin eye drops every hour, and lubricants every hour. Moreover, oral fluconazole 400 mg was given as a loading dose, followed by 200 mg once daily as maintenance.

On 25th of August, his visual acuity improved to counting fingers at 3 meters with resolution of the hypopyon and an ulcer size of 2 mm × 3mm. Oral doxycycline 100 mg once daily, and loteprednol etabonate eye drops 0.5% every 2 hours were added. Voriconazole and moxifloxacin eye drops were decreased to 4 times a day. The patient's case was monitored over 3 days.

The patient’s case continued to improve until 27th September 2023 when he was discharged. Upon examination, his visual acuity was 20/125, and the ulcer had resolved, leaving a 3 mm*4 mm scar with no fluorescein uptake. Discharge medications included fortified voriconazole eye drops 1% twice a day, moxifloxacin eye drops 0.5% twice a day, lubricants eye drops every 2 hours, loteprednol etabonate eye drops 0.5% four times a day, cyclopentolate eye drops 1% twice a day, and oral doxycycline 100 mg once daily for 1 week, with eye drops administered only to his right eye. A follow-up appointment was scheduled 2 weeks later post-discharge.

During the follow-up appointment, examination revealed a visual acuity 20/200. The patient had a central scar measuring 3 mm × 4mm, corneal thinning, and vascularization. Moxifloxacin 0.5% and loteprednol etabonate 0.5% eye drops were reduced to twice daily, while lubricants were continued. Cyclopentolate 1% and fortified voriconazole 1% eye drops were discontinued. The patient was planned for corneal transplantation.