An 83-year-old woman with permanent AF, undergoing treatment with direct oral anticoagulant therapy (rivaroxaban 15 mg once daily), was referred to our hospital due to fatigue and worsening dyspnoea. Upon admission, the patient was afebrile (36°C), and exhibited a blood pressure of 125/78 mmHg, a pulse rate of 96 beats per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 92% on room air. Cardiac auscultation revealed a 2–3/6 systolic murmur at the lower sternal border and at the apex of the heart, radiating to the left axilla. Laboratory tests revealed severe microcytic anaemia, with a haemoglobin level of 4.9 g/dL (normal range: 13.8–18.0 g/dL). No signs of haemolytic anaemia were identified. The patient presented a CHA2DS2-VASc risk score of 4 and a HAS-BLED score of 4. Previous medical history was characterized by degenerative mitral valve disease complicated by severe mitral regurgitation. In 2016, patient underwent mitral valve repair with ring annuloplasty, tricuspid annuloplasty, and surgical LAA ligation. Her past medical history was also remarkable for arterial hypertension, dyslipidaemia, chronic anaemia, and previous erosive gastritis. Endoscopic examinations revealed gastric polyps, colonic diverticulosis, and enlarged haemorrhoids, with no evidence of recent or ongoing haemorrhage. The search for Helicobacter pylori yielded negative results. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal left and right ventricular systolic function, residual mild to moderate mitral regurgitation, and severe tricuspid regurgitation. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) ruled out intracardiac thrombi but revealed incomplete surgical LAA occlusion with a narrow neck of 5 mm in conventional 2D images and 13 × 6 mm using multiplanar reconstruction of acquired 3D datasets (, , , , and ).
The patient was transfused with six units packed red blood cells, with clinical improvement. Rivaroxaban was discontinued. Based on both the high bleeding risk and the results of the echocardiography study, the Heart Team members indicated percutaneous transcatheter LAAC to best manage the patient. Pre-procedural imaging with cardiac computed tomography (CCT) scanning was performed, showing a bilobed LAA with dehiscence of the ostium and a neck of 13 × 8 mm (, , ). The LAA presented an elliptic landing zone with a major axis of 22 mm and a depth of 17 mm .
The procedure of LAAC was carried out with the patient under general anaesthesia. Adequate anticoagulation with heparin was maintained throughout the procedure (activated clotting time [ACT] 250–300 s). The intra-procedural combined angiographic and echocardiographic evaluation demonstrated a maximum LAA diameter ranging from 20–22 mm ( and ): thus, an Amplatzer Amulet 28 mm was considered to be the best choice. The device was delivered with good LAA sealing by the body of the prosthesis (see , and ), without peri-device leak. A slight protrusion of the external disc in the left atrium was observed without impeding of the mitral valve leaflets excursion (, , ). No pericardial effusion was detected, and the patient was discharged on single antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel), remaining clinically stable on post-operative Day 2. One month post-procedure, the patient was asymptomatic with a haemoglobin level of 11.2 g/dL, and no complications were recorded. Transoesophageal echocardiography examination confirmed the device’s position without signs of thrombosis. After three months, the stability of the haemoglobin level and the absence of device thrombosis allowed the discontinuation of antithrombotic therapy . One year after hospital discharge, the patient did not experience adverse clinical events. Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed the stable position of the device.