A 3-year-old girl was referred to our hospital 5 days after the trauma, complaining of right elbow joint restriction and pain. She fell onto her outstretched hand while playing at home from a low chair. Her hand was put into a sling by her grandmother, but she hadn't received any other medical care.
On our examination, there was mild swelling over the elbow and tenderness over the radial head. On palpation, the radial head appeared to be anteriorly dislocated. She had pain in her elbow and could not do the active motion. The passive movement of the injured elbow was: 100º of flexion, 20º lack of full extension, 70º of pronation, and 50º of supination.
Radiographs confirmed an anterior dislocation of the radial head with plastic bowing of the ulna, no evidence of fracture . Ultrasound detected fluid in the joint and soft tissue interposed in the humeroradial joint, so we anticipated that closed reduction would be unsuccessful. The patient was brought to the imaging department the following day. Under anesthesia using a laryngeal mask airway, closed reduction was initially attempted; however, that was unsuccessful as we anticipated. Then, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) film was done that showed that a structure of low signal intensity (annular ligament) was stuck in the humeroradial joint .
The patient was moved to the operative room the following day (7 days after injury). Closed reduction was attempted a second time, but it also proved unsuccessful verified by intraoperative X-ray fluoroscopy. Open reduction through a posterolateral approach was performed. We found the annular ligament was what stopped the radial head from returning to its anatomical location. The annular ligament wasn't damaged but was very stretched. The radial head was found to be protruding below the annular ligament and was incarcerated between the ligament and anterior capsule, similar to a kind of buttonhole effect . The ligament could not be pulled over the radial head when still intact as that made the joint irreducible. We decided to transect the ligament and repaired it subsequently. By pushing the radial head distally and pulling the interposed ligament anteriorly, it returned to its normal anatomical position immediately. After reduction, the elbow seems to be stable in the proper position during elbow joint movement and forearm rotation, so we finished the operation.
Active range-of-motion exercises were allowed following 3 weeks of immobilization by a long arm plaster splint. At 3-week, 6-week, 3-month follow-up checkups, the movement range of the operated arm gradually improved, and at 6 months after surgery, it was 135º of flexion, full of extension, 90º of pronation, 90º of supination. This was compared to normal, which was 145º of flexion, full of extension, 90º of pronation, 90º of supination . The result was excellent according to the Mayo elbow performance score (100 scores).