A 60-year-old Chinese male presented to our hospital complaining of pain, coldness and numbness in the right lower limb for one month. On physical examination, he was afebrile and had a pulsatile, firm subcutaneous mass with a diastolic and systolic murmur on the medial aspect of the right thigh. Peripheral pulsations could be palpated well at the right common femoral artery, but not the popliteal artery, dorsalis pedis artery and the tibialis posterior artery, indicating the occlusion of superficial femoral artery (SFA). Additional imaging, including the color Doppler ultrasonography (CDUS, Fig. ) and computed tomography angiography (CTA, Fig. ) conducted to evaluate the potential embolic sources, revealed the formation of two aneurysms in the middle and lower segment of the right SFA , accompanied by the presence of mural thrombus. The proximal aneurysm was located higher than the Hunter’s canal with the maximal diameter of 15 mm, while the distal aneurysm (which was ruptured, but only with localized hematoma, not progressive bleeding) was located within the Hunter’s canal with the maximal diameter of 26 mm. The normal neurological, cardiovascular systems examinations and no significant medical history of hypertension, heart diseases, diabetes mellitus, blood transfusion, genital ulcer and skin rash seemed to indicate our case was less possibly caused by the complications of these diseases. The popliteal lymph nodes were not palpated and clearly swollen in CDUS and CT examinations, excluding the lymph nodes origin. However, he recounted he had heterosexual extramarital unprotected sexual contacts twenty years ago, but denied any sexual activity since his wife died eighteen years ago. His wife had one previous abortion before death, but no syphilis testing was performed. These promoted us to perform the syphilis tests for this patient. As a result, the patient tested positive for Treponema pallidum hemagglutination antibody and rapid plasma regain (RPR, titer 1/16). The patient denied any recent inoculations, vaccinations or complementary treatments that may cause a false positive syphilis serology . Additional laboratory tests revealed the elevated levels of both the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 58 mm/1 h) and the serum C-reactive protein (CRP, 15.4 mg/L), suggesting the inflammatory arteritis. A presumptive diagnosis of right femoral aneurysm secondary to the tertiary syphilis from unprotected sexual contacts was given.
In view of the active syphilis infection and the high vascular inflammatory reaction that may cause pseudoaneurysm and rupture of the artery anastomosis if surgery was performed, the patient was firstly treated with benzathine penicillin (2.4 MU, i.m) once a week. Four weeks later, the titer of RPR, the concentration of CRP and ESR were respectively reduced to 1:12, 12.5 mg/L and 42 mm/1 h, demonstrating the effectiveness of anti-syphilis therapy. However, the patient presented aggravated pain at the right thigh, which was considered to result from the hematoma enlargement due to the rupture and hemorrhage of the aneurysm. Thus, the operation treatment was prepared. In an effort to minimize the morbidity and mortality of femoral aneurysm repair, implantation of the Viabahn covered stent graft (Gore & Associates) was performed to isolate the aneurysm . Intraoperatively, a 90-cm, 6-F Flexor sheath (Cook) was advanced into the right common femoral artery in a retrograde fashion. Nevertheless, the distal occlusion of the right femoral artery was still displayed on the digital subtraction angiography (DSA, Fig. ), which may be attributed to the tortuous arterial wall compressed by the aneurysm and hematoma. Then a single 5-F, cobra-shaped catheter (Terumo) combined with a 0.035-inch smooth Radiofocus hydrophilic guidewire (Terumo) were inserted but they could also not pass through the distal end of the aneurysm. Subsequently, an incision was made below the right medial malleolus to expose the right tibialis posterior artery and the retrograde puncture was performed to place a 5-F dilator catheter (Cook). A 0.018-inch guide wire (Boston Scientific) was inserted through the dilator, however, the distal end of the aneurysm was still not opened. The routine open operation via a medial incision was eventually carried out to remove the right femoral aneurysm under the general anesthesia. Pathological examination of the resected aneurysm showed the proliferation of adventitial vasa vasorum, with sporadic infiltration of inflammatory cells ; the fibroplasia in the arterial wall accompanied by local calcification and mucoid degeneration . Accordingly, the patient was ultimately confirmed with right femoral aneurysm due to syphilis.
Postoperatively, the anti-syphilis treatment continued. After three months, the laboratory findings indicated that RPR and Treponema pallidum hemagglutination antibody were negative. The CDUS demonstrated that the stenosis, occlusion and re-formation of aneurysm were all not found in the arteries of the right lower limb. The patient was also well and asymptomatic.