A 54-year-old Caucasian man with no known previous comorbidity developed sudden-onset severe right-sided calf pain. The pain occurred while he was taking a casual walk in the evening. The pain intensity gradually worsened over the next few hours. The patient also noted progressive swelling of the calf of the right leg, gradually extending to the ankle. He denied trauma and could not recall a history of animal or insect bite. There was also no recent history of immobility. He was on no medication, either prescription or over-the-counter. The symptom onset was spontaneous and unprecipitated. The patient sought initial pain relief and self-medicated with codeine-paracetamol 30/500 mg and ibuprofen 400 mg. Failure to achieve adequate pain relief, along with evolution of symptoms with the development of numbness on the same side below the knee, prompted the patient to seek medical assistance.
On clinical examination, the patient appeared to be in severe pain. He was afebrile with normal hemodynamic parameters, with a pulse rate of 85 beats per minute. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure measurements were 133 mmHg and 76 mmHg, respectively. Oxygen saturation was 97% on room air. His National Early Warning Score 2 (NEWS2) was 0 based on clinical assessment. Systemic clinical examination was normal. On examination of the lower limbs, the right calf measured 45 cm in circumference and the left calf measured 44 cm in circumference. On visual assessment there was no rubor or blisters. However, the skin appeared tense and stretched. The right leg and calf were tender to the touch. The right-sided dorsal and posterior tibial pulses were present and capillary refill time was < 2 seconds, which was normal. The anterior and peroneal compartment was visually tense, which was more evident with toe movement. A reduction in sensation to light touch was also noted.
Bedside venous blood gas analysis revealed a normal pH of 7.4 and a normal electrolyte profile, with blood glucose of 5.8 mmol/L (normal reference = 7–11.1). The serum lactate level was 1.6 mmol/L (normal < 1.8). Whole blood analysis revealed hemoglobin of 155 g/L (normal reference = 130–180), with a total white blood cell count of 9.9 × 109/L (normal reference = 3.7–11) and a normal differential count. Platelet count was 275 × 109/L (normal reference = 150–450). Renal and liver function and coagulation parameters were all normal. C-reactive protein was 4.3 mg/L (normal reference = < 5) and the D-dimer level was normal at 327 µg/L (normal reference = 0–500). Considering the clinical context and near normal biochemical parameters, the initial working clinical suspicion was compartment syndrome of the right leg despite the absence of an obvious etiology. This was based on the classical presentation, especially when D-dimers were negative, making deep vein thrombosis unlikely. Urgent magnetic resonance imaging of the lower limbs was done, which revealed gross edema and swelling of the right lateral leg compartment involving the peroneus and longus muscle, consistent with acute lateral compartment syndrome .
The patient received analgesia with intravenous administration of morphine 5 mg. The leg was kept in an elevated position. Urgent surgical consult was taken, and the patient underwent emergency anterior and peroneal compartment fasciotomy on the same evening of presentation. Subsequently he underwent a second-look washout and graft fasciotomy of the right lateral leg. He had an uncomplicated clinical course and underwent physiotherapy and recovered well, and was discharged 3 days after initial admission with a plan for review in 5 days to assess the graft and in 2 weeks to reassess the fasciotomy site. He was discharged on oral pain relief medication.