A 72-year-old, para one Caucasian female, presented with postmenopausal bleeding in July 2016. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension managed by Hydrochlorothiazide. She had no family history of ovarian, uterine, breast, pancreas, colon, or prostate cancer. Social history included social drinking with 1–2 drinks per week, with no smoking or recreational substance use. Her BMI was 27, and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS) score was 0, denoting that she was fully active and able to perform activities without restriction. The ECOG PS is a scale describing a patient's functional status regarding their ability to take care of themselves and perform daily and physical activities. An endometrial biopsy showed clear cell carcinoma of the endometrium. A CT-Abdomen/Pelvis (CT-AP) was consistent with thick endometrium, unremarkable adnexal structures, and no evidence of metastatic disease. CA19-9 and CA-125 were 168.9 μ/mL and 68.1 μ/mL respectively. Upon final review of the patient's history and physical, she was found to be optimized for surgery. She underwent a robot-assisted total laparoscopic hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy and pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection by a gynecologic oncologist. Pathology showed mixed endometrioid and clear cell adenocarcinoma with 90 % myometrial invasion, positive metastatic adenocarcinoma to multiple pelvic and paraaortic lymph nodes bilaterally, no omental metastasis, and negative pelvic washings. This was consistent with FIGO stage IIIC2, grade 2 endometrioid adenocarcinoma/clear cell carcinoma. She was treated with adjuvant chemotherapy with platinum and taxane doublet IV every 21 days for a total of six cycles. During immediate post-chemotherapy surveillance, there was no evidence of residual disease on CT scan, and serial CA 125 levels decreased appropriately. Twenty months after initial debulking, CA125 levels were noted to double over a five-month period . Patient had no presenting symptoms and the physical exam was without evidence of recurrence.