29-year-old female patient with chronic renal disease due to primary focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis, who received a renal transplant in 2017 and was taking tacrolimus, everolimus and prednisone 5 mg daily, was non-diabetic. After a year of progressive deterioration of renal function, diagnosed by gradual increase in serum creatinine and without associated symptoms, a biopsy of the renal graft was performed, which showed findings consistent with pauciimmune vasculitis, so it was decided to hospitalize her to intensify the immunosuppression with methylprednisolone and cyclophosphamide.

The patient was admitted in a stable condition, afebrile and without urinary symptoms. The examination revealed low inflammatory parameters (C-reactive protein: 17.9 mg/L, white blood cell count: 7,600 cells/uL, absolute neutrophil count: 6,000 cells/uL), but with a urine sediment of 5 leukocytes per field and few bacteria. The urine culture was negative, so 7 urine bacilloscopies were performed, with 3 positive results, reporting 4 to 9 acid-fast bacilli per 100 fields. 6 urine mycobacteria cultures were performed, all negative, as well as a urine sample polymerase chain reaction (PCR) against M. tuberculosis (GeneXpert®) also negative. The study was complemented with a Mycobacterium tuberculosis interferon-gamma release assay (Quantiferon TB-Gold-Plus®) that was negative and a non-contrast computed tomography of the abdomen that did not show structural alterations suggestive of mycobacterial infection.

Due to the context of the patient with an immunosuppression plan, it was decided to postpone the start of immunosuppressive therapy and request the identification of the species of mycobacteria from a urine sample using panmicrobacterial PCR with sequencing of the amplified product. The sequence obtained was compared with the GenBank® database and was compatible with Lawsonella clevelandensis. Following the result, amoxicillin with clavulanic acid 500/125 mg was indicated every 12 h for 3 to 6 months. The patient progressed 4 months later with a severe COVID-19 case, requiring mechanical ventilation and renal replacement therapy, so the antibiotic therapy was extended for 7 months, and the immunosuppressive therapy was restarted after hospital discharge and clinical stabilisation.
