We present a case of a 10-year-old girl from a low socioeconomic background in a Hindu family from Sindh, Pakistan, who initially presented to our Pediatric Urology Clinic and was later transferred to Pediatric Nephrology Care. She presented with a 1-week history of severe right lumbar pain, gross hematuria, vomiting, and fever. The pain was severe enough to require pain relief medication, and she visited the emergency room 2–3 times before being admitted for hospitalization. She did not report any burning sensation during urination, dysuria, urinary retention, or incontinence. There were no other systemic manifestations, such as joint pain, prolonged fever, alopecia, mouth ulcers, or skin rash.

She was born by C-section to unrelated parents, and her early childhood was uneventful. She was fully immunized and developmentally normal. She is currently a student in the 8th grade. Her past medical and drug history was unremarkable, and there was no family history of kidney disease or other systemic disorders at the time of presentation. On examination, she appeared anxious and unwell, febrile (101°F), and hypertensive, with a systolic and diastolic blood pressure of 130/96 mmHg, which was above the 95th percentile for her age and height.

Her anthropometric measurements were as follows: weight 36.4 kg (50th percentile), height 141 cm (above the 50th percentile), and body surface area (BSA) 1.2 m2 . She was mildly anemic and dehydrated, but not jaundiced. No rashes or lymphadenopathy were observed. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the right lumbar region, but there was no splenomegaly. Her respiratory and cardiovascular systems were normal, and locomotor and neurological examinations were unremarkable. Initially, a diagnosis of ureteric calculus and/or acute pyelonephritis was suspected.

Initial laboratory results showed a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 12.4 g/dL, white blood cell count of 14.98 × 109/L, and platelet count of 75 × 109/L. Urinalysis revealed a reddish, hazy appearance with 150 mg/dL protein, 3 + blood, numerous red blood cells (RBCs) and white blood cells (15–20/hpf), while leukocyte esterase and nitrites were negative. The spot urine calcium-to-creatinine ratio was 0.06 (normal < 0.2), and the protein-to-creatinine ratio was 0.8 (normal < 0.2). Renal function was normal, with urea at 12 mg/dL, creatinine at 0.33 mg/dL, and electrolytes within normal limits. Liver function tests and coagulation profiles were normal as well. The serum lipase level was normal, but her serum albumin was slightly low (2.98 g/dL), and dengue serology was negative. Her C-reactive protein level was elevated at 48 mg/dL, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 696 U/L, and D-dimer was significantly raised at 19.8 mg/L. Her blood and urine cultures were negative. Ultrasound (US) revealed a diffusely enlarged right kidney (11.5 cm × 6.7 cm) with patchy areas of increased echogenicity, while the left kidney appeared normal. A color Doppler study showed a hypoechoic thrombus in the right renal vein (RRV) that completely blocked blood flow and extended into the inferior vena cava (IVC). Renal computed tomography angiography confirmed these findings, showing an enlarged, edematous right kidney with a well-organized hypodense thrombus completely obstructing the RRV, extending into the IVC.

Her work-up for hereditary thrombophilia (including protein-C, protein-S, antithrombin III, and factor V Leiden) was negative. Further serological testing confirmed a diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), evidenced by low complement-3 (C3), positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA) with a titer of 1/5120, and positive anti-ds DNA antibodies. In addition, tests for antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) showed positive anticardiolipin antibodies (IgG and IgM), lupus anticoagulant, and prolonged confirmatory tests, which confirmed APS as secondary to SLE.

The patient was initially managed with intravenous paracetamol, hydration, and antibiotics. Her hypertension was controlled with oral captopril and amlodipine, and captopril was later switched to losartan. She was anticoagulated with low-molecular-weight (LMW) heparin (enoxaparin) and later switched to oral warfarin after 6 days. Her condition improved over 8–10 days, with her platelet count rising to 189 × 109/L. She was discharged after 12 days on warfarin, with strict observation for bleeding and regular monitoring of her prothrombin time and international normalized ratio (PT-INR), aiming to maintain a target INR of 2–3. She continued amlodipine and losartan for hypertension and proteinuria, along with hydroxychloroquine (200 mg) and acetylsalicylic acid (75 mg) for thrombosis prevention.

We closely monitored her for signs of pulmonary embolism owing to the risk of embolization from the IVC thrombus, but no such signs were observed. Immunosuppressive therapies, such as corticosteroids, were not considered as there were no systemic manifestations of SLE or lupus nephritis at that time.

Initially, the patient was closely monitored in the outpatient department with regular checks on her blood pressure (BP), clinical symptoms (such as pain and gross hematuria), prothrombin time (PT) with international normalized ratio (INR), and complete blood count (CBC) to monitor thrombocytopenia; color Doppler ultrasound (US) for recanalization of the affected veins; serum creatinine (Cr) for kidney function; and a dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) renal scan to assess right kidney function. Her echocardiogram did not reveal any valvular defects or vegetation. A repeat color Doppler US during follow-up showed persistence of the right renal vein (RRV) thrombus but resolution of the inferior vena cava (IVC) thrombus. The DMSA renal scan revealed a nonfunctioning right kidney, which was recommended for nephrectomy; however, the parents chose not to pursue this option.

Four weeks after discharge, the patient contracted chickenpox but recovered smoothly without complications. We lost contact with the patient from November 2020 to September 2021 owing to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. During this period, she visited another healthcare center where her anticoagulant treatment, warfarin, was replaced with rivaroxaban (10 mg once daily) to avoid the need for frequent INR monitoring. During her subsequent follow-up visits, we monitored her growth (height and weight), hypertension (BP), kidney function (serum Cr), proteinuria (spot urine protein-to-creatinine ratio, suPCR), and hematuria (urinalysis) monthly for 3 months. She also underwent two ophthalmological reviews to check for hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)-associated retinopathy, which were both normal. We continued to monitor her clinically for lupus flare-ups, recurrence of thrombosis, and performed serial ultrasounds to assess the size of her right kidney.

Her recent follow-up showed a weight of 56.9 kg, height of 160 cm, body mass index (BMI) of 22.7 kg/m2 (85th percentile), and a blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg (off amlodipine but continuing with losartan). Her kidney function was normal, with a serum creatinine of 0.6 mg/dL and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of > 170 ml/min/1.73 m2. However, she had slightly low hemoglobin (9.9 g/dL), a normal white blood cell (WBC) count (9.59 × 109/L), and a normal platelet count (418 × 109/L). Fortunately, she did not develop any further complications; however, she experienced menorrhagia, which resulted in anemia (Hb 9.9 g/dL). This was managed by consultation with a gynecologist, who adjusted her rivaroxaban dosage to 5 mg/day and prescribed 250 mg of tranexamic acid three times a day for 3–5 days during her menstrual period. We also tested her complement C3 (1.02 g/L) and anti-ds DNA levels (8.86 IU/mL), both of which were normal, indicating no active lupus.

Her most recent ultrasound of the kidneys showed a small, shrunken, and echogenic right kidney (5.7 cm × 1.8 cm), with a compensatory enlargement of the left kidney (12.5 cm × 5 cm).

We plan to continue her anticoagulation, antiplatelet therapy, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB), and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) on a long-term basis, potentially for life. We also consulted a rheumatologist regarding the duration of anticoagulation therapy, but no decision has yet been made regarding discontinuation. Unfortunately, her mother developed systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 18 months later, and she is currently under the care of a rheumatologist.