A 32-year old gentleman was admitted to our trauma department with a painful, immobile right knee. He sustained the injury externally rotating his knee whilst in “slight flexion” while he was moving from the driver’s seat to the passenger’s seat of his car. He had a history of two previous lateral patellar dislocations on same knee. The first event was 15 years prior, when his knee twisted in flexed position while pushing a car. He was taken to the emergency department where it was successfully reduced under sedation. The second event was four years prior, when he sustained an injury while pushing a van, this time with the right knee fully extended. On this occasion, his patella spontaneously reduced and he did not seek any medical intervention. Our patient had no other significant past medical or surgical history and explained his right knee was completely asymptomatic prior to this current event.
On examination, there was an obvious deformity suggesting lateral displacement of the patella with a sulcus in the skin evident over the femoral groove. Furthermore, the knee was held fixed in 15 degrees of flexion. Due to patient positioning difficulties we were unable to obtain true AP and lateral views on X-ray. The radiographs demonstrated a laterally displaced and a mal-rotated patella in the vertical plane (see Figs. and ). A manipulation under sedation was attempted unsuccessfully. A further attempt of reduction under a femoral nerve block had again been unsuccessful.
Our patient was subsequently taken to theatre where one final attempt of closed reduction was carried out under general anaesthetic and muscle relaxation. Ultimately, this failed and an open reduction was performed. The patient was positioned supine and an anterior midline skin incision was used. Complete rupture of the medial patellofemoral ligament (MPFL) was identified with the patella situated lateral to the lateral femoral condyle, everted by approximately 100 degrees. There were no visible deficiencies of the femoral condyles or the patellar articular surface. The patella was carefully reduced by direct manipulation. Following manipulation, the knee joint was washed out with normal saline and the medial patella retinaculum was repaired. After the repair, patella tracking was satisfactory with full range of flexion and extension. Post-operative radiographs confirm the patella in a satisfactory position in the antero-posterior and lateral planes (see Figs. and ). The patient was placed in an extension splint for comfort purposes immediately post-operatively. No weight bearing restrictions were applied. Early mobilization was encouraged after 5 days and the patient was referred for early physiotherapy. At 3 months follow-up, our patient had no further episodes of dislocation, full range of knee extension and flexion, and normal patella tracking. A hypermobility assessment at this stage revealed a Beighton score of 2 with extension beyond 10 degrees of both elbows only.