A 40-year-old man with history of intravenous drug use presented to the emergency department with altered mental status and dyspnoea. He was afebrile and haemodynamically stable. Auscultation of the chest revealed bibasilar lung crepitations and a 3/6 holosystolic murmur at the left upper sternal border and apex. Neurological exam revealed no focal deficits. The patient denied any relevant past medical and surgical history.
Laboratory tests identified a neutrophilic leucocytosis (white blood cell count 13.6 K/μL, reference range 4.5–11 K/μL; absolute neutrophil count 11.7 K/μL, reference range 1.9–8 K/μL) and elevated C-reactive protein (75.2 mg/L, reference range 0–5 mg/L). 12-lead EKG showed normal sinus rhythm (SR) with no conduction disturbances . Transthoracic echocardiogram identified left ventricle (LV) dilation with an ejection fraction 54%, apical akinesis, aortic and mitral valve vegetations with severe regurgitation of both valves (, ). Brain CT showed an acute SAH , with acute obstructive hydrocephalus . Computed tomography angiography revealed a 4-mm irregular-shaped aneurysm arising from a RMCA branch .
The patient was intubated and an EVD was emergently placed. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) documented a ruptured fusiform mycotic aneurysm in a distal parietal branch of the RMCA . Under fluoroscopic guidance, a Headway Duo micro-catheter was advanced over a 0.014’’ micro-guidewire into the RMCA. Embolization of the aneurysm was achieved with deployment of six coils, followed by n-butyl cyanoacrylate glue embolization . Final DSA showed excellent aneurysm obliteration (Raymond Roy Grade 1; ). Blood cultures were collected before empiric antibiotic therapy with Vancomycin 1 gr IV every 12 h and Ceftriaxone 2 g IV daily was started.
On Day 3, the patient became febrile (38.2°C) and EKG showed new STE in Leads II, III, aVF, V3–V4 . Troponin-I was 8 ng/mL (cut-off <0.03 ng/mL). Serial troponin levels showed a decreasing trend. A conservative approach without diagnostic coronary angiography was pursued, as the patient was at prohibitive risk for surgical or percutaneous revascularization if significant coronary artery disease was confirmed, given the attendant bleeding risk in the setting of recent SAH and EVD placement.
On Day 5, the patient developed bilateral upper limb paresis. Cerebral angiography demonstrated RMCA and anterior cerebral artery vasospasm, which was treated with Verapamil, Nimodipine, Milrinone, and monitored with transcranial Doppler.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE; and , , ) identified a Sievers Type 0 bicuspid aortic valve with a large vegetation (1.8 × 1 cm) arising from the left cusp; there was associated left cusp perforation resulting in severe AR; perivalvular infection was also seen, with an aortic root abscess, and pseudo-aneurysm formation. The mitral valve also had a large vegetation (2.4 × 1.2 cm) with anterior mitral leaflet aneurysm and perforation, resulting in severe MR. There was no TEE evidence of left main (LM) coronary ostium obstruction. Blood cultures revealed growth of Streptococcus salivarius; Ceftriaxone and Vancomycin were continued according to microbiological sensitivities.
On Day 7, an EKG showed SR with new 1st degree atrio-ventricular block and stable V3–V5 STE. The clinical course was then complicated by development of hypotension, acute pulmonary oedema, pneumonia, and progressive left upper extremity weakness due to cerebral vasospasm, requiring intra-arterial Verapamil and stent angioplasty at the first segment of the RMCA. Electrocardiogram showed stable V3–V5 STE and accelerated junctional rhythm with retrograde P waves .
On Day 15, fluctuating conscious levels and neurological deficits prompted CT-angiography, which showed worsening basilar artery vasospasm and a new mycotic aneurysm in the distal M2 left middle cerebral artery branch (, ). The patient progressively deteriorated with rising intracranial pressure and drainage of blood from the EVD. There was also additional cardio-respiratory decompensation. Head CT showed a new left parieto-temporal intraparenchymal haematoma from a ruptured left distal mycotic aneurysm, with rightward midline shift and left lateral ventricle effacement (, ). Electrocardiogram showed worsening anterior STE with new bigeminy and multifascicular block without discernible P waves . Following multidisciplinary team meetings and Ethics committee reunion, the patient was managed conservatively and subsequently passed away on Day 24.