A 55-year-old female patient who had a 4-year history of type 2 diabetes was admitted to our hospital due to paroxysmal general weakness and acro-anesthesia for one year. Since her diagnosis with type 2 diabetes, she was advised on a low-carbohydrate diet and was prescribed an oral hypoglycemic agent regularly (Repaglinide, 3.0 mg/day). She was then followed up averagely twice a month with fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels 6.0 ~ 7.0 mmol/L and HbA1c around 7.0% (53 mmol/mol). She denied any prolonged use of laxatives or diuretics, or any episodes of diarrhea or vomiting in recent weeks. Blood pressure and body mass index (BMI) of the patient were 90/70 mmHg and 23.6 kg/m2, respectively. The muscle strength of upper limbs was grade 4, and that of the lower limbs was grade 3. Deep tendon reflexes were weakened. Laboratory findings revealed hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, metabolic alkalosis. Urinary analysis showed alkaline urine with renal wasting of potassium, sodium and chloride, as well as significantly decreased excretion of calcium (urinary calcium/creatinine ratio 0.04 mol/mol). There was neither haematuria nor proteinuria, while the concentrations of plasma aldosterone and renin activity were both elevated. According to the clinical features and biochemical parameters, the patient was suspected with Gitelman syndrome (GS) and concurrent of type 2 diabetes.
According to the clinical features and biochemical parameters, the patient was suspected with Gitelman syndrome (GS) and concurrent of type 2 diabetes. After obtaining written informed consent from the patient and her family, Sanger sequencing of SLC12A3 gene was performed. As described in our previous study [, ], twenty-three pairs of oligonucleotide primers were synthesized to amplify all 26 exons and flanking intronic regions of the SLC12A3 gene . Her results demonstrated the patient was a compound heterozygote for a recurrent mutation c.179C > T and a novel deletion c.1740delC , which were predicted as a missense variant p. Thr60Met and a frame-shift variant p.(Met581fs) in protein level respectively. Validation of the two mutations by Sanger sequencing in all family members revealed that heterozygous p. Thr60Met and p. (Met581fs) was present in her son and daughter respectively. Accordingly, the patient was genetically diagnosed with GS.
One-week of treatment with potassium chloride (3.0 g/d) and magnesium chloride (element magnesium 350 mg/d), her serum potassium and magnesium levels fluctuated around 3.91 mmol/L and 0.65 mmol/L, respectively. General weakness and acro-anesthesia also disappeared and quickly she was discharged. Since then, she was repeatedly sent to local hospital due to hypoglycemic coma (blood glucose 2.2 ~ 2.60 mmol/l). However, both her serum potassium and magnesium levels were normal (3.6 ~ 3.9 mmol/l and 0.7 ~ 0.8 mmol/l, respectively). She denied any change of behaviors including eating habit and physical excise, as well as smoking and drinking. Then, she was admitted to our hospital and the OGTT was performed again , which showed increased insulin secretion level (evaluated by the homeostasis model assessment for β cells (HOMA-β)) and markedly improved insulin sensitivity (evaluated by the homeostasis model assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR)). Although hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia both have effects on blood glucose, we also consider the side effects of hypoglycemia of repaglinide after the magnesium and potassium supplementation. Then the patient was recommended to change the hypoglycemic agent to a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor (Trajenta 5 mg/d). Her blood glucose level was maintained at 6 to 9 mmol/L during the follow-up of two years.