A previously healthy, 17-year-old white American female individual with a noncontributable past medical history brought to an outpatient pediatric clinic by her mother in January with an erythematous rash on the anterior aspect of her neck with overlying vesicles. The rash had been present for 2 days, and she described it as cramping, tingling, and itchy but denied headaches, nausea, vomiting, fevers, myalgias or arthralgias. She has no known sick contacts and no other lesions or rashes. She denied addition of new foods, supplements, skin care products, or detergents. She did not take any prescriptions or supplements and had no known allergies. She completed all her vaccination series as recommended by the CDC schedule. She did not have a reaction after either of her varicella vaccinations. Family history is notable for a brother with keratosis pilaris, a mother with plaque psoriasis, and a cousin that had a case of varicella shortly after his initial varicella vaccination. Physical examination showed vesicular lesions overlying an erythematous base on the anterior neck with various vesicular macules of various diameters in the C2 and V3 dermatomal distributions. Bilateral tympanic membranes and external ear canals were without lesions. No ocular involvement was detected; extraocular eye motion was intact, and pupils were equal and reactive to light. At that time, she was prescribed 1 g oral valacyclovir to be taken every 8 hours for seven days and topical 5% acyclovir with bacitracin 500 U/g to be applied every 12 hours for seven days for the diagnosis of probable VZV on the basis of the appearance of the lesions.

Laboratory tests were drawn and ordered at the time of her initial visit to confirm this diagnosis, including a C-reactive protein (CRP), complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), cytomegalovirus (CMV) immunoglobulin (Ig)G antibodies, VZV IgM and IgG antibodies and viral load, herpes simplex virus (HSV) 1 and 2 viral load, monkeypox viral load, and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) profile. The only abnormalities were a VZV IgG level of 1304 (reference range: positive > 165) and a VZV viral load of 3.8 billion copies/mL, representative of a high viral load. VZV IgM antibodies were negative, as were the other viral load levels. Her CBC, CRP, and ESR were within normal limits.

A total of 1 day after being seen in clinic, she presented to the emergency department owing to development of a fever, nausea and vomiting overnight. There, she had a temperature of 103.1 °F, blood pressure of 128/74, pulse of 87, respiratory rate of 17, and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. They noted a vesicular rash and erythema extending from under the left ear to the left face and neck, with a notable spread from the C2 and V3 dermatome to the V2 dermatome. There was no rash on the tip of the nose or in the ear canal but there was a small vesicle near the left eye. She was discharged home with acetaminophen 1000 mg and hydrocodone/acetaminophen 5 mg/325 mg as needed for the pain. No labs or imaging were performed.

A total of 2 days after the initial clinic visit, the patient reported new-onset lethargy. The rash was still within the V2, V3, and C2 dermatomes. Pediatric infectious disease was consulted at this time. They suggested the addition of swabbing for group A strep owing to the possibility of underlying bacterial skin infection, as well as HIV blood test, both of which were negative.

A total of 1 week after the onset of the rash, she was seen in the clinic. At this time, she had been taking the oral valacyclovir and using the topical acyclovir for 5 days. Her vitals were within normal limits; she no longer had a fever, nausea, vomiting, headache, or lethargy. On physical exam, the vesicles were present in the V2, V3, and C2 dermatome and had begun to scab over; they were no longer burning or cramping but remained itchy. There were no new lesions or rashes and she did not demonstrate any vision changes, hearing loss, or focal neurological deficits. Labs were redrawn at this time; CBC and HIV remained within normal limits. Varicella viral load was undetectable at this time. On follow up, the patient reported complete recovery of the vesicular rash within 2 weeks of beginning antiviral treatment. She has no residual scarring or symptoms.