A 2-year-old, 4.5-kg neutered male domestic shorthair cat was presented for acute-onset dyspnea. The past medical history was unremarkable. The cat lived indoors and was current on vaccinations and parasite prevention. On presentation, lung sounds were harsh, with no crackles. The cat exhibited inspiratory effort, with a respiratory rate of 44 bpm. The remaining physical findings were within normality. Thoracic radiographs identified moderate pleural effusion and lung edema. Echocardiography revealed asymmetric left ventricular myocardial thickening [interventricular septum end-diastolic thickness 5.7 mm (5 ± 0.7 mm) , left ventricular posterior wall end-diastolic thickness 7.5 mm (4.6 ± 0.5 mm) ] and severe left atrial dilation [left atrium-to-aortic root ratio 2.2 (1.29 ± 0.23) ]. The cat was hospitalized and treated with oxygen, furosemide (Dimazon 50 mg/ml, MSD Animal Health S.r.l., Segrate, Italy; dose: 1 mg/kg IV q6h), pimobendan (Vetmedin chew 1.25 mg, Boehringer Ingelheim Animal Health Italia S.p.A., Noventana, Italy; dose: 0.2 mg/kg PO q12h), and clopidogrel (Clopidogrel ACT 75 mg, BB FARMA Srl, Samarate, Italy; dose: 18.75 mag/cat PO q24h). During hospitalization, blood was collected to assess the cat’s systemic condition (i.e., complete blood count, biochemistry, test for feline leukemia and feline immunodeficiency virus), leading to unremarkable results. The cat was discharged after 4 days with oral furosemide (Dimazon 10 mg, MSD Animal Health S.r.l., Segrate, Italy; dose: 1 mg/kg PO q12h) and an unchanged dose of pimobendan and clopidogrel. One week after discharge, the cat was represented with a recurrence of lung edema, despite the regular administration of drugs by the owners. Therefore, the dose of furosemide was increased (2 mg/kg PO q12h), and spironolactone was added (Prilactone next 10 mg, CEVA salute animale S.p.A., Agrate Brianza, Italy; dose: 2 mg/kg PO q24h). Despite increasing diuretic therapy and adherence to the therapeutic protocol by the owners, the cat presented an additional relapse of lung edema the following week. Suspecting an ongoing diuretic resistance, the dose of furosemide was further increased, and its route of administration was switched from oral to parental. As the owners were not able to administrate the drug intramuscularly, the subcutaneous administration of furosemide was considered. In light of such a change, owners were carefully instructed about the technique of subcutaneous administration. Only when it was conclusively certified that owners were able to administrate SF (Dimazon 50 mg/ml, MSD Animal Health S.r.l., Segrate, Italy) properly, this therapeutic protocol was started at the dose of 2 mg/kg SC q8h. Other cardiac therapies were continued at the previously reported doses. Thanks to the introduction of SF, the cat no longer presented a recurrence of lung edema. However, although the cat had never presented skin problems before and owners administrated properly SF, multiple well-defined circulars, crusted ulcerative cutaneous lesions (0.5–1 cm) associated with alopecia developed at the sites of furosemide injections (i.e., dorsal area of thoracic region) 2 weeks later . At that time, spot-on treatment with fluralaner and moxidectine (Intervet International B. V., Boxmeer, Holland) was prescribed, albeit without clinical improvement. Accordingly, a dermatological consultation was subsequently obtained. On physical inspection, neither signs of self-trauma due to pruritic allergy nor signs of trauma due to improper administration of SF were identified. Trichoscopic evaluation at the level of the aforesaid areas showed neither alteration of the hair shaft nor the presence of spores. Scraping and culture for dermatophytes tested negative. Cytological examination of impression smears and fine-needle aspiration obtained from crusted areas showed an inflammatory pattern characterized by neutrophils, eosinophils, and rare macrophages, without evidence of microorganisms. Owners declined skin biopsies. Given the above and considering that several differential diagnoses for inflammatory ulcerated lesions were unlikely in the light of anamnestic and clinical findings (e.g., thermal/electrical/chemical burns, skin trauma/infection/neoplasia/autoimmune disorder), it was hypothesized that the dermal lesions were primarily associated with the administration of SF. This hypothesis was further supported by the use of the Naranjo Algorithm Adverse Drug Reaction Probability Scale, which led to a score of 6/13 (i.e., “probable” reaction to the drug) . Nevertheless, considering the severity of the cardiac condition and the previous relapses of lung edema, we preferred not to return to oral furosemide. Rather, we decided to interrupt the ongoing injectable formulation and substitute it with an alternative brand (Lasix fiale 20 mg/2 ml, Sanofi S.r.l., Milano, Italy), maintaining the same dose. Moreover, the cutaneous lesions were treated locally with a lenitive local product for 1 week (Douxo S3 CALM pads, CEVA salute animale S.p.A., Agrate Brianza, Italy). The dermal ulcerations disappeared within 1 month . Subsequently, the cat experienced neither further skin problems nor recurrence of lung edema, and he is still alive at the time of manuscript writing (13 months after the initial presentation).