A 31-year-old patient, gravida 1, para 0, of Romanian origin, with no medical or surgical history, was followed in the Obstetrical Department at Montpellier University Hospital (France). She was not related to her husband. After discontinuing an oral contraceptive, she rapidly became pregnant with a singleton pregnancy with a normal first-trimester ultrasound scan and a low risk for Down syndrome prenatal screening (1/10,000) with a PAPP-A at 1.42 MoM, freeB-HCG at 1.07 MoM. She was referred to the prenatal diagnosis unit because of an unusual imaging of the fetal profile during second-trimester ultrasound imaging. A specialized ultrasound scan, performed at 25 weeks, confirmed the presence of a eutrophic male fetus with a single medial incisor and a narrow superior maxilla possibly ogival, without posterior palatal cleft . Fetal brain was normal with no sign of holoprosencephaly. Additionally, a flattened nasal sulcus and a flat profile were also mentioned (D). The nose aspect and medial central incisor were suggestive of nasal pyriform aperture stenosis.
A fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then performed at 30 weeks’ gestation, confirming upper jaw dysmorphism of triangular appearance, with a single median incisor and nasal pyriform aperture stenosis . The morphological assessment of the median line of the brain did not reveal any malformation, especially no holoprosencephaly, no hypertelorism, no choanal atresia, no cerebral lobes agenesis, and no microcephaly. After genetic counseling, an amniocentesis was performed retrieving a normal fetal karyotype (46XY) and a normal CGH array. In the absence of cerebral abnormality, the couple was informed not only of the good prognosis of the malformation but also for the need for a specialized consultation with a pediatric otolaryngologist/pediatric plastic surgeon. Depending on the size of the nasal pyriform aperture stenosis, the newborn could experience rapidly after birth or within a few weeks a respiratory distress syndrome, or, he could also tolerate very well the overall hypoplasia. The delivery was therefore organized in a type III maternity for postnatal close survey of the child.
The women delivered vaginally, at 39 weeks’ gestation of a baby boy weighing 3085 g (−0.8DS) measuring 46 cm (−1.7DS) with a head circumference of 33 cm (−1DS). He initially adapted very well in the delivery room with an Apgar score of 10 at 5 minutes, venous pH at 7.26, and arterial pH at 7.17. He did not experience immediate transient respiratory distress, and a routine neonatal intensive care unit survey for respiratory disorders was established. The newborn remained in spontaneous ventilation with an air humidifier and no desaturation below 90% was observed despite obstructive dyspnea associated with nasal pyriform aperture stenosis and mid-nasal stenosis confirmed by nasofibroscopy. Neurological clinical examination, child behavior, and paraclinic examinations were noted as normal, especially transfontanellar ultrasound, cerebral MRI screening on day 4, auditory screening, and funduscopic examination. The hormonal balance of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis was also normal.
At 5 days of life, a facial computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed a nasal pyriform aperture stenosis measured at a maximum transverse diameter of 5.4 mm, associated with an overall hypoplastic aspect of the anterior half of the nasal fossae, which had a triangular morphology. The nasal septum, although medial, had a thickened aspect (measured at 4.5 mm). Choanal atresia was not associated and the single median incisor diagnosed prenatally was confirmed . Due to good respiratory tolerance, the baby boy was discharged at home at 12 days of life.