A 74-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital department due to a right atrium mass. Three months earlier, she consulted a haematologist due to persistent fever and lymphadenopathy. A diagnosis of metastatic non-small cell lung carcinoma was made. Cardiovascular assessment before cancer treatment by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed the presence of a mass in the right atrium. A transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and a cardiac magnetic resonance were performed to further evaluate this mass, revealing a filamentous formation of 15 × 15 × 19 mm, originating from the inferior vena cava and extending to the interatrial septum, without gadolinium enhancement (; see ). This mass was interpreted as a Chiari’s network, and no specific treatment was proposed at the time. Immunotherapy with pembrolizumab was initiated. One month prior admission, she was hospitalized for fatigue. Physical examination revealed peripheral oedema and elevated jugular venous pressure. Laboratory investigation revealed cholestasis. Due to this right-sided acute heart failure, a computed tomography angiography of the chest was performed and showed a bilateral pulmonary embolism . The TTE showed the same previously known mass in the right atrium. Rivaroxaban, a non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant (NOAC), was started and patient was discharged. One day prior to admission, the follow-up TTE showed an increased size of the right atrium mass, as well as two new masses on the mitral valve . The patient was referred to our department.
At presentation, she was still febrile with a body temperature of 38.1°C. She presented persistent dyspnoea for several weeks and reported amaurosis fugax as well as transient diplopia. Except for pulmonary cancer, the patient’s medical history was only relevant for arterial hypertension. Her usual treatment included perindopril. Her blood pressure was 120/60 mm Hg, heart rate was 90 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 96% on room air. The physical examination was irrelevant, and there were no signs of heart failure or neurological deficit. Routine laboratory investigations showed a C-reactive protein at 195 mg/L (normal range < 10.0). Blood cultures were negative multiple times. Immunological assays for anti-phospholipid syndrome were negative. Coagulation factor VIII was 419% (normal range: 60–150%). TEE showed two masses on the mitral valve: the first one on the A2 portion of the anterior leaflet, and the second one on the posterior leaflet (; see , ). These two masses had the same echogenicity as the one in the right atrium. The valve had neither stenotic nor regurgitant complications. A cerebral magnetic resonance was performed and showed multiple bilateral lesions compatible with ischaemic embolism.
A NBTE involving Chiari’s network and mitral valve in the setting of a procoagulant state related to the active cancer was suspected, and intravenous heparin was started. To achieve the target range of activated partial thromboplastin time and anti-Xa level, the patient required a high dose of heparin (50.000 units per day for a weight of 50 kg). TTE and TEE realized 2 weeks after heparin initiation, showed a favourable regression of the right atrium mass, as well as the two lesions on the mitral valve. After multidisciplinary discussion, 3 weeks of intravenous heparin was decided with bridging therapy to vitamin K antagonist (VKA) for life (international normalized ratio target range 2.0–3.0). Follow-up TTE and TEE at 6 weeks showed a persistent filamentous structure coming from the inferior vena cava, which is consistent with the Chiari’s network . The mitral valve was free from vegetations. On the oncologic level, the patient did not respond to immunotherapy and is undergoing chemotherapy.