A 30-year-old woman, a nurse, came to the doctor's clinic complaining of left back pain for seven days in June 2021. The patient had no past illness or urological problems history, The family history for urological problems and routine drug consumption was denied. The vital signs were within normal limits, and the physical examination demonstrated normal results, which were no referred pain, mass, or lesions. The patient underwent routine laboratory tests, including CBC, Kidney Function, Liver Function, Urinalysis, and Urine sedimentation, and showed no abnormal results. Therefore, radiologic imaging was carried out for the diagnosis. The USG abdomen showed a cyst on the left kidney. Based on those data, conservative management was the best option for the patient.
In July 2021, the patient suddenly felt accompanied by severe pain in the left flank region while carrying her baby. The patient denied any history of strenuous activity and trauma. The patient appeared pale and weak, and her vital sign showed low blood pressure and tachycardia. The laboratory examination results demonstrated anemia and low hematocrit level. The results of a CT-Scan abdomen with contrast showed that there was a hyperdense lesion, a well-defined, regular edge on the left kidney, size ± 7.4 × 7.0 × 7.0 cm, with a calcified component, the lesion appears to compress the left renal pelvis, accompanied by subcapsular fluid collection, density 32 Hounsfield Unit (HU) and gloom in the left fat mesentery reaching the region left lower hemiabdomen . Other findings in the patient included ascites in the pelvic and peri splenic region, bilateral pleural effusion, especially left, hepatomegaly, and thickening of the VU wall. Due to suspicion of spontaneous rupture of the renal cyst, the patient underwent exploration and bleeding control. The exploration results obtained that on the base cyst, there was an active blood vessel that bursts. The operative technique for this condition through cyst excision and nephrorrhaphy was performed by Tarakan Regional Hospital Urologist . Moreover, pathological anatomy analysis demonstrated no malignancy cells found.
As a comprehensive treatment, ensuring any abnormality in the following days was mandatory. The patient underwent a routine follow-up for perioperative, one-week post-operative, and a month later. The patient's daily routine had no limitations, without any post-operative adverse effects. This case presentation followed SCARE Guideline Checklist 2020 .