A 21-year-old woman presented with left upper quadrant pain. She underwent routine blood tests and non-contrast computed tomography (CT). The blood tests did not show any abnormalities, and the CT showed the presence of three, similarly sized spleens, but no other abnormalities. As the patient did not have any other symptoms, she was sent home with a prescription for an analgesic. However, the abdominal pain did not improve and she returned to the hospital 2 days later. Her inflammatory markers were somewhat elevated, and an enhanced CT showed that one of the multiple spleens did not pick up the contrast . We diagnosed her with splenic infarction; however, the cause of the infarction was unclear, and torsion or embolism was considered possibilities. The patient was admitted and began conservative therapy, including fasting and antibiotic administration. However, neither her abdominal pain nor inflammatory marker levels improved . Hence, we performed a follow-up enhanced-CT scan, 2 days after admission, which showed that the splenic infarction had not improved and that ascitic fluid was present around the spleen and in the pelvic space . At this point, we decided to surgically remove the infarcted spleen. Considering that the patient was a young woman, we elected to perform a laparoscopic splenectomy after receiving informed consent.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia, with the patient in a supine position and her legs spread apart. We created an umbilical incision and inserted three operating ports along the left subcostal margin (5 mm, 12 mm, and 5 mm in size), and a 5-mm operating port on the left side of the abdomen . The port sites were selected along the lines of a left subcostal incision, in case conversion to open surgery became necessary. These port sites were also in a co-axial position to the surgeon. There were no adhesions observed in the abdominal cavity. First, we incised the omentum and opened the bursa, detecting two non-infarcted spleens in front of the pancreas. Behind these spleens, there was an infarcted spleen surrounded by fluid. We incised the inflamed adipose tissue around the spleen to expose the pedicle, which was twisted; consequently, we diagnosed splenic torsion . Using an automatic suturing device, we dissected the pedicle of the infarcted spleen. The umbilical incision was extended to remove the resected spleen (78 × 57 × 35 mm) . After confirming the absence of active bleeding, we sutured the incisions. The surgical time was 119 min, and there was little blood loss. The patient did not experience any complications and was discharged 4 days after surgery.