A 17-year-old girl suffered from a traumatic injury to her maxillary anterior teeth one month ago . The girl complained of severe pain to teeth 11 and 21 to touch and biting. Clinical examination showed that teeth 11 and 21 were slightly displaced labially . The teeth responded to electric and cold pulp sensibility tests (tooth #11: 77/80, tooth #21: 56/80). The teeth were moderately tender to percussion and palpation. Both teeth showed grade II mobility. Periodontal probing was in the 2–3 mm range. Radiographic examination showed that teeth 11 and 21 had fully developed and demonstrated multiple transverse fractures in the middle third of the root of tooth 11 and tooth 21 . The diagnosis was multiple transverse root fractures with treatment was required due to persistent pain experienced by the patient despite splinting of the teeth for 1 month. Treatment options included root canal treatment of the coronal fragment of the root, REPs for the coronal fragment, and extraction. The patient decided to have REPs and informed consent was obtained.
At the first visit, teeth 13, 12, 11, 21, 22 and 23 were splinted for 4 weeks after the first visit. Local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine containing 1:100,000 epinephrine was administered. The teeth were isolated with a rubber dam. Under a surgical microscope (Zumax, Zuzhou, China), the canals were accessed, and a moderate amount of bleeding immediately drained through the access cavity. The canals were gently irrigated with 1.5% sodium hypochlorite solution to a level of a1mm coronal to the fracture. The working length of each tooth was extended up to the most coronal fracture line determined radiographically with a #25 hand K-file. The canals of the coronal fragments were carefully, sequentially debrided to #40 K-files with constant irrigation with sodium hypochlorite to the most coronal fracture line preserving vital pulp tissue and with only minimal to no filing of the canal walls. The canals of the coronal fragments were dried with paper points and dressed with calcium hydroxide (ApexCal; Ivoclar Vivadent AG, Schaan, Liechtenstein). The access cavity was temporized with a sterile cotton pellet and glass ionomer cement (Fuji IX, GC, Tokyo, Japan).
At the second treatment visit two weeks later, both teeth were asymptomatic. Local infiltration anesthesia with 3% Mepivacaine (Septodont, Taican, Jiangsu, China) without vasoconstrictor was administered. The teeth were isolated with a rubber dam and the access cavity reopened. Calcium hydroxide was removed with copious amounts of sodium hypochlorite irrigation followed by saline solution irrigation. The coronal canal was dried and rinsed with 17% EDTA solution (Langlishangwu, Wuhan, China) for 1 min in each tooth and dried again. A #40 hand K-file measuring 21 mm was used to gently penetrate the apical fragment of the canal containing vital pulp to induce bleeding into the coronal canal spaces up to the cemento-enamel junction. After a blood clot was formed, CollaCote (Integra Life Sciences, Shanghai, China) was placed over the blood clot in the canal of each tooth. A 3 mm thickness of iRoot BP (Innovative Bioceramix, Inc, Shanghai, China) paste was then placed against the CollaCote followed by a moist cotton pellet. The teeth were restored with glass ionomer cement and composite resin (Fuji IX, GC, Tokyo, Japan). A final radiograph was taken to verify the location of the coronal seal . The patient was reviewed after 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, and 48 months, respectively.