67-year-old female patient who consulted the emergency department for palpitations. As a clinical history, she presented mitral prolapse and loss of vision in the right eye secondary to an ophthalmic artery embolism. She began 7 days earlier with sporadic palpitations, not associated with the functional class, which subsided spontaneously, and which persisted permanently for 2 hours on the day of the consultation. The patient reported progressive dyspnoea up to functional class III of 6 months of evolution. On admission, she presented the following vital signs: arterial tension of 110/60 mmHg, heart rate of 140 beats per minute, oxygen saturation of 95% of ambient air, respiratory rate of 20 beats per minute, jugular engorgement, oedema 3/6 and hepatalgia. On the admission electrocardiogram, a rhythm of atrial fibrillation was observed at 140 beats per minute, axis at 60°, qrs 0.14 with an image of incomplete left branch block, without alterations of the ST-T segment. Laboratory: haematocrit of 42, no leukocytosis, creatinine 0.92, sodium of 136, potassium of 4.3, magnesium of 1.9, NT proBnp of 12 000 pg/dL, and troponins of 1900 ng/dL. It was interpreted as heart failure in a patient with atrial fibrillation with high ventricular response. During the admission, the etiological diagnosis was deepened. An echocardiogram was performed, where increased left ventricular diameters with severe impairment of function, severe left atrial enlargement, redundant mitral valve with bivalve prolapse were observed, with a predominance of p, with mild reflux and mild tricuspid insufficiency with pulmonary systolic pressure of 28 mmHg. Due to severe impairment of function not known and positive troponins, a cinecoronaryography was performed, which did not evidence angiographically significant lesions. Differential diagnoses were proposed: myocarditis and tachycardiomyopathy. They were ruled out, given that the patient did not present echocardiographic characteristics of myocarditis and in the rhythm without sinus there was no recovery of function, which also did not correspond with a syndrome of tachycardiomyopathy. It was interpreted as severe impairment of ventricular function in a patient with Barlow's disease. An electrocardiogram of the rhythm without sinus was performed, and a transesophageal cardioversion was performed successfully. In the transesophageal electrocardiogram, the mitral valve was reevaluated again and the patient presented mild insufficiency with a prolapse similar to that observed in the transtoracic electrocardiogram. Electrocardioversion was performed successfully. In the subsequent electrocardiograms of the rhythm without sinus, the severe impairment of ventricular function persisted. At 24 hours of admission, the patient intercurred with an episode of cardiorespiratory arrest, secondary to polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. She repeated two similar events at 48 and 72 hours, all of which were reversed with advanced cardiopulmonary resuscitation. For this reason, the placement of an implantable cardiodesfibrilator (CDI) was decided as secondary prevention. The patient was discharged.
