A 15-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital due to skin lesions for more than 2 months, muscle weakness for 1 month, and dysphagia for 3 days before her visit.
Two months before admission, the patient experienced facial swelling and pain, red papules appeared on her eyelids. The local hospital treated her for allergy, but the symptoms did not improve. The weakness of proximal limbs and cervical flexor began one month before admission and was associated with upper limbs edema. Muscle weakness gradually progressed, and she could not do her daily activities such as tooth brushing, hair combing, and going up and down stairs. Laboratory examinations revealed elevated levels of serum creatine kinase (CK, 2914U/L; reference.
range: 26-200U/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH, 555U/L; reference range: 100-250U/L). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and complete blood count were normal. Anti-nuclear matrix protein 2 (NXP2) antibody was found in her serum sample. Her pulmonary CT showed pleural thickening, a small amount of effusion, and subcutaneous edema of the chest wall. Echocardiography showed a small amount of pericardial effusion. Muscle biopsy revealed inflammatory cell infiltration, muscle fiber degeneration, necrosis and phagocytosis, and perivascular inflammatory infiltration. MHC-I staining was positive. She was diagnosed with JDM and subsequently given intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) 80 mg daily and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 20 g for 4 consecutive days in local hospital. Then, her skin rash was alleviated, and her muscle strength slightly improved. But dysphagia, choking cough during drinking, and hoarseness appeared 3 days before admission to our hospital.
On admission to our hospital, physical examinations revealed a body temperature of 37.1℃. Her only skin lesion was heliotrope rash. Mild edema of the upper arms was found in physical examination. Decreased muscle force was detected mainly in the proximal segment of the upper (Medical Research Council (MRC) Scale for muscle strength grade 3) and lower (MRC grade 2) extremities. Laboratory examinations revealed hyperferritinemia (443.3ng/mL; reference.
Range: 11-306ng/ml), and hyperCKemias (2495U/L). The serum levels of LDH (503U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (165U/L; reference range: 0-42U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (73U/L; reference range: 0-40U/L) and γ-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) (70U/L; reference range: 0-52U/L) were slightly elevated. Ro-52 antibody was positive.
She was treated with IVMP 40 mg (1 mg/kg) daily, intravenous cyclophosphamide (IVCYC) 400 mg (10 mg/kg) every two weeks, and tocilizumab, a humanized monoclonal interleukin (IL)-6 receptor inhibitor, 480 mg (8 mg/kg). The skin rash and subcutaneous edema were relieved, and muscle strength improved.
Three weeks later, the patient developed a high fever (39.1℃) and headache after catching a cold. Laboratory examinations revealed leukopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), or herpes simplex virus (HSV) was negative. The serum level of ferritin was 4322ng/mL. The serum level of CK decreased to 1545U/L, but the serum levels of ALT, AST, and LDH increased after treatment. Abdominal ultrasound showed splenomegaly. Bone marrow aspiration revealed haemophagocytosis. The diagnosis of MAS was established according to the HLH-2004 criteria . Despite intensive treatment with dexamethasone, cyclosporin (CsA), and IVIG, her condition further deteriorated, and she died due to refractory MAS and multiple organ failure 6 weeks later.