A 56-year-old man developed isolated paresthesias, weakness and cramps of the right upper limb over a period of three months. Previously he had been healthy with no history of long-term medications, engaging in variety of sports (cycling, running, cross-country skiing, bow-shooting). Neurological examination revealed isolated distal muscle weakness of the right upper limb (MRC 3), normal muscle strength of the left upper limb (MRC 5), generalized hyporeflexia and the presence of pes cavus bilaterally with normal muscle strength (MRC 5) and reduced vibration sense (ankle 4/8, toe 2/8) in the lower limbs. Slightly reduced pin prick and thermic sensation was detected. The patient was able to walk on heels and tiptoes. Mild ataxia when standing with eyes closed (positive Romberg sign) was also present. Chronic progression of muscle weakness followed during the next six months. The right upper limb showed increased distal weakness (wrist extensors MRC 3, finger extensors MRC 1, wrist and finger flexors MRC 3, intrinsic hand muscles MRC 3). Afterwards, involvement of the left upper limb with mild weakness and paresthesia also appeared (wrist extensors MRC 5, finger extensors MRC 3, wrist and finger flexors MRC 4, intrinsic hand muscles MRC 4). As a result, the patient had difficulties with fine motor tasks, such as buttoning or unbuttoning of clothes, unscrewing bottle caps and turning door-knobs. No weakness of proximal upper limb muscles was registered (MRC 5). Muscle strength in lower limbs was normal (MRC 5).
Nerve conduction studies (NCS) were consistent with moderate primary demyelinating sensory-motor polyneuropathy of the upper limbs with partial conduction blocks in some nerves (median, ulnar) and severe sensory-motor polyneuropathy of the lower limbs. Compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) showed prolonged distal motor latencies, reduced nerve conduction velocities and low amplitudes with prolonged minimal F wave latencies. Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) in the upper limbs showed prolonged distal latencies, reduced velocities and low amplitudes. SNAPs in lower limbs were absent . Needle electromyography revealed a severe chronic denervation syndrome with sporadic spontaneous activity in upper limb muscles (biceps brachii, deltoideus, extensor digitorum communis, interosseus dorsalis primus, and abductor pollicis).
Laboratory tests revealed normal values, including the absence of paraprotein. CK (creatine kinase) levels were two-fold greater than normal. Antineuronal, antiganglioside and anti-MAG (myelin-associated glycoprotein precursor) antibodies were negative. Nodal/paranodal antibodies (NF 155, 140/186, contactin 1 and Caspr) were also negative. Genetic testing for CMT1A and HNPP (hereditary neuropathy with pressure palsies) yielded negative results. CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) showed a protein level of 0.54 g/L, normal cell count and absent oligoclonal bands. MRI of the brain, cervical spine and both plexus brachialis showed normal findings.
The diagnosis of Lewis-Sumner syndrome (MADSAM) was made at the time (according to EFNS/PNS criteria 2010). The treatment started with methylprednisolone 4 g intravenously. Oral prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) continued for two months. No clinical improvement led us to start with immunoglobulin therapy (IVIG, 0.4 g/kg/day, five days every month). After the 3rd cycle of IVIG, upper limb weakness transiently improved (right upper limb wrist extensors MRC 4, finger extensors MRC 3, left upper limb wrist extensors MRC 5 and finger extensors MRC 4). Despite the frequent and highly dosed IVIG therapy during the next two-year treatment period, weakness progression continued. Later, patient underwent three cycles of plasma exchange in period of six months (five exchanges in each cycle) without any clinical improvement. Finally, one dose of ocrelizumab (two 300 mg infusions) was administered off label as the last therapeutic attempt. The patient continued to progress despite ocrelizumab treatment (right wrist extensors MRC 1, finger extensors MRC 1, wrist and finger flexors MRC 2, intrinsic hand muscles MRC 2, left wrist extensors MRC 2, finger extensors MRC 1, wrist and finger flexors MRC 3, intrinsic hand muscles MRC 2). Moreover, weakness and muscle wasting spread to proximal upper limb muscles bilaterally (supinator, pronator, biceps, brachialis, deltoideus with MRC 4). Minimal weakness progression was also registered in the distal muscles of both lower limbs with (MRC 4). Therefore, in conclusion, intensive long-lasting immunomodulatory therapy was unsuccessful .
A survey of the patient´s family revealed signs of polyneuropathy in two other family members: the proband’s mother (79 years old, I.2) and his son (31 years old, III.7, Fig. ). Both of them were asymptomatic (they did not complain about any motor or sensory disturbance in the upper or lower limbs). However, both of them had an evident bilateral pes cavus, generalized areflexia and decreased vibratory sense in the lower limbs. NCS revealed moderate primary demyelinating sensory-motor polyneuropathy of the upper limbs and severe demyelinating polyneuropathy of the lower limbs with partial conduction blocks and prolonged distal CMAP duration in some nerves .
The LITAF/SIMPLE (ENST00000339430) bidirectional sequencing of the proband’s sample (II.5, Fig. ) showed a G > C transversion in exon 4 at position 348 (c.348G > C/p.Trp116Cys, Fig. and Fig. ) present in the heterozygous state. This novel, missense variant of LITAF had not been previously reported elsewhere and was scored as pathogenic by Predict Protein Open (Effect of Protein Mutations) software and other predictive software programs (GERP, MetaSVM, PolyPhen 2 and MutationTaster). Furthermore, the mutation was scored as 'pathogenic' by the ACMG (American College of Medical Genetics) criteria (PS1 + PM2 + PM5 + PP1 + PP2 + PP3 + PP4) . No other plausible, causative candidate variants were found in the proband’s genetic material by WES (whole exome sequencing). WES results were verified by the amplicon deep sequencing (ADS) method. PCR amplicons (545 bp long) were generated using specific primers (forward: actggtgttccttccccttt, reverse: tcgtttgaacctgagcagtg). The amplicons were prepared for sequencing using a Nextera XT kit (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were paired-end (2 × 100 bp) sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq1500. The results were visualized on the Integrative Genomics Viewer and analysed for the presence of the particular variant in proband. The ADS verification resulted in obtaining coverage > 6000 × in all cases. The missense variant c.348G > C of LITAF was also identified in family members I.2 and III.7 which correlated with autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance . Genetic analysis did not confirm the missense variant in healthy family members (father I.1, proband´s brother II.2, other son III.6).