We present the case of an 81-year-old male who presented from a skilled nursing
facility with persistent fevers, confusion, and sepsis, secondary to a suspected
urinary tract infection that failed to respond to outpatient levofloxacin. His past
medical history included hypertension, cerebral hemorrhage, atrioventricular block,
and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Pertinent vital signs and laboratories include
heart rate of 94 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute, white
blood cell (WBC) of 15.2 K/mcL, temperature of 100.7°F, and blood pressure of
128/70 mmHg. Medications on admission included tamsulosin, clonidine, and
levofloxacin. He reported an allergy to sulfonamides. Blood and urine cultures were
collected, levofloxacin was discontinued, and ceftriaxone 1 g intravenously (IV)
every 24 h was subsequently initiated. A Foley catheter was in place but changed
upon admission. An initial chest X-ray revealed no acute process.
On day 2 of admission, both blood and urine cultures were positive for S.
aureus, mecA positive by polymerase chain reaction. Susceptibilities
were performed by VITEK2 which demonstrated a vancomycin MIC ⩽ 0.5 mg/L and a
daptomycin MIC = 0.25 mg/L (see ). Ceftriaxone was discontinued, and vancomycin was initiated at
15 mg/kg IV every 12 h. On day 3, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) of adequate
diagnostic quality found no evidence of endocarditis. Transesophageal echocardiogram
was attempted on day 7 but was aborted due to complications. A repeat TTE was
considered but not performed as it was unlikely to change the course of therapy.
Vancomycin troughs were monitored twice weekly and maintained greater than 10 mg/L
(range 10.2–12.2 mg/L). Subsequent blood cultures drawn on days 3, 5, and 15
remained positive. On day 17, a magnetic resonance imaging was performed to evaluate
the lumbar spine, demonstrating no evidence of osteomyelitis, discitis, or abscess.
On day 18, therapy was changed to daptomycin 6 mg/kg IV every 24 h. Creatinine
phosphokinase was monitored weekly and remained within normal limits. Blood cultures
on days 19 and 23 remained positive. On day 25, daptomycin was increased to 8 mg/kg
IV every 24 h, and gentamicin 1 mg/kg IV every 8 h was added. Gentamicin levels were
monitored to maintain peaks above 3 mg/L and troughs below 1 mg/L. In addition, a
whole body indium-111 tagged WBC scan was performed and did not reveal any evidence
metastatic infection.
Blood cultures were repeated on day 28 which subsequently turned positive on day 29.
Hospice care was discussed with the patient and family due to his continued fevers,
increasing confusion, declining clinical status, and overall poor prognosis. The
family requested to continue care for an additional week. The infectious diseases
service switched to the salvage regimen of vancomycin 15 mg/kg IV every 12 h plus
nafcillin 2 g IV every 4 h. Vancomycin troughs ranged from 10.7 to 12.3 mg/L,
similar to the previous course. Blood cultures drawn on day 32, 3 days after
starting vancomycin and nafcillin, were negative. A peripherally inserted central
venous catheter was placed on day 16 which was removed with the tip sent for culture
on day 33 which showed no evidence of growth. Local wound care had been continuously
provided for an unstageable decubitus ulcer. A bedside debridement procedure was
also performed on day 34, 2 days after the negative blood cultures. After 11 days,
nafcillin was changed to piperacillin–tazobactam 3.375 g IV every 6 h, based on a
culture of Pseudomonas aeruginosa growing from an infected
decubitus ulcer. The patient continued to improve and was discharged on day 44 to a
skilled nursing facility to continue vancomycin and piperacillin–tazobactam to
complete 42 days of therapy following the negative blood culture, which was 71 days
after the initial presentation. Renal function was monitored throughout therapy
without any significant changes.