We report here a case of 37-year old woman with schizophrenia, hospitalized for an exacerbation of psychotic symptoms. She had no personal/family history of cardiac diseases or sudden deaths. Besides benzodiazepines, she was treated at the admission with aripiprazol (20 mg/day), haloperidol (3 mg/day) and escitalopram (20 mg/day). The routine laboratory and clinical check-up (including ECG and blood electrolytes) revealed no abnormalities. The patient developed the aLQTS in response to small doses of risperidone (1–2 mg/day), confirmed at three independent drug challenges. Noteworthy, the patient responded with significant QT prolongation to risperidone (QTc increase from 458 to 508 ms), also when all other drugs, which might potentially affect QT length, were discontinued (Figure ). The reason of this extreme sensitivity to risperidone was unclear but the contribution of a cytochrome polymorphism or other elimination failures is unlikely since risperidone prolonged QT at very low blood concentrations (19.1 nM). Moreover, the concentration of paliperidone, an active metabolite of risperidone with QT-prolonging potential , was very low too, and the cumulative blood concentration of risperidone and paliperidone was subtherapeutic. Interestingly, the patient did not respond with QT prolongation following the administration of other antipsychotics (e.g. aripiprazol, clothiapine, haloperidol; data not depicted). In particular, the administration of clozapine, known to be associated with higher QT-prolongation risk than risperidone , had no effect on QT-length (Figure ).
We hypothesized that our patient carries a mutation or polymorphism in the KCNH2, which could determine conformational alterations of the channel and thus differentially affect its capacity to bind risperidone and clozapine. Therefore, we have sequenced all the coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the KCNH2 (isoforms 1a and 1b), but no mutation or polymorphism was found (data not depicted). We have also excluded any mutation in the SCN5A gene, as well as in the KCNE2 (data not depicted), the gene encoding the β–subunit of the Ikr channel, as well as G38S and D85N polymorphism in the KCNE1, reported to cause the LQTS [,]. Since a subtle mutation in the KCNQ1 could affect the repolarisation reserve, indirectly leading to the aLQTS [,], we have sequenced also this gene but found no mutation (data not depicted). Additionally, we have excluded any exonic deletion and duplication of the KCNH2 by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (data not depicted; P114-A2-LQT probemix, MRC-Holland).