The patient was a 69-year-old man referred to our department after a simple computed tomography (CT) scan revealed enlarged gastric lesser curvature lymph nodes and a mass lesion in the pancreatic head. A subsequent contrast-enhanced CT revealed wall thickening of the lower gastric body, multiple enlarged gastric lesser curvature lymph nodes, and an anterior superior common hepatic artery (CHA) lymph node involving the pancreatic head and CHA . Tumor markers showed elevated levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, 33.9 ng/ml) and carbohydrate antigen (CA19-9, 108.1 U/ml). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed a tumor with an ulcer on the lesser curvature of the lower body of the stomach . Histopathological examination of the biopsied specimen indicated moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, which was HER2-negative, and MSI-high status was determined using an MSI test kit (FALCO biosystems, Kyoto, Japan). Based on these findings, a diagnosis of advanced gastric cancer of stage III (T3N2M0) was made (8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control). The anterior superior lymph node of the CHA was considered unresectable due to its involvement with the pancreatic head and CHA, and chemotherapy was decided as the treatment plan. The patient had difficulty swallowing at the time of examination; therefore, he was treated with mFOLFOX6 therapy (leucovorin 200 mg/m2, oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 in a 2-h infusion, bolus fluorouracil 400 mg/m2 on day 1, and a 46-h infusion of fluorouracil 2400 mg/m2 every 2 weeks). At the end of three courses, tumor markers were elevated (CEA, 35.3 ng/ml and CA19-9, 136.9 U/ml), and contrast-enhanced CT showed enlargement of the primary tumor, and lymph node of the lesser curvature and anterior superior CHA .
The patient was diagnosed with the progressive disease based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) and was treated with ramucirumab plus paclitaxel as a second-line therapy. After a 4-week course of paclitaxel (80 mg/m2) intravenously on days 1, 8, and 15, with ramucirumab (8 mg/kg) intravenously on days 1 and 15, the patient developed a grade 3 fatigue, which necessitated a change of the therapeutic drugs. Hence, his second-line therapy was switched to pembrolizumab monotherapy (pembrolizumab 200 mg once every 3 weeks). Tumor markers decreased markedly to CEA 7.2 ng/ml and CA19-9 35.9 U/ml at the end of three courses, and contrast-enhanced CT showed that both the primary tumor and the lesser curvature lymph node had shrunk, and the anterior superior lymph nodes of the CHA showed improved findings of invasion into the pancreatic head and CHA . A diagnosis of partial response was made based on RECIST guidelines. EGD revealed a tumor in the primary lesion that almost disappeared after six courses of pembrolizumab . Tumor markers remained low with CEA 7.5 mg/ml and CA19-9 33.7 U/ml , and contrast-enhanced CT revealed that R0 resection was possible; therefore, a distal gastrectomy with D2 lymph node dissection was performed. Surgical findings showed no obvious liver metastasis or peritoneal dissemination, and the cytology was negative. The anterior superior lymph node of the CHA was safely dissected after resection of the primary tumor, as intraoperative ultrasonography confirmed that there was no invasion into the pancreatic head or CHA . Gastrectomy specimens showed an ulcerated scar on gross examination . The histopathological findings showed that the superficial layer of the gastric mucosa was covered by regenerating epithelium and that there was only mucus accumulation from the submucosa to the serosa with no residual tumor cells that could be considered viable, determined to be histological grade 3 . The histopathological findings of the resected lymph node revealed mucus accumulation only in the anterior superior lymph node of the CHA, which was diagnosed as metastasis of adenocarcinoma, although there were no residual tumor cells that could be classified as viable . The patient was discharged from the hospital 23 days after surgery without complications.
The patient commenced 6 months of adjuvant chemotherapy with pembrolizumab 3 months after surgery. Twenty months after surgery, the patient is alive and recurrence-free.