A 52-year-old, right-handed, previously healthy woman presented to our hospital for unprovoked numbness and worsening impairment of sensibility at the level of her right thumb, index, middle finger, and radial half of her ring finger. She also complained of impairment in everyday activities due to worsening weakness of her opponens pollicis muscle. Only slight improvement in her symptoms was reported during the past 12 months despite splinting the hand using a wrist brace, undergoing physiotherapy, and taking high doses of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and Gabapentin. The patient reported a chronic history of repetitive movements of the fingers and wrists with chronic pressure points on the right wrist.
On examination, the affected hand revealed no swelling or local heat. Atrophy of the thenar muscle and hypoesthesia in the distribution of the median nerve were noted. Both Phalen’s test and Tinel’s sign were positive on the right side with no restriction in the range of motion of wrist and fingers. Nerve electrodiagnostic testing suggested right median nerve compression at the level of the right carpal tunnel. An initial plain radiograph of the right wrist showed an oval radio-opacity on the volar side of the wrist joint facing the carpal bones .
A confirmatory magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right hand and wrist showed a solitary oval calcification (low-intensity lesion both in T1WI and T2WI) measuring 2 × 0.8 × 0.6 cm (cm), located in the carpal tunnel centrally between the flexor tendons of the wrist, at the lunatum-capitatum junction, without surrounding adherence (the boundary between the lesion and the surrounding tissues was clear) . The lesion is also surrounded by a reactive fluid collection . The MRI also showed subtle tenosynovitis of the flexor’s tendon sheaths, with mild compression of the median nerve . The patient’s full blood count, vitamin D, calcium, phosphate, electrolytes, uric acid, urea, creatinine, and alkaline phosphatase were within normal range. Other laboratory data including an endocrine and rheumatology panel were also normal. Subsequently, the patient was diagnosed with CTS secondary to a localized calcareous mass.
Given that conservative treatment was ineffective, the patient’s condition was managed by open incisional carpal tunnel release. An incision of approximately 4 cm was performed on the volar side of the right wrist facing the third metacarpal bone . The palmar aponeurosis was then dissected, and the flexor retinaculum was located and transected. The white calcareous tumor was lying over the carpal bones of the osteofibrous canal, and it was only visualized after retracting the median nerve. A 2.1 by 1.0 cm mass was easily removed with no adhesion to surrounding tissues. Histological sections showed calcified deposits encased in a fibrocartilaginous tissue with inflammatory infiltrates composed of giant cell granulomas. These findings supported the diagnosis of tumoral calcinosis [, ].
During her follow up, three months following the surgery, no clinical or radio-graphical signs of recurrence were noted and the patient reported complete resolution of her symptoms.