A 64-year-old woman, with medical history of hypertension that was treated with amlozin (5 mg, Sumitomo Pharma, Japan) and azilsartan (20 mg, Towa, Japan), was initially admitted to another institution due to temporary back and abdominal pain. Her abdominal ultrasonography raised suspicion of CAA. Consequently, she was referred to our institution for further evaluation and treatment of CAA.
At the time of presentation at our institution, she was asymptomatic, and her laboratory results were within the normal range (Additional file ). Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed that the CA and SMA converged into the aorta via the CMT. The CAA was a saccular aneurysm and located approximately at the median of the CA, with a diameter of 26 × 28 mm . Notably, no significant stenosis was present on the CMT. The patient was diagnosed with CAA, complicated by CMT. She was a good candidate for surgery since her CAA was > 20 mm .
Selective visceral angiography was performed to evaluate the visceral circulation of each branch, especially that of the CA and SMA. Angiography revealed that the branches from the CA were only the common hepatic artery (CHA) and splenic artery (SA). We found no discernible microbranches originating directly from the primary CA duct . The left gastric artery (LGA) originated from the aorta. Angiography of the LGA with balloon occlusion of the CMT revealed collateral circulation to the proper hepatic artery (PHA) via the right gastric artery (RGA) and to the SA via the short gastric artery (SGA) , suggesting that hepatic circulation could be maintained even after occlusion of the CHA.
Based on these anatomical findings, we determined that the safety landing zone for stenting of the CA was not sufficient. In addition, coil embolization of the CAA itself posed a potential risk of coil migration, which could lead to severe complications. Because of the patient's relatively young age, preserving the anatomical antegrade visceral circulation was considered more important than pursuing a less invasive approach through endovascular therapy (EVT). Regarding open surgical procedures, several options are available, such as aneurysmectomy, aneurysmorrhaphy, aortoceliac bypass, aortohepatic bypass, or ligation [, ]. Based on CT and angiography findings, simple CAA resection would suffice and be a less invasive surgical procedure for open surgery; therefore, direct CAA resection was performed.
After the induction of general anesthesia, the abdomen was opened through a midline incision. The pancreas was exposed through an incision in the omentum. Since the CAA was located behind the pancreas on preoperative CT, the CAA was approached with caution to separate it from the pancreas. The portal vein, CMT, CHA, and SA were eventually exposed . Following systemic heparinization, direct resection of the CAA and subsequent reconstruction of the CA were performed after clamping the CHA, SA, and proximal CA . The total operative time was 249 min, and blood transfusion was not required.
On postoperative enhanced CT, the visceral circulation of the CA and SMA was preserved . Histological analysis of the CAA revealed degenerative true aneurysm, with no evidence of abnormalities, such as lack of elastic fibers or cystic medial necrosis . The patient was discharged uneventfully on postoperative day 10. A follow-up CT one year later demonstrated no sign of recurrence of the CA or the development of new visceral aneurysms.