Our 54-year-old male Caucasian patient had had a severe car accident at the age of 38. He suffered multiple fractures of the central face. His right eye had to be enucleated and replaced by a prosthesis. The patient underwent multiple surgeries and stayed in the intensive care unit for more than two weeks, and then for several weeks in the hospital. He noticed a complete loss of his sense of smell, which was confirmed in subsequent litigation. The patient reported that he was not able to smell smoke or gas and he could not detect flavor in food and beverages. Consequently, the patient's quality-of-life significantly decreased.
Approximately nine years after the accident, he reported his first olfactory impression. It was the smell of hay which was perceived during a walk. The ability to smell continually improved over three years, and has stayed constant since then. No specific therapies regarding smell function were given to the patient. Today, he has no problems with his sense of smell and has normal flavor perception during eating and drinking.
Computed tomography showed patent olfactory clefts, both after the accident, when the patient was anosmic, and 10 years later, when he had regained his olfactory abilities. These images ruled out the presence of obstructions due to sinunasal disease as possible causes of smell dysfunction.
After complete ear-nose-throat examination including nasal endoscopy, smell function was tested 16 years after the accident using the 'Sniffin' Sticks' test battery . This test has been extensively validated and comprises three subtests: a test of olfactory threshold, an odor discrimination task, and an odor identification test. The patient yielded 28.5 points, which represents a score within the lower normal range .
In order to confirm the absence of anosmia, evoked-response olfactometry was applied to the patient using an olfactometer (Burghart Instruments, Wedel, Germany). Following stimulation with selective olfactory stimuli (50% v/v phenylethanol), event-related potentials were clearly detectable .