A 10-year-old girl was referred to the pediatric orthopedic clinic with a right foot deformity which had started at age 4 and had slowly progressed. The parents were certain that the child had symmetric feet shape from birth. There was no history of a similar deformity in the close or distant family members. There was no family history of any neuromuscular disorder.
The physical examination revealed plantigrade feet, with a distinctly right flatfoot with a well-formed longitudinal arch on the left side . There was no evidence of spine anomaly, peripheral neuropathy or myopathy. The right foot examination showed intact sensation, and full power in all the muscles, except for the inversion power which was weaker than the opposite foot. On closer inspection of the foot, a small scar of about 3-4 mm was visible just posterior to the medial malleolus. On further questioning of the parents, they remembered their daughter having cut herself on a piece of rock playing in a park at age 3. This did not require any medical attention and apparently healed uneventfully in few days. This piece of history led to the further investigation including a magnetic resonance imaging of the leg which showed the absence of TPT at the ankle level, and atrophic muscle.
Surgery, through a slightly curved medial foot and ankle incision, showed a fibrous stump of old TPT on the navicular tip. There was no evidence of TPT. The atrophic muscle was, however, found some 12 cm proximal to the medial malleolus with no visible tendon end.
A reconstruction with the flexor hallucis longus longus (FHL) tendon was planned. The incision was extended distally, the “Master Knot of Henry” - the fibrous slip that envelope the FHL and the flexor digitorum (FDL) tendons - was exposed. The FHL was cut at that level, and proximal end was transferred to the navicular bone and tightly sutured to bone and remnants of TPT. The distal stump of the FHL was tightly sutured to the FDL ( and ). Following 6 weeks of cast immobilization a course of physiotherapy was started .
The longitudinal arch was restored and has remained nicely intact up to the last visit 3 years post-surgery . The patient has a pain-free motion of foot, ankle, and toes, and is satisfied. The push off is strong, and she shows very nice longitudinal arch when standing on tiptoes. She could do repeated push off exercise on tiptoes with similar power and foot-arch shape as the opposite foot, without any fatigue.