An 87 year old woman patient reported to the outdoor department of our hospital with a history of having sustained a fall in her bathroom. The patient complained of tenderness and pain in the right hip and thigh. The extremity was externally rotated and shortened. Movement elicited pain in the area of the right hip. Radiographs of the right femur revealed a transverse fracture of the right subtrochanteric region. On assessing the trabecular pattern of the trochanteric region the patient was found to have Singh's grade one porosis with near absence of the trabeculae in the femoral head and neck.
The patient was put on traction and advised to undergo surgery in view of the nature of the fracture and the requirement of early ambulation. Dual X-ray absorbsiometry showed a T score greater than 2.5 standard deviations below normal.
In view of the extremely thin cortices of the femur, it was felt that the oft required schanz pin assisted reduction, needed for guide wire insertion in interlocking nailing, could damage the cortices at the insertion site. Besides this the possibility of cut out precluded the use of dynamic hip screw fixation. The DCS along with cancellous screws was chosen to circumvent these problems.
The fracture was reduced on a traction table after opening the area. Fixation was held with a dynamic condylar screw [DCS] and 95 degree barrel plate. In view of the tenuous nature of the cortices the plate was affixed with four cancellous screws on either side of the fracture.
Post operatively the patient underwent supervised physiotherapy over a period of six weeks. At ten weeks the fracture had united and the patient was allowed full weight bearing. The patient simultaneously was put on treatment with bisphosphonates for the underlying osteoporosis which was primarily of the senile variety.
At the last follow-up [3 years post operative] the patient was pain free with full range of motion of the hip joint. The patient's cortex thickness had also improved at this time as seen on radiographs. The patient was advised as to the potential complications of removal of hardware after which she chose to avoid removal of the implant.