An 11-year-old boy consulted a family doctor for bloody diarrhea. The patient had no specific medical or family history. A colonoscopy from the rectum to the sigmoid colon led to the diagnosis of pediatric UC with a pediatric ulcerative colitis activity index (PUCAI) of 30. He was administered 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) suppositories (1 g/day) and was referred to our hospital for subsequent treatment. His symptoms promptly improved to a PUCAI of 5. His blood examination results were unremarkable but the fecal calprotectin (FC) level was elevated to 3,190 mg/kg. A complete colonoscopy was performed, which revealed inflammatory findings from the rectum to the transverse colon. Moreover, the cecum and ascending colon showed loss of vascular permeability and adherent purulent mucus . The patient was prescribed oral 5-ASA (3,000 mg/day). The FC level gradually decreased to 33.2 mg/kg by week 15 .
At 12 years old, he complained of epigastric pain on an empty stomach, which was relieved with dietary intake (week 19). He reported no UC symptoms, including diarrhea and bloody stools (PUCAI, 0); however, an elevated FC level was noted (week 20). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) findings indicated an A1 ulcer on the lower wall of the duodenal bulb . A rapid urease test was positive, and he was diagnosed with a duodenal ulcer due to H. pylori infection. The H. pylori infection was treated using clarithromycin and amoxicillin for 7 days and a proton-pump inhibitor. The patient’s symptoms improved the day after treatment initiation. In week 33, an EGD was performed to evaluate the therapeutic effect. The duodenal ulcer had healed, and scarring was observed .
The FC level remained high despite improvement of duodenal ulcer symptoms and endoscopic findings of H. pylori eradication. The patient subsequently developed diarrhea (PUCAI, 10) in week 35 and a UC relapse was considered. Cytomegalovirus antibody, antigenemia, and tuberculosis (T-SPOT assay) tests were negative. Colonoscopy showed small aphthae and edematous mucosa throughout the colon in week 36 . Histopathological examination revealed UC lesions grades 3–5 based on the Matts classification. The patient was diagnosed with a UC relapse, and the 5-ASA dosage was increased to 4,000 mg/day (100 mg/kg/day).