A 44-year-old female presented with progressive abdominal distension especially after eating, accompanied by anorexia, fatigue and vomiting, was admitted to our hospital. MRI of the upper abdomen revealed an irregular huge cystic-solid mass which located in both Segments V-VI and VII-VIII of the liver. The largest size of each section was approximately 12 cm × 9 cm (S VII-VIII) and 11 cm × 8 cm (S V-VI). The mass consisted of dense calcification, fat and soft tissue, poorly demarcated from the adjacent peritoneum, suggesting the possibility of malignant teratoma. No abnormalities were found during the examination of the uterus and bilateral adnexa. For serum tumor markers, carcinoma embryonic antigen (CEA) and β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) levels were normal, but AFP level was elevated to 476 ng/ml (the normal range: 0–20 ng/ml). Then, biopsy specimens were obtained and immature neuroectodermal-like structure was observed , which showed positive staining for spalt like transcription factor 4 (SALL4, Clone#6E3, ZSGB-BIO) and negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, Clone#GA5, Vision BiosytemsTM) . Also, Ki-67 (Clone#MRX002, MXB Biotechnologies) staining showed high proliferative index . Therefore, the tumor was diagnosed as immature teratoma, which was not further graded because of the limited tissues.
After exclusion of chemotherapy contraindication, a systemic chemotherapy was delivered associating etoposide (75 mg/m2), with ifosfamide (1.2 g/m2) and cisplatin (20 mg/m2) each day, day 1 to day 4, every 3 weeks. After four cycles, MRI of the upper abdomen showed tumor survival and the size of tumor increased to 14 cm × 11 cm (S VII-VIII) and 13 cm × 12 cm (S V-VI) . However, the serum AFP level was nearly normal.
For further treatment, right hepatectomy, cholecystectomy and partial diaphragmectomy and diaphragmatic repair were performed. During the surgery, the tumor was found to protrude from the liver surface and adhere to the diaphragm, omentum, transverse colon, stomach and duodenum. The tumor size was about 28 cm × 17 cm × 15 cm, and it invaded the abdominal wall and part of the diaphragm. No metastatic tumor was detected in other parts of the abdominal cavity.
Macroscopically, the resected liver measured 30 cm × 24 cm × 13 cm. Cut sections of the liver revealed a solitary, round and cystic-solid mass with grayish or grey-yellow color, which sized 28 cm × 14 cm × 13 cm. The tumor was well-circumscribed but unencapsulated, adjacent to the liver capsule and about 2.5 cm distant from surgical margin.
The section was cystic and solid, showing multiple cystic cavities with different sizes (about 2–10 cm in diameter). The inner wall of the cyst was smooth, and the cavity was filled with jelly-like viscous liquid. For the solid areas, hard bone-like tissues, tender brain-like tissues, and multitudes of fat were visible .
On histologic examination, the tumor contained multiple mature types of tissues derived from three germ layers. Ectodermal derivatives including squamous epithelium, sebaceous glands, eccrine glands and hair follicle could be seen . Also, abundant mature brain tissues such as glia and choroid can be observed . In some areas, these cells were sheet arranged, with layers and polarities, but without significant cellular atypia and neural tube formation . On immunohistochemical staining, those densely cellular regions demonstrated positive for GFAP but negative for SALL-4, and Ki-67 index was low . Moreover, intestinal epithelia and respiratory ciliated epithelium (endoderm), mature cartilage and adipose tissue (mesoderm) could also be observed . The tumor was cut open along its long axis and extensively sampled, and no immature component was found. GTS was diagnosed finally.
Then the patient continued to receive 2 courses of chemotherapy, with the same type and dose of medications as before. However, after 2 months, a CT scan showed multiple small nodules in the bilateral adnexa, suggesting new-onset lesions . Subsequently, the patient underwent the second surgery to resect total uterus and bilateral adnexa. Multiple nodules (0.5-2 cm in diameter) were found on the surface of the ovary, the front of the rectum, and the pelvis on both sides at surgery. Histologically, a large amount of mature glial was observed, while no immature components such as neural tube existed with all tissues sampled. Based on clinical history, GP should be considered.
A brief flow chart of clinical diagnosis and treatment was shown in Fig. . The patient was still in follow-up at the outpatient clinic and in good condition .