A 31-year-old Japanese woman who presented with upper abdominal pain was admitted to a local hospital. She had a history of mycoplasma pneumonia in childhood and a family history of diabetes mellitus of her father. Four days before admission, she had a fever over 37 degrees and received an antipyretic agent at the local clinic, while flu testing results were negative. On admission to the local hospital, serum amylase was elevated to 370 IU/L, and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scanning showed pancreatic swelling and mild ascites . She was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis (grade 1) and treated with ulinastatin. The morning after admission, her fasting serum glucose, insulin and C-peptide level were within normal ranges: 101 mg/dL, 2.2 μIU/L and 0.8 ng/mL, respectively. At 4 days after admission, she complained of nausea and low back pain, and fell to consciousness disturbance (Japan Coma Scale II-10: drowsiness) with hyperglycemia (861 mg/dL) and metabolic acidosis. She was diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis and transferred to our hospital.
This patient’s clinical course in our hospital is presented in Fig. . On admission to our hospital, she showed confusion (Japan Coma Scale I-2) and the upper abdominal symptom of nausea. Laboratory findings showed metabolic acidosis (pH, HCO3, and the anion gap in arterial blood were 7.07, 2.7 mmol/L, and 27.7 mmol/L, respectively), hyperketonemia (serum total ketone bodies 13,179 μmol/L) and hyperglycemia (612 mg/dL). Hemoglobin A1c (5.7%) was within the normal range, and anti-GAD and anti-IA-2 antibodies were undetectable. In addition, neither her serum C-peptide after a glucagon test nor 24-h urinary C-peptide excretion was detectable. These findings met the criteria for FT1D with diabetic ketoacidosis, and the patient was immediately given intravenous insulin infusion therapy. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing indicated DRB1*0401-DQB1*0301, and DRB1*1302-DQB10604 class II gene.
Although serum amylase (1800 U/L, Fig. ), lipase and trypsin (320 U/L and 3040 ng/mL respectively) were elevated, reexamination with CT scanning showed amelioration of the pancreatic swelling and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) imaging depicted no abnormalities, even in the pancreas (data not shown). On the second day in our hospital, her symptoms showed improvement, and the serum glucose level had fallen below 200 mg/dL. However, on the 3rd hospital day, electrocardiography (ECG) depicted ST-segment elevation in V3-V6 without typical cardiac symptoms but serum creatinine kinase (CK) (830 U/L, Fig. ), CK-MB and troponin I (49 U/L and 11.99 ng/mL respectively) were elevated. Coronary angiography showed no abnormal findings. Left ventriculography (LVG) showed apical wall hypokinesis, while no other abnormal findings, including takotsubo cardiomyopathy, were detected. On the 4th hospital day, abnormal ECG findings showed improvement and serum myocardial necrosis markers had normalized. On the 8th hospital day, contrast-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the apical wall . She was diagnosed with acute myocarditis based on the guidelines for diagnosis of myocarditis . It should be noted that no abnormality was observed in echocardiogram examination and that serum CK level was 156 U/L at the previous hospital. On the 28th hospital day, follow-up cardiac MRI showed no LGE in the apical wall.
Because some viral infections are thought to cause FT1D, viral antibodies were measured at the time of admission and 4 weeks later: we tested for adenovirus, influenza A and B, echovirus 3, 7, 11, 12, coxsackie virus types A2, A4, A5, A6 A9, A16, B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6, parainfluenza virus 1, 2, 3, respiratory syncytial virus, Epstein-Barr virus, measles virus, mumps virus, herpes simplex virus, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, and parvovirus. None of these tests revealed significantly elevated antibody titers. She was discharged on the 35th hospital day with intensive insulin treatment without medication for cardiovascular disorders or pancreatitis.