A 63-year-old Japanese man who had cardiomyopathy of unknown etiology experienced ventricular tachycardia, and an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was thus implanted. The ventricular lead was fixed on his RV high septum, because a low-voltage area extended across his mid- to low-ventricular septum. The pacing mode of the ICD was programmed to AAI mode. The width of his own QRS wave was 120ms. His echocardiogram showed a severely dilated and diffuse hypokinetic left ventricle. His septal wall was thin and high-echoic. Cardiac sarcoidosis was suspected, but the diagnostic criteria could not be fulfilled. Three years after ICD implantation, he developed dyspnea until he experienced New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III heart failure. A Wenckebach-type second-degree atrioventricular block was observed during atrium-only pacing at 60 beats per minute (Figure ), therefore, the pacing mode was programmed to DDDR mode. After changing the pacing mode, his symptoms apparently worsened, and he was admitted the following week. He experienced NYHA class IV heart failure, and his electrocardiogram showed dissociated biphasic QRS morphology (Figure ). The width of the first component of the QRS wave was 110ms, and that of the second component was 102ms. His echocardiogram showed severe interventricular dyssynchrony. LV ejection occurred 150ms later than did RV ejection.
Endocardial substrate mapping by the CARTO™ XP system (Biosense Webster Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) showed a low-voltage area extended across his basal to mid-ventricular septum. Activation mapping of his own QRS wave (Figure A) showed that ventricular conduction started at his mid-septum, and both LV and RV excitation ended simultaneously within 166ms. However, activation mapping during RV high-septal pacing (Figure C) showed that RV conduction started at the pacing site and ended at the RV basal inferior site within 83ms after the pacing stimulus. Subsequently after a 10ms interval, LV conduction started at his basal posterior septum and ended at the lateral wall within 226ms after the pacing stimulus. These data show that in RV high-septal pacing, the first component of the QRS wave supposedly reflects only RV excitation originating at the RV high septum, and the second component reflects only LV excitation originating at the LV posteroseptum. His electrocardiogram (ECG) also showed biphasic QRS morphology during LV lateral or RV apical pacing. This interventricular dyssynchrony was improved by biventricular pacing, therefore, his ICD was upgraded to cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator (CRTD; Figure ). Two years after upgrading to CRTD, he showed good hemodynamic conditions and improved to NYHA class II.