A 74-year-old Japanese woman gradually developed general malaise and loss of appetite. In addition, arthralgia and pitting edema in her feet appeared. Her laboratory findings revealed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count and C-reactive protein (CRP). She was admitted to our hospital for further examination. She had an operation for endometrial cancer at the age of 72 and had no family history.
On admission, her blood pressure was 129/76 mmHg, heart rate was 101/minute, respiratory rate was 18/minute, and body temperature was 39.1 °C. A physical examination revealed pitting edema on the dorsum of her hands and feet. Her neurological examination was unremarkable. However, she had difficulty with squatting and walking because of arthralgia in her proximal lower limbs. Laboratory testing showed a WBC of 11700/μL, CRP of 6.7 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 44 mm/hour, total protein of 5.8 g/dL, and albumin of 2.3 g/dL. Rheumatoid factor, anti Ro/SSA antibody, anti La/SSB antibody, anti Scleroderma 70 antibody, and anti cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody were negative. Serum interleukin-6 (IL-6) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were markedly increased to 285 pg/mL (normal; <2 pg/mL) and 1820 pg/mL (normal; 262±228 pg/mL) , respectively. Her human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing included B7. A chest X-ray revealed mild pleural effusion on the right side. Electrocardiography showed a complete right bundle branch block without ST-T change. Echocardiography revealed a slight pericardial effusion surrounding her entire heart.
She had a high fever, general malaise, and muscle weakness, and her laboratory tests revealed elevated inflammatory markers including WBC, CRP, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Because infectious disease was suspected, tazobactam-piperacillin 13.5 mg/day was started. On day 2, atrial fibrillation appeared on the electrocardiography monitor. A chest X-ray showed that the pleural effusion had increased in both lungs. Furthermore, echocardiography demonstrated increased pericardial effusion around her heart. On day 3, she developed respiratory failure, and oxygen administration was started by nasal cannula at a dose of 3 L/minute. Enhanced chest-abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed marked bilateral pleural and pericardial effusions without neoplastic lesions . Analysis of the pleural effusion revealed exudate with an increased protein level and neutrophils, but cytological evaluation of the pleural effusion revealed no evidence of malignancy. Cultures of blood and pleural effusion were all negative. Our patient fulfilled the diagnostic criteria of RS3PE syndrome including: 1) pitting edema of the hands and feet; 2) sudden onset of polyarthritis; 3) onset at age 50 years or older; and 4) negative serology for rheumatoid factors . From day 6, she was treated with methylprednisolone administered intravenously at a dose of 1000 mg/day for 3 days. After steroid therapy, her fever rapidly improved, and blood tests revealed a decrease in CRP to 1.71 mg/dL. The pleural and pericardial effusions on chest CT decreased . When the pericardial effusion decreased, her atrial fibrillation disappeared. After steroid pulse therapy, oral prednisolone administration at a dose of 15 mg/day was started. Her respiratory failure immediately improved, and then she no longer required oxygen administration. A chest CT performed on day 38 revealed that the pleural and pericardial effusions had disappeared . On day 45, she was discharged. One year later, the prednisolone dosage was decreased to 8 mg/day, but the patient experienced no recurrence of symptoms. At the 1-year examination, no malignancy was found. Serum IL-6 and VEGF were significantly decreased to 1.3 pg/mL and 562 pg/mL, respectively.