A 13-year-old young man was admitted to our hospital with non-sustained ventricular tachycardia episode, noticed during routine athletic evaluation.
Resting ECG was normal, with sinus rhythm, normal heart rate in the absence of significant alterations of the ventricular repolarization phase (QTma × 413 ms, QTmin 383 ms, QTd 39 ms, QTcd 44 ms). Exercise stress test (treadmill) didn’t show signs of inducible ischemia through maximal effort (METS 21, HR max 194 beats per minutes), but induced asymptomatic non sustained ventricular tachycardia, with left bundle branch morphology an inferior axis with a rate of 150 beats per minute during the second minute of the recovery phase .
Standard echocardiographic views showed a not clearly normal coronary pattern. Indeed, the right coronary artery appeared with high take-off from the aortic wall, without clear identification of right coronary artery ostium.
As a result of genetic screening for catecholaminergic tachycardia, beta-blocking therapy with nadolol was started and continued until the first cardiological follow up.
In order to exclude the presence of a possible coronary artery anomaly and disease, coronary computed tomography angiography was performed.
The scan showed anomalous origin of the all three branches of coronary arteries of a single origin from left coronary sinus with malignant course of the right coronary artery, squeezed between the pulmonary trunk and the proximal ascending aorta. The distal part of the artery took its normal course. The left anterior descending artery and the circumflex artery calibers appeared to be normal. All the data were confirmed by cardiac magnetic resonance .
Myocardial scintigraphy with protocol of two days steps and treadmill stress test (exercise) was performed, without significant evidences of perfusion defects. Catheter coronary angiography was performed to decide the tailored treatment plan. The coronary angiography showed the rare coronary anomaly pattern .
Furthermore, the exam showed a significant milking effect at the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery, with borderline value of indices of intracoronary pressure and coronary flow reserve measured by Fractional Flow Reserve (FFR 0,74) and invasive Fractional Flow Reserve (iFFR 0,83) analysis.
On intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) both a slit like right coronary ostium and eccentric systolic compression in the proximal bridge segment of vessel were evident.
The depth and the length of the bridging muscle segment were measured as 16 mm and 25 mm, respectively .
Planned on pump surgery was discussed. We performed a surgical unroofing of the right coronary artery intramural section and resuspension of the intercoronary commissure, that resulted in relocation of the coronary artery into the appropriate aortic sinus. Surgical myotomy involving resection of the overlying muscle fibers on middle segment of the left anterior descending artery was performed.
The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. He stayed overnight in the intensive care unit and left the hospital on postoperative day 7. No complications occurred during the first six months of follow-up.