A 4-year-old Japanese boy presented with bilateral upper eyelid swelling and discomfort. The swelling was painless, but he complained of itchy eyelids. Ophthalmic examination revealed bilateral upper eyelid edema . No lymphadenopathy of the head or neck was observed. The patient had no medical history of atopic dermatitis, but local reactions to insect bites and vaccinations were excessive. There was no family history of autoimmune renal disease.
Urinalysis results were normal. Blood analysis showed a white blood cell count of 8,200 /mL with a differential neutrophil count of 13%, a lymphocyte count of 55.5%, and a markedly increased eosinophil count of 28.5%. A peripheral smear revealed no abnormalities. The CD4/CD8 ratio was normal (1.46). Most laboratory blood examinations included electrolytes, serum creatinine, and blood urea nitrogen quantitation. The patient had an elevated aspartate aminotransferase level (34 IU/L; normal range, 14–20 IU/L), but alanine aminotransferase activity was within the normal range (16 IU/L; normal range, 10–40 IU/L). Lactate dehydrogenase and creatinine kinase activities were normal. The patient’s C-reactive protein level was 0.045 mg/dL, and he had an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 9 mm/h. Immunoglobulin levels of IgG, IgA, IgD, IgM, and IgG4 were normal (IgG, 1,173 mg/dL; IgA, 162 mg/dL; IgD, 9.9 mg/dL; IgM 206 mg/dL; and IgG4 9.7 mg/dL). The patient had a highly elevated serum IgE level (14,351 IU/mL; reference range: 0–295 IU/mL). Serologic analyses for antinuclear antibody and MPO-ANCA were negative and serum complement components C3, C4, and total complement activity were normal. Chest radiography results were also normal, though magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral lacrimal gland enlargement without the appearance of mass lesions in the orbit and adjacent bony erosion .
Mikulicz disease was initially suspected, despite the IgG4 level being normal. Based on this presumptive diagnosis, pranlukast hydrate was administered for 2 years. However, follow-up treatment was suspended for 4 years as the symptoms did not improve. An excisional biopsy via anterior orbitotomy was performed at the age of 10 years, which revealed eosinophilic hyperplastic lymphogranuloma involving the lacrimal gland . A mixture of CD3-positive and CD5-positive T-cells was found within the interfollicular regions, and CD20-positive B-cells were observed within the follicles. A relatively smaller number of IgG-positive and IgG4-positive plasma cells were also observed. There was no evidence of either vasculitis or prominent vascular endothelial cell proliferation.
Based on these findings, IgG4-related diseases, including Mikulicz disease, were excluded. Oral prednisolone was initiated at 1 mg/kg/day based on a diagnosis of lymphoproliferative disorder. The patient’s symptoms, including the eyelid edema, discomfort, and eosinophilia, were dramatically improved at the 1-month follow-up. However, symptoms recurred as prednisolone was tapered. A combinatorial therapy of prednisolone with mizoribine was subsequently initiated to mitigate the side effects of steroids. However, swelling of the bilateral eyelids worsened, and an itchy subcutaneous mass developed on the left arm. MRI examination revealed serpiginous subcutaneous lesions in the medial aspect of the left distal arm . The bilateral eyelid masses were resected when the patient was 14 years old due to their frequent recurrence, the side effects associated with steroid administration at the time of recurrence, and the negative impact the masses had on the patient’s physical appearance, and narrow field of view. Postoperative pathological examination of the excited masses showed hyperplastic lymphoid follicles embedded in fibroconnective tissue and multinuclear Whartin-Finkeldey cells, indicative of KD . Immunohistochemical analysis of the cells revealed negative staining for IgG and IgG4. The serum IL-4 level was elevated (500 pg/mL; reference range: < 6.0 pg/mL), but IL-5, IL-6, and interferon γ levels were normal. Serum sIL-2R levels were with in the reference range throughout the clinical course. The diagnosis of KD was confirmed based on the histological findings, markedly high serum IgE levels, and peripheral blood eosinophilia. Treatment with oral CsA at an initial dose of 2.5 mg/kg/day was started, which maintained at a trough level of approximately 50 ng/ml. The eosinophilia and serum IgE levels gradually decreased after initiation of CsA, but the IL-4 levels remained high. The CsA therapy was adjusted to 4mg/kg/day and the clinical symptoms were stable, without bilateral upper eyelid swelling or recurrence of the subcutaneous mass on the left arm .