A 13 year old female living in a remote rural area came to our clinic with an 8 year history of deformities in the extremities which had gradually became worse till she was unable to walk. The patient over the years had developed recurrent fractures in her legs and arms after minor falls. The family was poor and lived in a remote area far away from proper medical facilities. She was treated by local healers for her fractures which resulted in bowing of legs and arms. There were no gastrointestinal symptoms of abdominal pain or diarrhea. She was brought to the clinic carried by her father. The patient used her arms to drag herself around the house and developed fractures followed by severe bowing of her arms. She had been diagnosed with rickets and iron deficiency anemia by doctors in community hospitals and had received Vitamin D and iron supplements many times without improvement. She had never had a complete workup to find out the cause of her rickets. The patient also had failure to thrive. On examination the patient was pale, weight was 11 kg and height 97 cm (below the 3rd percentile for her age) . She had severe bowing of her arms and legs.
Due to the presence of anemia, failure to thrive and rickets the initial impression was malabsorption probably due to celiac disease and the laboratory work up was done accordingly.
Initial laboratory investigations that were done are mentioned in Additional file : Table S1. X-rays of her upper and lower limbs showed diffuse osteopenia and bowing of both legs and forearms with blurring of the metaphyseal lines. It also showed dense transverse lines in tibia and ulna suggestive of looser’s zones indicative of severe rickets .Anti- endomysial antibodies titer was 80 (normal is negative), anti-tissue transglutaminase IgA was positive 75 U/ml (normal <2.5 U/ml) and anti-tissue transglutaminase IgG was negative. Upper endoscopy was done with small intestinal biopsy. The duodenum showed scalloping and fissuring of the small bowel suggestive of celiac disease. The histopathology report of the small intestine showed severe villous atrophy grade IV with crypt hyperplasia consistent with celiac disease. Old Marsh-Oberhuber classification: Type 3c: Total villous atrophy with completely flat mucosa and increased intraepithelial lymphocytes .
The patient was started on a gluten free diet. She also was started on Vitamin D supplements, calcium and iron replacement. The patient returned for follow-up 5 months later, she was feeling better, her weight had increased to 14 kg and her height had increased to 97 cm. She had taken iron and calcium supplements for a very short period but she did continue on a gluten free diet. The family was very poor and on further questioning on their dietary habit, it lacked many of the main constituents and was very low in vitamin D for most of her life but she did live in a very sunny area and before becoming crippled she had adequate sun exposure. Her diet before diagnosis was found to consist mainly of grains and breads with little protein and after being diagnosed and receiving instructions on a gluten free diet it was changed to rice and potatoes. Laboratory investigations showed some improvement from 5 months earlier these are shown in Additional file : Table S1. The patient was seen by an orthopedic surgeon who wanted the general condition of the patient to improve before considering any surgery.
The patient and her family were further instructed again on a gluten free diet emphasizing the available options. She was given further iron, calcium and Vitamin D replacement, the patient was not able to come back for follow up but 4 months later the family phoned and said she had markedly improved and had started walking.