A 53-year-old female was referred to our centre because of a two-month lasting exhaustion, abdominal distension, early satiety and fever of up to 39°C. Her medical history was not significant. She had been travelling for a longer periods of time in the countries of the Middle and Far East, especially to Indochina and India. Physical examination showed splenomegaly and hepatomegaly, palpable at 15 and 6 cm below the costal margin, respectively. Peripheral lymph nodes measured up to 1 cm in the largest diameter. Petechiae and suffusions were present on the skin of the thoracic region and flanks. Laboratory tests demonstrated: (1) white blood count 3.40 × 109/l (Neu 2,01 (59%) , Ly 0,99 (29%), Mono 0,17 (5%), Eos 0,03 (1%)), platelet count 64 × 109/l, red blood cells 3,66 × 109/l, haemoglobin level 115 g/l (2) liver function tests were raised: AST 2.21 IU/L, ALT 0.95 IU/L and γGT 1.30 IU/L with bilirubin within normal ranges-bilirubin 17 IU/L (3) LDH was raised to 15,68 IU/L; raised was also CRP to 35 (4) serology for HAV showed reactive IgG anti-HAV antibodies, whereas IgM anti-HAV, HbsAg, anti- HBc, anti-Hbs, anti-HCV and CMV were negative.
The Giemsa-stained smears from bone marrow and peripheral blood showed presence of medium-sized atypical lymphoid cells. These cells slightly differed in size and shape, being round, oval or droplet-like with irregular cell borders. The cytoplasm was scant and basophilic, containing few small vacuoles. The nuclei were round or oval. Chromatin was immature, finely granular, with small inconspicuous nucleoli . On flow cytometric immunophenotyping (FCI) of bone marrow and peripheral blood, these cells had immunophenotypic profile consistent with gamma-delta T-cell lymphoma (CD3 dim +, CD7 dim+, CD2+, TCRγδ dim +, CD52 dim +, CD56+, CD5-, CD4- and CD8-) . Besides T-cell lymphoma, a small population of monoclonal B-cells with immunophenotype characteristic of HCL (CD103+, CD25+, CD22+, surface-kappa+) was also present in the bone marrow and peripheral blood. After careful re-examination of peripheral blood smears, only few hairy cells were found. These cells were medium-sized and oval in shape, their cytoplasm was abundant, pale basophilic, with circumferential “hairy” projections .
Biopsy of a slightly enlarged left inguinal lymph node and bone marrow trephine biopsy were also performed. Histology of the lymph node showed partial, predominantly intrasinusoidal infiltration by medium-sized, atypical lymphoid cells that were immunohistochemically positive for CD3, CD56, and TIA, while other T- and B-cell markers were negative. Bone marrow biopsy revealed hypercellular bone marrow with reduced orthotopic haematopoiesis and intrasinusoidal infiltrates consisting of medium-sized lymphocytes with the same immunohistochemical profile as was observed on lymph node infiltrates. To continue, patchy interstitial infiltrates were also present, consisting of medium-sized lymphocytes with a round nuclear profile and fine chromatin, and they were widely separated from each other by abundant clear cytoplasm. These cells were positive for CD20, HCL, Cyclin D1 and TRAP . There was also a marked increase in reticulin fibres. According to the morphology, the immunophenotype and the infiltration pattern of lymphoid infiltrates, the diagnosis of coexistent HSTCL and HCL was established.
The patient was treated with multivalent chemotherapy including rituximab. The effect of treatment was monitored by clinical and ultrasound examination, leukocyte and lymphocyte counts and FCI of peripheral blood. The patient received the first immunochemotherapy regimen with R-VACPE (rituximab-vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, prednisone, etoposide) and splenectomy . After that HCL regressed completely while HSCTL was refractory to the treatment. R-VACPE was therefore changed to R-DAHP (rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine, cisplatin) and then to R-EPOCH (rituximab- etoposide, vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, prednisone). However, all these treatment regiments turned out to be only partially effective. The disease progressed again in the liver, and the patient’s general condition worsened. Therefore, only palliative treatment with liver irradiation was continued. The patient died soon because of haematemesis and Mallory-Weiss syndrome, 7 months after the initial diagnosis.