We report the case of a 60-year-old woman of West African descent, with no history of asbestos exposure, who originally presented 24 years ago to another institution with acute abdominal pain. At that time, she underwent an exploratory laparotomy and was found to have nodules diffusely covering the peritoneum. A total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed for suspected ovarian carcinoma, and biopsies were taken of the peritoneal nodules. The pathology from this original surgery was interpreted as low-grade papillary mesothelioma. She then received six adjuvant cycles of intravenous cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and cisplatin. She underwent a second-look laparotomy six months later, and still had gross disease visible in the peritoneum. Post-operatively she received three additional cycles of intraperitoneal cisplatin and intravenous sodium thiosulfate. She subsequently received maintenance therapy with alternating courses of tamoxifen and megace alternating every two weeks.
She presented four years later with obstructive gastrointestinal symptoms and was again found on laparotomy to have diffuse peritoneal studding. Pathology from this surgery was interpreted again to be papillary mesothelioma. As a result, she began six cycles of carboplatin and cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for suspected progressive disease. Several months later, she presented with complaints of shortness of breath, orthopnea, and worsening lower extremity edema. A multi-gated acquisition scan (MUGA) revealed an ejection fraction of 14% and enlarged cardiac silhouette on chest X-ray, and she was clinically diagnosed as having anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy. Medical therapy was initiated at that time for congestive heart failure.
Two years later, she was found on a computed topography (CT) scan to have an interval increase in loculated subhepatic fluid collection and a lobular soft tissue mass in the right subphrenic region. She then received three cycles of VP-16 and ifosfamide. She remained well until 2000, when she underwent an orthotopic heart transplant. Upon subsequent reimaging of her abdomen the next year, she was found to have continued slow progression of the tumor and was started on single-agent paclitaxel followed by cyclophosphamide for two months. She was then referred to our institution in late 2001 with stable disease on abdominal CT and a presumed diagnosis of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma refractory to therapy. Over the following year, she was maintained on combination capecitabine and gemcitabine therapy and had stable disease as assessed by CT scans. However, in early 2003 she was found to have declining renal function and was forced to stop chemotherapy.
She was observed closely until 2004 and had little change in her overall tumor burden, but had recurrent ascites requiring drainage by paracentesis on multiple occasions. Because of doubts about the true nature of her peritoneal tumor, a further biopsy of her tumor was performed in 2004, with the final interpretation demonstrating a low-grade papillary mesothelioma of the peritoneum (see Figure ). She has been observed closely since that time with periodic abdominal imaging showing a right side subphrenic mass, loculated subhepatic fluid collection, scattered soft tissue densities with calcification, and extensive anterior wall and peritoneal adhesive disease without obstruction (see Figure ). She continues to have chronic renal insufficiency and suffers from severe chronic abdominal pain and cramping, but has stable radiological evidence of disease.