A 43-year-old Caucasian man on anti-retroviral therapy (lopinavir/ritonavi and emtricitabine/tenofovir) for HIV/AIDS presented in September 2008 with a three-month history of low grade fevers, night sweats, generalized fatigue, lethargy, unintentional weight loss, and bilateral lower extremity swelling. He had a CD4 count of 196 cells/mm3, and a viral load of <50 copies/mL. He had been diagnosed with HIV-infection in 1990; his CD4 nadir was 4 (0.6%) in February 2004 with high viremia, 175,671 copies/mL. After initiation of potent anti-retroviral therapy the HIV viral load has been undetectable since October 2004.
A physical exam of our patient revealed diffuse lymphadenopathy in his cervical, axillary and inguinal areas, splenomegaly, and pitting edema in both lower extremities. Computed tomography of his chest, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated widespread mediastinal, hilar, axillary, retro-peritoneal and pelvic lymphadenopathy, as well as the splenomegaly. A laboratory workup revealed a hemoglobin level of 8.5 mg/dL, a white blood cell count (WBC) of 4,600 cells/μL, an albumin level of 2.5 mg/dL, and a Westergren sedimentation rate of 90 mm/hr. A lower extremity Doppler was negative for deep venous thrombosis.
Histological examination of lymph node biopsy material revealed marked plasma cell infiltration, and follicles that were variable in appearance, from marked follicular hyperplasia to involution and dendritic cell hyperplasia . Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated HHV-8 positive , and plasmablastic foci associated with an intense polytypic plasma cell infiltrate. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of MCD--plasma cell variant. Our patient was discharged from the hospital and was scheduled to start treatment for MCD.
Three weeks later our patient presented with lower abdominal pain, urinary retention, and lower extremity weakness. Neurological examination revealed bilaterally reduced motor power (4/5) in all major muscle groups in his lower extremities, along with a positive Babinski sign on the right. Deep tendon reflexes were normal bilaterally. An ultrasound of his pelvis demonstrated bladder distention. A Foley catheter was inserted and 2 liters of urine was evacuated, with complete relief of pain.
A Gadolinium magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his spine was done to rule out spinal cord compression; it revealed abnormal spinal cord signal intensity involving several cervical and thoracic segments, associated with expansion of the cord and mild enhancement of the areas of abnormal T2 signal . MRI of the brain revealed a few patchy areas of abnormal T2 signal in the peri-ventricular and pontine white matter.
A lumbar puncture was performed: cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contained an elevated WBC of 50 cells/mm3, with 90% lymphocytes, and a high protein level of 243 mg/dL; cytological analysis identified mature reactive lymphocytes with no evidence of lymphoma on flow cytometry. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was positive for EBV DNA in the CSF, but negative for HHV-8, cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV) and Varicella-Zoster virus (VZV). Treatment with high-dose dexamethasone was initiated. Our patient was then transferred to the National Institute of Health (NIH) and started on a treatment protocol of high-dose zidovudine (AZT) and valganciclovir for MCD (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00099073). Subsequent laboratory follow-up revealed marked improvement over the first seven days of treatment, including a marked decrease in WBC and protein in his CSF. A follow-up MRI demonstrated resolution of all spinal cord lesions. He is now doing well, his last CD4 was 322 (15%), viral load < 50 copies/mL in August 2010.