Male patient aged 45 years at the time of diagnosis.
Chronic fatigue and pain in both shoulders and the lower back.
The patient visited a local clinic due to headache, dizziness, malaise, fatigue, and pain in both shoulders and the lower back. Symptoms persisted for several days and did not ease with medication. The patient underwent a complete blood count test; his white blood cell count was elevated to 34,100/mm3. The vital signs of the patient were normal, and the patient was stable without any fever. The clinical impression was leukemia, and the patient was referred to the hemato-oncology department of a university hospital. After admission, he underwent a bone marrow biopsy and a cytology exam. The results are reported in Table . Based on the biopsy results, he was diagnosed with CML and was started on chemotherapy.
The patient had never smoked and rarely drank alcohol.
The patient did not have hypertension, diabetes, tuberculosis, viral hepatitis, or human immunodeficiency virus infection.
There was no family history of hemato-oncologic diseases.
The patient started his job as a diagnostic radiographer in November 1990 and had continued working until he was diagnosed with CML. His job history is summarized in Table .
The patient’s main jobs involved obtaining simple radiographs, including chest and abdominal radiographs. He also performed special radiography such as gastrointestinal series radiography and measuring bone marrow density. The working environment and the equipment he used are shown in Figures and . The one-time exposure amount of the relevant diagnostic tools are listed in Table .
The patient’s work profile also included fixation and development of the exposed films. We investigated the chemicals used to fix and develop the film, but we found no known compound that could be considered to have initiated oncogenesis.
Records of the patient’s personal exposure dose from 1997 to 2012, measured by the TLD, were available. This is the official record provided by the Korea Workers’ Compensation and Welfare Service .
The patient mentioned that he was very stressed specifically from 2002 to 2006 because several cases of radiography had to be performed and there was no assistant to help with the workload. With regards to the missing records from 1990 to 1996, the patient estimated that the accumulated radiation would be comparable to that of 2003 to 2005, or even higher. Conventionally, younger workers tend to take more jobs than senior workers. Furthermore, the working environment then was worse than the present working conditions, and past radiologic shield methods were not as effective .
Based on these assumptions, the PC was calculated by applying both the highest value (17.48 mSv) and the mean value (6.02 mSv) of annual radiation for the period of 1997–2012 . The PC was calculated by the Radiation Health Research Institute-Program for Estimating the Probability of Causation (RHRI-PEPC), under the consultation of the Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Company. The results showed that the point estimation of PC, i.e., the 50th percentile, was 58.83% for the highest estimation, and 57.28%, using the assumed mean value for the missing records.