A 35-day-old girl was admitted to Kunming Children’s Hospital in October 2019 due to a lesion in the right frontotemporal region.
The lesion was found at birth, as a subcutaneous mass with granular and papillary surface. The patient was firstly diagnosed with “cavernous hemangioma”, without treatment. The skin lesion easily bled upon touch, and showed repeated ulceration, erosion, and scab formation. There was no obvious enlargement of the lesion and subcutaneous mass from birth until now.
The patient was born at 38 wk of pregnancy, with a birth weight of 3.1 kg and no perinatal infection or suffocation.
The patient had no specific personal and family history.
Physical examination revealed good general condition. The vital signs were stable, and no other abnormality was found. Dermatological examination showed a red lesion in the right frontotemporal region, with thick brown scab on the surface. After cleaning the scab, the surface of the skin lesion was bright red, appearing like granulation tissue. The lesion was granular and papillary and easily bled upon touch, with about 1.5 cm × 4 cm in size. A small amount of pale yellow thin secretion was observed on the lesion surface. There was a pedicle at the base of the skin lesion. A subcutaneous mass was felt at the base of the lesion, with slightly hard texture and a clear boundary. The mass expanded beyond the red area, with a size of about 3 cm × 5 cm. The surrounding skin had no redness or swelling, and the mass showed no tenderness .
Blood routine test showed lymphocyte count at 4.51 × 109/L (1.0-3.0 × 109/L), lymphocyte percentage at 60.60% (20%-40%), neutrophil percentage at 30.80% (50%-70%), platelet count at 528 × 109/L (100-300 × 109/L), platelet hematocrit at 0.52% (0.108%-0.282%), and platelet distribution width at 10.0 fL (15.5-18.1 fL). The remaining indicators were unremarkable. Surface secretions were cultured for 48 h, and three plasma coagulase tests were negative; meanwhile, mixed growth of Staphylococcus was detected, with no Haemophilus isolated. Stool routine, urine routine, liver function, and kidney function tests were normal. These laboratory findings did not point to any specific diagnosis.
Skull plain computed tomography (CT) and enhanced scans showed slightly thickened subcutaneous soft tissue of the right temporal region, and the stripes showed a high-density shadow, with a CT value of about 31 HU. Enhanced CT showed enhancement, with a CT value of about 61 HU. No obvious signs of damage were seen in the adjacent skull. There were no lesions with definite abnormal density in the brain parenchyma (no obvious abnormal enhancement). There was no enlargement, stenosis, or occlusion in the ventricular system; no widening of subarachnoid space of each ventricle or displacement of the midline structure was found.
Dermatoscopy showed that the skin lesion was lobular and crumby. The lesion center was reddish or white, while the edges were white or yellowish band-like. There were polymorphic vascular structures and white radial streaks in the lesion, with some vascular clusters scattered .
Pathological examination showed papilloma-like hyperplasia of the epidermis, with the epidermis partly sinking into the dermis to form several cystic depressions, lined with stratified squamous epithelium. Glandular cavity-like structures were seen in the dermis, with some opened into the epidermis. A large number of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and plasma cells infiltrated in the interstitial area was observed, as well as splinter hemorrhage. The cavity wall and villous epidermis of the glandular cavity were composed of two layers of epithelial cells; the inner layer included columnar cells, with oval and eosinophilic nuclei and abundant cytoplasm; apocrine secretion was observed .