The patient was an 81-year-old Japanese man. He was diagnosed with a recurrence of UC with multiple lymph node metastases, originating from the left renal pelvis, 1 year after laparoscopic radical nephroureterectomy. In addition, his renal function worsened 1 month before the above diagnosis; a shunt was created surgically for hemodialysis initiation. Thus, chemotherapy was planned while the patient continued hemodialysis.
Before the commencement of chemotherapy, the patient’s Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was 1. His height was 163.5 cm, dry weight was 51.90 kg, and body surface area (BSA) was 1.55 m2. Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood count, 3700/μL; hemoglobin, 11.0 g/dL; platelet count, 168 × 103/μL; blood urea nitrogen, 24.2 mg/dL; and creatinine, 3.38 mg/dL. The patient had residual renal function, with daily urine volume > 500 mL and a 24-h creatinine clearance of 7.3 mL/min.
The GEM dose was reduced by 25% (750 mg/m2) and was administered by intravenous infusion for 30 min on days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle. CBDCA was administered by intravenous infusion for 60 min on day 1, followed by infusion of GEM. The initial CBDCA dose was calculated according to the Calvert’s formula (target AUC: 5.0 mg/ml min, GFR: 6.1 mL/min). GFR was calculated based on knowledge that 24-h creatinine clearance is generally approximately 20% higher than GFR . Therefore, the CBDCA dose was calculated as 160 mg.
Hemodialysis commenced 2 h after the end of CBDCA infusion on day 1 and was performed for 3 h, with a blood flow rate of 200 mL/min and a continuous infusion of heparin as an anticoagulant. The dialyzer membrane was made of polymethyl methacrylate, with a surface area of 1.6 m2 (BK1.6P, TORAY Inc., Tokyo, Japan). Subsequent hemodialysis was performed on days 3 and 5.
A pharmacokinetic study was performed to monitor the measured AUC of CBDCA. This study was approved by the ethical review board at Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences. Informed consent was obtained from the patient. Blood samples were collected during the first 2 cycles of chemotherapy. Sampling points were as follows: immediately after CBDCA infusion, before starting and ending hemodialysis, and 20 and 48 h after CBDCA infusion on day 1 . The plasma was stored at − 80 °C until analysis. The plasma platinum level was measured by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. The CBDCA level was calculated using the molar ratio of platinum: CBDCA (371.25/195.08). The measured AUC of plasma CBDCA was calculated using the trapezoidal method according to the intervals before, during, and after hemodialysis, with extrapolation to infinity.
The measured AUC of CBDCA in the first cycle was 5.96 mg/mL min, which was 19.2% higher than the target AUC . Consequently, grade 4 neutropenia and grade 3 thrombocytopenia were observed, according to the National Cancer Institute’s Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.0 . To match the target AUC more closely in the subsequent cycle, we performed a pharmacokinetic study using parameters obtained in the first cycle. Consequently, the CBDCA dose was reduced to 135 mg, and the time interval between the CBDCA infusion and hemodialysis initiation was shortened to 1 h in the second cycle. The hemodialysis duration and conditions, such as the dialyzer and blood or dialysate flow rates, were unchanged. The measured AUC of CBDCA in the second cycle was 4.97 mg/mL min . The CBDCA dose and administration procedure in the third cycle were the same as that in the second cycle. In the second and third cycles, neutropenia severities were grades 2 and 3 and thrombocytopenia severities were grades 2 and 1, respectively . In addition, no other serious adverse events, including nausea and vomiting, were observed by the supportive care. Serum creatinine levels immediately prior to starting the second and third cycles were 3.12 mg/dL and 2.84 mg/dL, respectively; the 24-h creatinine clearance was only measured prior to the first cycle. The CBDCA removal rates by hemodialysis in the first and second cycles were calculated at 56.9 and 59.3%, respectively, though the redistribution phenomenon in the post hemodialysis period could not be considered due to the small number of blood sampling points. Other pharmacokinetic parameters in the first and second cycles are shown in Table . Total clearance of CBDCA was slightly higher in the second cycle than in the first cycle. Stable disease (according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) was demonstrated by computed tomography after the second and third cycles.
The patient’s QOL before treatment and after 2 cycles of treatment was evaluated using the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short Form Survey (SF-36, iHope International Inc., Kyoto, Japan), which is a questionnaire used to measure general health status . Mean norm-based score (NBS) is an international common score recalculated on the basis of the score of 8 items of the SF-36. Our patient’s NBS did not significantly decrease after 2 cycles of chemotherapy compared with his NBS before treatment .