A 22-year-old patient who was 35 weeks pregnant was evaluated in the emergency department with a complaint of right-sided weakness. The COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction test was performed and was found to be positive. However, she did not have fever or respiratory distress and then was followed up at home without medication.
The patient started to have throbbing headaches that did not respond to analgesic treatment (paracetamol 1000 mg/day) for four days. The intensity of her headaches gradually increased, such that she was being awakened from sleep, and this condition was accompanied by nausea and vomiting.
After this four-day period, she again felt weakness on her right side when she woke up in the morning. Twelve hours later, she went back to the emergency department because her weakness was increasing. At the emergency department, the patient was found to be normotensive, conscious, cooperative and oriented in a neurological examination. No fundus examination was performed, given that she was COVID-positive. Examinations on the patient’s visual field and vision showed normal results. Other cranial nerve examinations were normal. Her muscle strength ratio was 3/5 in the upper right extremity, 2/5 in the lower right extremity and 5/5 in the upper and lower left extremities. The foot sole skin reflex of the right lower extremity consisted of an extensor response. She presented decreased speech fluency and had difficulty in word finding, which were diagnosed as mild motor aphasia. Laboratory tests revealed high levels of fibrinogen (899 g/l; normal is 180-400) and D-dimer (6.38 mg/l; normal is 0-2). It was noted that the patient had also had high levels of fibrinogen (665 g/l) and D-dimer (2.2 mg/l) in examinations performed 10 days previously.
Diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed cortical diffusion restriction in the left parietal region and a hypointense response in the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) . The result from the diffusion MRI was suggestive of venous sinus thrombosis. Widespread loss of flow in the superior sagittal sinus and right transverse sinus, suggesting partial venous thrombosis in the left transverse sinus, was observed in brain magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance venous angiography . The brain MRI and magnetic resonance venography confirmed the diagnosis of venous sinus thrombosis. Thrombosis was not investigated in other parts of the body.
The polymerase chain reaction was repeated and the result was again positive. The patient was then hospitalized with the diagnoses of COVID-19 infection and venous sinus thrombosis. Other genetic, hematological and rheumatological examinations were planned, in order to investigate the etiology of her condition. Anticoagulant treatment (low molecular weight heparin) was started after the patient had been found to present a low platelet count (107,000/mm3), through evaluation of a peripheral blood smear.
Diffuse contractions were observed in a non-stress test (NST), and tocolysis was started, consisting of nifedipine and betamethasone treatment. However, the patient’s labor could not be stopped after 18 hours of hospitalization. She was then admitted for an emergency cesarean section because the intracranial pressure was increasing. A healthy baby was delivered.
Subsequently, the patient’s postpartum headache complaints decreased and her speech became fluent without any change in muscle strength deficit. Her thrombocyte counts decreased to 67,000/mm3. Anticoagulant therapy was continued, with peripheral smear follow-ups. Thoracic computed tomography was performed on the patient, who did not present respiratory distress, and the findings were compatible with COVID-19 pneumonia after birth . There was an increase in infection parameters, and the patient was started on hydroxychloroquine and ceftriaxone treatment.
In the examinations performed to ascertain risk factors, the patient was found to be positive for antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and showed prothrombin heterozygous mutation. The patient was negative for anti-cardiolipin antibodies and anti-double stranded DNA (dsDNA), and tests on lupus anticoagulant, homocysteine, protein C, protein S and antithrombin 3 showed results within normal limits.
On the third day following the birth, the patient’s headache complaint became completely resolved, her thrombocyte counts stopped decreasing and her thrombocytopenia improved over the subsequent days. The infection parameters regressed. Partial regression of the lesions was observed on control thoracic computed tomography. The patient’s general condition stabilized and she was discharged on the 10th day of hospitalization, with muscle strength 4-5/5 on the right side, which was mobilized without support. Continuation of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) treatment was planned, along with neurological and hematological control tests at a polyclinic.