A 35-year-old Caucasian male presented to the Maxillofacial Surgery service of Campo Limpo Hospital, in São Paulo, Brazil, with the main complaint of an intraoral swelling that had been growing for the last 8 years. The lesion was asymptomatic, and even though the patient had been aware of its constant growth, he decided to look for professional help only when its proportion began to cause him speaking impairment.
The physical examination revealed a firm mushroom-like mass, with bony consistency covered by smooth regular mucosa spanning almost the entire right alveolar border of the mandible. The area was edentulous and, according to the patient’s report, had initiated its growth shortly after the extraction of a molar, which the patient could not specify. As it developed, the remaining teeth had been extruded until complete avulsion (teeth 28 through 32, in universal numbering system). No extraoral abnormalities were observed. The patient was in good health, with no history of previous diseases, smoking, or substance abuse. The diagnosis of Gardner syndrome was discarded due to the lack of any other symptoms, such as gastrointestinal implications or supernumerary teeth .
Computed tomography revealed a well-defined pedunculated mass attached to the right body of the mandible with radiographic characteristics resembling the original bone, consisting of a central area of moderated radiopacity similar to medullary bone, surrounded by a denser, more radiopaque thin area, comparable to cortical bone. According to Rodriguez (2011), these particular growth characteristics make it easy to diagnose a peripheral osteoma clinically and radiographically .
Since the tumor presented both clinical and radiographic features of a benign lesion, the patient underwent an excisional biopsy, with complete removal of the mass and an osteoplasty of the mandible. The access was intraoral, with an incision directly over the lesion, and divulsion of the mucoperiosteal tissues, preserving their integrity for suture later . After the complete exposure of the lesion, surgical drills were used to mark the limits of excision, and the mass was removed in two pieces, with the use of a chisel and hammer. An oval drill was used to perform an osteoplasty of the jaw, recovering its original shape and thickness . After surgical resection, the mucosa flaps had their wedges trimmed, to obtain straight margins that were sutured with 3–0 resorbable thread. The surgical piece was a white, oval, bony fragment, with a regular surface of approximately 4.2 × 4.8 × 2.5 cm . The postoperative course was uneventful, except for discrete dehiscence of the suture 5 days after the procedure, which was spontaneously healed with chlorhexidine mouthwash on clinical follow-up for the next 7 days . The radiographic aspect of the jaw, 14 days after surgery showing regular shape and dimensions .
Histopathological analysis revealed mature adipose tissue, permeated by viable compact bone lamellae, consisting of medullary tissue, delimited by a thin and well-vascularized lamellar cortical bone. Thin and congested blood vessels were noted throughout the whole sample.