A 55-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with unexplained abdominal distension and anorexia 3 mo ago.
The patient suffered from unexplained abdominal distension and anorexia for 3 mo. The patient developed darkened urine 2 mo ago. He experienced a weight loss of 5 kg over the course of the disease. He underwent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) examination at a local hospital, and a lesion was found in the extrahepatic bile duct, which was believed to be a tumor.
The patient underwent cholecystectomy for gallbladder stones with an uneventful postoperative recovery 4 years ago. He had a 10-year history of hypertension.
There was no other personal or family history of acute or chronic disease.
The patient showed no tenderness, rebound tenderness or muscle tension on abdominal palpation.
The liver function tests demonstrated increased levels of alanine aminotransferase (185 IU/L, normal range: < 50 IU/L), aspartate aminotransferase (148 IU/L, normal range: < 40 IU/L) and total bilirubin (37.0 μmol/L, normal range: 5 µmol/L to 28 µmol/L). Tumor markers included carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (98.6 U/mL, normal range: < 22 U/mL), carcinoembryonic antigen (0.97 ng/mL, normal range: < 5 ng/mL), and alpha-fetoprotein (4.67 ng/mL, normal range: < 7 ng/mL).
The patient underwent an abdominal ultrasound (US) examination by a Resona7 US system (Mindray Medical International, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China) equipped with an SC6-1U (1-6 MHz) transducer. The US revealed mild to moderate dilatation of the intrahepatic bile duct, and the diameter of the upper extrahepatic bile duct was 1.2 cm . A hyperechoic nodule sized 0.8 cm × 0.6 cm was found in the upper extrahepatic bile duct with an almost regular shape and slightly clear margins . The patient underwent CEUS with the patient’s consent for further diagnosis. A 2.4-mL US contrast agent SonoVue (Bracco, Milan, Italy) suspension was injected through the left cubital vein followed by a flush with 5 mL saline. In the arterial phase, the nodule showed slight heterogeneous hyperenhancement without rim-like enhancement . The nodule appeared heterogeneous isoenhancement in the venous phase . Additional CECT in our hospital showed a hypoenhancement nodule approximately 1.3 cm × 1.0 cm in size in the upper extrahepatic bile duct .