During the COVID-19 pandemic, in April 2020, a 55-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency department of our institution with fever up to 38.6 °C, cough and shortness of breath. He had a history of ischemic heart disease, diabetes, arterial hypertension, severe obesity, asthma, and he was a smoker. Because of respiratory failure, oxygen therapy was promptly administered via a Venturi mask at 35%. Bilateral crackles were present during chest auscultation; there were no other relevant findings on physical examination. Blood chemistry revealed a high white cell count and high levels of both C-reactive protein (CRP) and D-dimer (the latter being 1652 mcg/l; normal: 0–550 mcg/l). Due to the ongoing pandemic and based on his symptoms, the patient was initially managed as a suspected case of COVID-19, even though two consecutive nasopharyngeal swabs were negative for SARS-CoV-2. High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest, before and after intravenous injection of iodinated contrast medium, was obtained. The exam showed multiple small hazy nodular opacities diffusely distributed throughout both lung fields, with no specific lobar preference . The nodules were centrilobular, with a linear branching pattern and a “tree-in-bud” appearance, mainly visible in the lower left lung field . CT also showed slightly enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes, without sign of necrosis, of a suspected reactive/inflammatory nature. The HRCT findings were not considered indicative of COVID-19 pneumonia.
A possible diagnosis of miliary tuberculosis or other diffuse infectious/inflammatory disease was made and the patient was transferred to our respiratory unit for further investigations. Past medical history revealed no hemoptysis, chest pain or weight loss. The patient reported that during the pandemic he had decided to live in the damp basement of his house, to be isolated from his family, and that he used to work there for several hours a day. This occurred six weeks before the onset of symptoms and it has been the only major change in his daily life.
Sputum was negative for acid-fast bacilli in three specimens, and both Mantoux and QuantiFERON tests were negative, such that a diagnosis of tuberculosis was excluded. Pneumonia due to Legionella sp., Mycoplasma sp. or Chlamydia sp. infection was excluded as were HIV infection and autoimmune disease. Another possible diagnosis was secondary neoplasm of the lung, but a whole-body CT scan did not reveal any malignancy. An antibiotic therapy course was empirically started with ceftriaxone 2 g a day and azithromycin 500 mg once a day for seven days. Three weeks after the hospital admission, the patient repeated a non-enhanced chest CT scan that showed persistence of the pattern described above. Antinuclear and antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody tests were negative. The patient’s clinical condition slightly improved: he did not present with fever, and oxygen therapy via Venturi mask was promptly reduced to 24%. Blood chemistry showed a normal white cell count and reduced CRP . The patient underwent bronchoscopy and the bronchial lavage fluid (BLF) revealed a galactomannan level of 3.7 (upper normal limit: 0.5). Total serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels were raised (1016 IU ml−1; normal: < 100 IU ml−1), although IgE specific for A. fumigatus was negative, while IgG specific for A. fumigatus was also high . Spirometry showed an obstructive ventilatory pattern, reversible after salbutamol administration, confirming a diagnosis of asthma. Forced vital capacity (FVC) was 3.22 l (70% of predicted) and a forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was 2.23 l (61% of predicted) and 3.00 l (+ 34.4%) after bronchodilatation. BLF culture was positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa rugosa and Achromobacter xylosoxidans. Finally, the following criteria for diagnosis of ABPA were satisfied: (1) predisposing condition as bronchial asthma; (2) elevated total IgE levels (> 1000 IU ml−1); (3) serum IgG antibodies against A. fumigatus; (4) radiographic pulmonary opacities consistent with ABPA. Immediate cutaneous hypersensitivity to Aspergillus antigen was not performed because the patient was on systemic antihistamines. The patient was started on prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg/day) for four weeks. To reduce the antigen burden, oral isavuconazole therapy was also started with a loading dose of 200 mg tid for the first three days and then 200 mg once a day for eight weeks. He was discharged two months after the hospital admission with improved clinical conditions, without oxygen therapy and with reduced total serum IgE levels of 306 IU ml−1. The patient continued steroids, which were gradually tapered down every two weeks. Three months after hospital admission, the patient was seen in our outpatient clinic and he referred only to mild dyspnea during physical exercise. HRCT of the chest showed significant reduction of the multiple nodular opacities and a lung pattern that had almost returned to normal appearance. Total IgE levels were 335 IUml−1. Prednisolone was also tapered, and it is still ongoing at the time of this case presentation at 10 mg daily.