A 66-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for repeated hemoptysis accompanied by fever for 8 months. A large amount of bloody purulent sputum was coughed out at the beginning, followed by brown pus. The largest amount was about 100 ml. He denied chest pain or dyspnea. The patient took amoxicillin and oral hemostatic drug and the symptoms were relieved. However, the symptoms recurred and gradually worsened. He was admitted to another hospital and received antibiotic therapy with levofloxacin and imipenem. His relevant past medical history included cholecystectomy for gallstone 5 years ago.
On admission, he had a temperature of 37.0 °C, heart rate of 80 beats per minute, blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg, and an oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. Physical examination revealed no positive sign. Chest CT scan demonstrated a consolidative mass located in the right middle lobe, together with scattered inflammation in the bilateral lower lobes and mediastinal lymphadenopathy . The patient received ceftriaxone and moxifloxacin intravenously with no improvement. Bronchoscopy exhibited no evidence of tumor or tuberculosis . Percutaneous lung puncture found inflammatory and tissue cells, and puncture fluid grew Escherichia coli. Pulmonary abscess was diagnosed and the antobiotic was changed to biapenem according to the drug sensitivity result . The condition improved and the patient was discharged.
However, the patient presented with hemoptysis again 2 months later but he refused surgery. So, he received right middle lobe arterial embolization. Digital substraction angiography showed a right bronchus common bronchial artery (canal-like expansion of right bronchial artery and right middle lobe pulmonary artery), a left and right common bronchial artery, and abnormal right inferior phrenic artery (tumor-like expansion at the traffic of right inferior phrenic artery and right middle lobe pulmonary artery).
Three months later, the patient suffered from hemoptysis again with about 1000 ml a day. Since conservative treatment failed, the patient agreed to right middle and lower lobectomy by open surgery. During the operation, the middle lobe was found to adhere to the diaphragm. However, when the adhesion was removed, a hole was observed on the diaphragm and colonic perforation was seen. The colon and the diaphragm were closed by suturing separately. Pathology demonstrated bronchogenic cysts with epithelial squamous hyperplasia. In addition, intestinal epithelium was found on the adhesion of middle lobe with diaphragm . Three days after operation, turbid stool like fluid drained out from the chest tube , and the patient developed continuous fever and increased white blood cell. Enterogenic empyema was diagnosed and emergent surgery found the diaphragm repair ruptured. Considering the pus was derived from the colon, a jejunostomy and empyema drainage was performed. The pus in the chest cavity was removed and a drainage tube was put into the colon from the chest cavity . Blood culture grew Staphylococcus aureus, and he received imipenem and piperacillin/tazobartan alternately upon drug sensitive results . The right lung re-expanded after surgery and no drainage came out from the colon tube.
Three weeks later, there was air leak from the chest tube again and CT scan showed bronchopleural fistula (BPF) at the bronchial stump . A rib bed drainage was performed since the visceral pleura was adhered to the lung tissue. Together with large amount of protein intake, the BPF closed in 3 months and all the chest tubes were removed.
Nine months after the first operation, enteroscopy demonstrated disuse colitis without other digestive tract pathology. The patient underwent right hemicolectomy and closure of ileostomy . The pathology reported chronic inflammation without evidence of Crohn’s disease. He was doing well when he was seen in clinic 2 months after the last surgery.