A 47-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of an abnormal chest shadow found on a routine chest X-ray. SCD was diagnosed when she was 6 years of age. Chest computed tomography showed a well defined mass (48 × 31 mm) touching the pericardium and left lung . Laboratory examinations showed normal serum levels of alpha fetoprotein (2.4 ng/mL), human chorionic gonadotropin beta (< 0.2 ng/mL), and antiacetylcholine receptor antibody (< 0.2 nmol/L). The differential diagnosis included thymoma, thymic carcinoma, and germ cell tumor; and surgical resection was recommended. However, the patient was a high-risk surgical patient because of SCD. Physical examination revealed a patient who was 164 cm tall, weighing 56 kg. Her vital signs were normal. Neurological examination revealed limb, truncal, ocular, and ataxic dysarthria; hypotonia; areflexia; sensory disturbances; and muscle weakness. Her Eastern cooperative oncology group performance status was 4. Pulmonary function tests showed an obstructive pattern. Her vital capacity (1.57 L) was 56.3% of predicted value and her forced expiratory volume in 1 s /forced vital capacity was 70.5% of predicted value. Magnetic resonance imaging showed severe cerebellar atrophy and spinocerebellar degeneration .
We decided to follow the patient while evaluating her general condition. Three months after her initial diagnosis, her tumor had grown to 50 × 35 mm. We performed surgery with the patient under general anesthesia only (without epidural analgesia), after explaining the risk of respiratory failure in detail and obtaining consent from her and her family. She received 30 mg rocuronium bromide (0.5 mg/kg), target-controlled propofol intravenous infusion (4.0 μg/mL), and remifentanil intravenous infusion (0.2 μg/kg/min) as general anesthesia by single-lung ventilation via a double-lumen endotracheal tube. Resection of the mediastinal tumor was performed via VATS. Although the tumor was firmly adherent to the left phrenic nerve, the tumor was carefully resected to preserve the nerve.
Histopathological examination of the tumor revealed small lymphocytes and atypical thymic cells of intermediate size that resembled epithelial cells . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the small lymphocytes were positive for CD99 expression and the medium-sized atypical cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and negative for c-kit and CD5 expression. The lesion was diagnosed as type B1 thymoma without capsular invasion (Masaoka stage I). The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 9. At the time of this report, 36 months after resection, she was doing well.