A 22-year-old young man presented with diarrhea for nearly 1 year and diagnosed of thymoma for 4 months. He is a Chinese college student, with no medical history. He denied any tobacco, alcohol, drug and family history.
The patient presented with diarrhea by sudden, did not have any recognizable precipitating factors. The frequency was 6 to 8 watery stools daily with tenesmus. There was no abdominal pain, hematochezia, or melena. The conventional antidiarrheal drugs and gluten-free diet were ineffective.
Four months ago, because of cough and shortness of breath, he underwent a chest computed tomographic (CT) examination, revealing a huge anterior mediastinal mass that measured 7.2 cm craniocaudally, 6.7 cm transversely, and 4 cm anteroposteriorly, as well as invading into the left anonymous vein . 18F-flurodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT showed the mediastinal mass was malignant, and no other malignant lesion was observed. Pathological examination by a core-needle biopsy specimen confirmed the diagnosis of thymoma. The abdomen and pelvis CT film showed the diffuse wall thickening of the colon . The enteroscopy showed the small intestinal villus atrophy, and the sigmoid colonic mucosa was markedly thinner than normal . The pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of autoimmune enteropathy . In addition, the anti-intestinal goblet antibody, anti-centromere protein B antibody were also positive. Flow cytometric evaluation of lymphocyte subsets showed: CD3, 2266/µL, (reference range, 1185–1,901); CD4+, 782/µL, (reference range, 561–1,137); CD8+, 1334/µL, (reference range, 404–754). Assay of serum immunoglobulin levels showed: IgG levels higher than normal, while IgM, IgE, and IgD are normal.
Considered that autoimmune enteropathy might be associated with thymoma, the patient was admitted to Beijing Tongren Hospital for tumor resection. On physical examination, the patient was severely malnourished and the vital signs were normal. Auscultation of the chest revealed scattered rales. The abdomen was soft, non-tender, and the bowel sound was exaggerated. The remainder of the physical examination was normal. On laboratory examination, levels of troponin I (TNI), B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were mildly higher than normal . The patient was positive for anti–RO-52, anti-titin, and anti-myocardial antibody, negative for anti-body and DNA of cytomegalovirus, and suspected clinically of having autoimmune myocarditisr .
The oxygen saturation, renal-function and thyroid-function tests were normal; fecal occult blood tests (FOBT), hanging drop test, parasitological test, clostridium difficile toxin of stool were negative. The other laboratory results were shown in .
Thymoma, left anonymous vein and involved anterior segment of the left-upper lobe were completely resected via median sternotomy . The surgical procedure was smooth. The amount of intraoperative bleeding was 200 ml and no transfusion.
The patient and his parents provided written informed consent for their participation in the study, specimen collection, and publication of the results. During the consenting process, risks and benefits of research-based whole exome sequencing (WES), immunohistochemistry (IHC) and drug sensitivity testing (DST) were explained.
Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood and tumor tissue, detected among the whole exome of more than 20,000 exons by SureSlect Human All Exon V6 of Agilent Technologies, Inc.
The paraffin-embedded thymoma tissues were cut into 4 µm of sections, stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC).
The collagen gel droplet embedded culture-drug sensitivity test (CD-DST) was performed as we described previously (, ). A sample of thymoma was collected from the fresh specimen during surgery. After 5–7 days’ growth, the colonies of thymoma cells were cultured in collagen gel droplets with Nutlin-3a (1.0 μg/ml) and analyzed by the image analysis method (the software Primage 1.0.6.3). The drug sensitivity was measured by the size of colonies. By measuring the size of colonies, drug sensitivity was tested.