A 41-year-old healthy male who presented to the clinic with a symptomatic chronic right Grade 3 ACJ dislocation .
He failed conservative treatment, including NSAID’s, rest, and physical therapy. His pain was located over her ACJ and worsened with increased activity. Due to his continued symptoms along with failed conservative treatment, surgical intervention was recommended. We agreed to pursue an arthroscopic-assisted ACJ reconstruction with allograft and joint fixation with a HP hook plate. We agreed that the HP hook plate will be removed at 6 months due to long- term complications such as impingement, irritation, and among others.
In the operating room, a standard posterior arthroscopic portal was established. Arthroscope was inserted into the glenohumeral joint. A second portal was established in the anterior aspect of the shoulder under direct visualization. . Supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor were intact.
At this time, ArthroCare wand was then used to release all soft tissues underlying the coracoid. . This was then debrided back and completed with the arthroscopic shaver. We were able to outline the coracoid back to its base, exposing the undersurface of it. At this time, using direct visualization, we established a second anterolateral portal. Two cannulas were placed. The first was in the first anterior portal and second was in the second anterolateral portal.
At this time, intraoperative fluoro was brought in. A curvilinear incision centered over the clavicle was then made. . Dissection was carried down exposing the superior surfaces. Soft tissue was elevated both anterior posterior, which was in the main portion of the clavicle. Then, using fluoroscopic assistance, we were able to place a switching stick into the clavicle and lateral to the coracoid. This was dilated over. FiberStick suture was then inserted and the suture was retrieved out for graft passage. We then placed the switching stick posterior to the clavicle and medial to the coracoid. This was again confirmed under intraoperative fluoro. We were able to retrieve out Tiger stick suture passer. We then were able to shuttle in the posterior tib allograft nicely having the graft present on the undersurface of the coracoid .
Next, we proceed with the distal clavicle excision. The distal end of the clavicle was exposed with electrocautery. Based upon pre-operative imaging, it was felt that 10 mm resection was indicated. The amount of resection was marked. This was confirmed to be appropriate on intraoperative fluoro. . Oscillating TPS saw was then use to perform resection. . The degenerative distal clavicle was removed.
Following resection, we then under fluoroscopic evaluation confirmed that a 15 mm 7-hole HP hook plate was appropriate size . This helped reduce the clavicle nicely down appropriately. We then held the reduction with a ball-tip guide pusher. The graft was then crossed over in a crossing fashion and this was tied to itself using #2 FiberWire in a figure-of-eight fashion. The clavicle HP hook plate was then positioned appropriately, overlying the graft that was just tied. This acts as an adjuvant to ensure the graft position is stable. Three bicortical screws were placed medially. . One locking screw was placed laterally. Fluoroscopic evaluation showed appropriate reduction of the ACJAC joint with good length and position of the hardware.
Post operatively, the patient denied any increased pain or instability. X-rays showed a well reduced AC Joint .
At the 6-month post-operative mark, due to some superficial irritation from the plate, we surgically removed the HP hook plate and the AC Joint remained well reduced. Now 2 years out from surgery, there has been no reported complications in her outcomes.