A 59-year-old Korean male with complaints of sudden metamorphopsia and reduced visual acuity for three days in the left eye was referred to our clinic. His past ophthalmological and other medical history was unremarkable except for hypertension.
On examination, the best-corrected distance visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/200 in the left eye. On slit-lamp examination, the cornea and conjunctiva were unremarkable, and there was no evidence of active inflammation in the anterior chamber or neovascularization in the iris. Fundus photography and fluorescein angiography showed BRVO in the left eye . Optical coherence tomography showed ME in the left eye . We performed intravitreal dexamethasone implantation and scatter laser photocoagulation in the left eye. The intravitreal dexamethasone implant injection was performed inferotemporally, 3.5 mm from the limbus. The implant was properly positioned in the vitreous chamber after the injection. One month after the intravitreal dexamethasone implantation, a decrease in the ME and an improvement of the BCVA to 20/40 was observed on left eye examination. Three months after the intravitreal dexamethasone implantation, recurrence of the ME and deterioration of the BCVA to 20/200 was observed on left eye examination. Therefore, we performed the second intravitreal dexamethasone implantation in the left eye in the same manner. One month after the second intravitreal dexamethasone implantation, the ME improved and the BCVA was 20/60 in the left eye. The ME recurred and the BCVA was 20/200 about four months after the second intravitreal injection. Therefore, we performed the third intravitreal dexamethasone implantation in the left eye in the same manner. Every intravitreal injections and the consequent follow-up examinations were performed by an experienced, single vitreoretinal specialist. On every follow-up examinations performed a day after the three dexamethasone implantations, the implant was positioned properly in the vitreous chamber, away from the crystalline lens. On slit-lamp examination performed one week after the third injection, grade 1 posterior subcapsular opacity was observed and the IOP was 42 mmHg by Goldmann applanation tonometer; however, there was improvement in the ME and the BCVA was 20/100. He was treated with oral acetazolamide, topical dorzolamide/timolol, and topical bimatoprost in the left eye. His IOP decreased to 18 mmHg in the left eye. He was discharged and prescribed topical dorzolamide/timolol and topical bimatoprost in the left eye and oral acetazolamide 10 mg/kg three times a day. Three weeks after the treatment, on slit-lamp examination, we observed that the posterior subcapsular cataract had progressed to mature stage ; anterior chamber was shallower than that observed in the previous examination. The IOP was 18 mmHg and the BCVA was reduced to hand motion in the left eye. Phacoemulsification and the consequent posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation was performed to treat the mature cataract, and intravitreal ranibizumab was performed in order to decrease the remnant ME in the left eye. The procedure was uneventful. His BCVA in the left eye was 20/60 one week after the procedure.