A 15-year-old boy who was previously diagnosed with SRU presented to our office with frequent bloody stool, chronic abdominal pain, constipation, and mucoid discharge. Five years earlier, his symptoms began with intermittent vague abdominal pain and bloody stool. Progressive deterioration of symptoms includes increased blood in the stool, new onset of mucoid discharge, and new onset of constipation. He complained of straining during defecation, difficulty passing hard and narrowed stool, and a sense of incomplete defecation that typically required manual finger evacuation. There was no previous history of surgery, prescription medication, or any other medical condition. He experienced no diarrhea, food intolerance, or significant weight loss. Additionally, his family history was negative for gastrointestinal disorders, including malignancies, IBD, and FAP. He had his first colonoscopy approximately four years prior, which revealed a solitary ulcer in the rectum .
The initial histologic examination revealed regenerative crypts in the lamina propria surrounded by fibrosis and smooth muscle proliferation, confirming the diagnosis of SRU. A previous laboratory evaluation revealed a WBC of 8100 × 109 cells/liter, Hb of 13.2 g/dL, MCV of 79.8 FL, platelets of 251,000 × 1010/unit, FBS of 85 mg/dL, TSH of 3.49 mIU/liter, AST of 12 units/liter, ALT of 16 units/liter, ALP of 391 units/liter, and ferritin of 22.2 mcg/liter, stool exam negative for occult blood, ova of parasites, and protozoa cyst.
On physical examination, his vital signs were stable, and there were no abnormal findings in his head, neck, chest, or abdomen. A perineal examination revealed no skin tags, fissures, visible prolapse, or other indications of child abuse. However, multiple irregular mass-like lesions were detected during the digital rectal examination.
We performed a colonoscopy, revealing multiple diffuse polyposes ranging in shape and size from 5 to 15 mm, extending from the rectum’s middle section to the rectosigmoid junction .
Multiple biopsies were taken and sent for histopathologic evaluation, which revealed a polypoid structure with a cap of ulcerated granulation tissue, inflammatory exudates on the surface, and tortuous non-dysplastic crypts with mucin spillage in the inflamed stroma, which included smooth muscle fibers and congested vessels . Thus, the diagnosis of CP was confirmed based on these new findings.
To rule out protein-losing enteropathy, total serum protein and albumin concentrations were determined to be normal (6.7 and 4.3 g/dL, respectively).
Until histopathologic confirmation of CP is obtained, conservative measures such as a high-fiber diet, the use of laxative agents, and avoidance of manual stool evacuation are recommended to the patient. After histopathologic confirmation, we decided to perform endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) and resected as many polyps as possible during the first session, considering the severity of the symptoms, multiple polyps in the rectum, and the lack of a standard established treatment plan. During the patient’s 3-month follow-up, the patient underwent two additional colonoscopy sessions, during which we removed the majority of the remaining polyps using EMR, but complete eradication was not possible. Nonetheless, the patient’s symptoms improved, the rectal bleeding stopped, and the abdominal pain subsided.