After 1 month of conservative treatment elsewhere, a 76-year-old Japanese woman who was previously healthy presented at our hospital with bilateral severe buttock and lower extremity pain, without a history of injury. She had a history of diabetes, hypothyroidism, and right breast cancer treated surgically 30 years previously. She had no appreciable familial or psychosocial history. Examination revealed the following: severe pain in the buttocks and posterior femoral area, positive straight-leg-raising tests at 30 degrees bilaterally, positive Valleix pain point and superior gluteal nerve pain point tests bilaterally, and negative femoral nerve-stretching tests bilaterally. The patient’s visual analogue scale (VAS; 100 mm) scores for lower extremity pain and numbness were 100/100 mm. By contrast, she had no motor deficit or dysfunction of the bladder or bowel. X-ray findings showed mild spondylosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a solitary intradural extramedullary mass at L2/3 with low T1, high T2, and uniform contrast enhancement with gadolinium . Myelography showed a total block of contrast below L2/3 and capping of contrast by the mass . The diagnosis was a solitary intradural extramedullary cauda equina tumor (a suspected schwannoma). The patient desired tumor extirpation because of the severe pain, so we evaluated her general status. A chest computed tomographic scan showed a suspected left breast cancer and lung metastasis . Brain MRI showed one small mass in the temporal lobe of the left side with a diameter of about 5 mm, a suspected metastasis . We considered a cauda equina tumor metastatic from the breast cancer. After obtaining informed consent, we performed an L1–3 laminectomy and tumor extirpation. Bloody cerebrospinal fluid was observed after the dura mater incision was made. The tumor was involved with the intact cauda equina, and careful division of adhesions was performed. After cutting the filum terminale (conglutinated with the tumor), the tumor was extirpated en bloc .
Postoperatively, the patient experienced pain relief. The pathology of the metastasis was adenocarcinoma. The result of cerebrospinal fluid cytology was negative. The patient started chemotherapy for breast cancer. At the 3-month postoperative follow-up, her VAS score was decreased for the lower extremity pain (from 100 to 0 mm) and numbness (from 100 to 20 mm). MRI showed no local relapses at the surgical incision. The lower extremity pain relief was maintained and was satisfactory during the postoperative course. Radiation therapy was performed to treat the brain metastasis after the surgery. The patient died 9 months postoperatively of Trousseau syndrome and brain metastasis due to breast cancer.