A 38-year-old female underwent a medical check-up at our institution. The patient’s medical profile had no history of weight loss, anorexia, or weakness. She had had a splenectomy 20 years prior for traumatic splenic rupture. Laboratory tests, including complete blood count, liver function test, and alpha-fetoprotein levels, were within the normal range. An abdominal CT scan without contrast enhancement revealed the absence of a normal spleen, with a homogeneous mass situated at the site (A and B). The mass exhibited heterogenous enhancement in the arterial phase (C), but homogeneous enhancement in the venous phase (D). The mass was suspected to have originated from the pancreas tail (A and C). There was no fat stranding surrounding the mass . Coronal CT image revealed that this mass compressed the left renal (A). The mass was fed by several branches of the splenic artery (B). An abdominal MRI was performed. This confirmed that the mass was located in the normal site of spleen and compressed the left kidney (A) and that the mass was round, with well-defined borders and without fat stranding. The mass presented as hyperintense compared to liver parenchyma on T2-weighted image (B). T1-weighted images showed that the mass was hypointense compared with liver parenchyma and did not lose signal on T1 out-of-phase images . Part of the mass was suspected to be connected to the pancreas tail (A and C). T1-weighted image in the arterial phase revealed that the mass enhanced markedly and inhomogeneously (A). The normal left adrenal gland was observed clearly (B). The mass exhibited homogeneous enhancement in the venous phase (C). It was clear that the mass showed restricted diffusion, since it was hyperintense on diffusion-weighted image (DWI) and had hypointense apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values on an ADC map compared to liver parenchyma . The preoperative diagnosis was a tumor of the pancreas tail. The patient underwent an operation to remove the mass by a general surgeon with 10-year experience. Histopathology showed white and red pulps, as well as connective tissue that presented within the mass as trabeculae that carry the arteries and veins (A). The white pulps included periarterial lymphatic sheath, lymphatic follicles, and the marginal zone (B). It was surrounded by a capsule composed of dense fibrous tissue (C). The lymphatic follicles contained benign lymphocytes (D). Histopathology of the mass revealed the appearance of a spleen parenchyma. The final diagnosis was an enlargement of AS after splenectomy. This patient was discharged from the hospital 4 days after surgery without further complications or treatment. The patient was lost to follow-up later. This case was reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .