A male, 72 years old. No physical discomfort, a physical examination, and gastroscopy are required.
Due to a regular physical examination, the gastroscopy found that the lower end of the stomach was marked with shallow depression near the antrum, with surface flushing and a tuberosity bulge in the centre . Then a biopsy. The indigo carmine staining is shallow depression, and the surrounding boundary is clear . Consider the patient’s atrophic gastritis with gastric antrum erosion and gastric antrum body junction lesions.
In the past medical history of patients, he had a history of hypertension and diabetes. Now blood pressure and blood glucose are perennial oral drug control. They denied others the history of chronic diseases, and the history of infectious diseases such as hepatitis, tuberculosis, and schistosomiasis.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumours. There is no history of Helicobacter pylori infection.
Physical examination revealed no fever, heart rate 77 bpm, blood pressure 141/85 mmHg, and other examinations all have discomfort.
After admission, the patient improved the examination of tumour indicators, and the results were negative .
No obvious abnormality in the upper abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed no concurrent lymph node and distant metastasis .
Pathology revealed high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia in the mucosa. The patient was subsequently examined after admission. Narrow-band imaging (NBI) after admission revealed a station membrane hyperemia lesion on the posterior wall of the gastric antrum. The staining showed that the lesion was a shallow depression with an unclear boundary. At the outer layer of the tumor, the micro glandular tube structure was disorganized and variable in size. The microvessels were slightly tortuous and expanded, forming a bright boundary with the periphery, with an endoscopic lesion ranging from 5 mm × 6 mm .
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was used to determine the source of the stomach wall. The local area is slightly thickened, the other levels of the stomach wall are continuous and complete, and there are no obvious abnormal echoes. The diagnosis was that the lesion was in the gastric mucosa .
Immunohistochemical examination revealed Ki-67 positivity in tissue , partial MUC2 positivity , partial MUC5AC negativity and partial MUC6 positivity . Hematoxylin and eosin were detected , after which poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma cells were detected.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed that the lesions were at the level of the neck of the gland and continued with the surface epithelium. Determining the tumor boundaries is difficult. There were “crawling type” glands everywhere in the tumour’s vicinity. Moreover, it spreads laterally in the lamina propria, but not in the stomach glands.