2 years 11 months old male pre-schooler admitted to hospital with a 2-month history of abdominal distension and increased abdominal temperature accompanied by pallor. He sought medical attention at the onset of the condition and was prescribed anti-parasitics and ferrous sulphate, which he has been taking since then, without improvement.

A week after admission, a bulge was observed in the left flank region when he sought medical attention again. He underwent abdominal ultrasound, which showed an enlarged left kidney with a globular appearance, with a suggestive image of a coraliform stone inside.

He was referred to tertiary care, where he presented a regular general condition, hypocratic, tachycardic, with a globose and painful abdomen, with a palpable mass in the left flank and an increase in temperature to the touch in the whole abdominal region. Laboratory tests demonstrated leukocytosis (21,420 leukocytes/mm3), important microcytic anaemia (haemoglobin of 6.3 g/dL and haematocrit of 22.3%), iron deficiency (13.6 mcg/dL), thrombocytosis (757,000 platelets/mm3), an increase in C-reactive protein (16.2 mg/dL) and leukocyturia (28,000 leukocytes/mL). The urine culture showed growth of Proteus mirabilis. The contrast computed tomography of the abdomen showed the presence of a 1.6 cm coraliform renal calculus, marked calicinal dilation and paradoxical renal pelvic contraction, as well as diffuse hypodensity and hyperechoic renal parenchyma, which gave the image a "bear's paw" pattern.

Patient underwent left nephrectomy by median laparotomy, under the assumption of xantogranulomatous pyelonephritis. Macroscopically, the left kidney appeared enlarged, with a look of pyelopelvic fat, adhered to the peritoneum, with a highly dilated pyelocalyceal system filled with pus. The anatomopathological study showed a kidney with intense pyelocalyceal dilation and hardened renal parenchyma, with yellowish areas. The microscopic examination revealed extensive chronic inflammation with xantogranulomatous areas coincident with the destruction of the renal parenchyma, with fibrosis and sclerosis of the remaining glomeruli. The conclusion was of xantogranulomatous pyelonephritis associated with pyelopelvic and urolithiasis with coraliform calculus.

He received 14 days of antibiotic therapy with metronidazole and ceftriaxone and recovered with complete clinical improvement and was discharged in good condition, with no report of recurrence of the condition or change in function in the contralateral kidney in the following year.
