A 73-year-old woman presented with dyspnea on exertion. Chest radiography showed an enlarged mediastinal silhouette. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) and echocardiography revealed a giant cyst (12 × 10 cm in diameter) occupying a large area around the left atrium and ventricle, and it was present behind the pulmonary artery. Based on the preoperative CT findings, a pericardial or an epicardial cyst was suspected. Additionally, attachment of the cyst to the left atrium, left ventricle, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary vein was suspected . Compression of the left atrium and ventricle was considered to be the cause of her symptoms. Her hemodynamic condition was stable. Percutaneous cystocentesis was performed, and 800 ml of serous liquid was aspirated. However, 1 week after cystocentesis, the cyst recurred, and its size was the same as that before the procedure. Therefore, resection was planned.
If the cyst was an epicardial cyst, tight adhesion of the cyst to the left atrium, left ventricle, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary vein was considered possible. However, we believed that the cyst was more likely a pericardial cyst because a pericardial cyst is more common than an epicardial cyst. Therefore, resection involving video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) was planned initially. However, the pericardium was intact and an epicardial cyst was diagnosed intraoperatively. As preoperative CT showed compression of the left atrium, ventricle, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary vein, adhesion was suspected. Additionally, the possibility of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was considered. Therefore, open surgery through median sternotomy was performed. The cyst was found to be attached to the visceral pericardium involving the left atrium and pulmonary artery. Contrary to our expectation, the left ventricle was not involved. Additionally, coronary vessels were not involved. The cyst was most tightly attached to the main pulmonary artery. Thus, it was thought to have originated from the pulmonary artery . The content fluid was aspirated via direct puncture, and a heart positioner was used to provide sufficient traction to the right side, with several sutures placed on the cyst wall, so that the back of the heart and the pulmonary artery could be observed. The cyst wall was thick and hypervascular, and it was completely dissected with an ultrasonic scalpel. The surgery was successfully completed without CPB.
The postoperative course was uneventful. CT confirmed absence of cyst recurrence or pericardial effusion. There has been no recurrence of the cyst since discharge (2 years).
Histopathological examination revealed a single layer of mesothelial cells. In addition to blood and lymphatic vessels, calretinin-positive cells lining the cystic wall, alpha-smooth muscle actin-positive cells, smooth muscle negative for myoglobin, neuron-specific enolase positive cells, lymphocyte infiltration, and fibrosis were observed .