A 40-year-old pregnant woman at 28th week of pregnancy was admitted to an obstetric emergency department in Isfahan, Iran, with chief complaints of epistaxis and gingival bleeding that were manifested about a week before admission.
She had no previous family history of bleeding disorders. But in her past medical history, it is highly notable that she had several hours of bleeding after eyebrow tattooing about 5 years before admission and two episodes of abortion in the first pregnancy trimester, 4 and 2 years before the current pregnancy. Moreover, her first pregnancy was successful. There were no abnormal data pertaining to her first labor.
Her medications were aspirin due to previous pregnancy losses, daily perinatal multivitamins, and iron supplements. She did not smoke or drink alcohol. Considering the patient’s condition, aspirin administration was discontinued and her symptoms reduced in intensity.
On admission, her vital signs were blood pressure 120/70, pulse 82, temperature 37 degrees C, respiratory rate 17. A detailed physical examination was performed but all findings were normal and no evidence of bleeding was found.
In her laboratory data, platelet count was in the normal range but prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) were both significantly elevated, so a mixing test was done. In the mixing test, both PT and PTT corrected instantly and after two hours of incubation at room temperature. Based on these results, the patient was suspected of having a deficiency of one or more coagulation factors. Thus, the activity level of coagulation factors were tested . Laboratory results showed that the activity level of factor V was decreased significantly and the patient was diagnosed with factor V deficiency. In accordance with the mixing test result, the congenital form of FVD was approved.
The patient had a history of two unsuccessful pregnancies and some complications were possible due to significantly elevated PT and PTT. Thus, the patient was started on fresh frozen plasma (FFP) every three days -two units each time (15–20 ml/kg bodyweight)- from week 30 of pregnancy until the parturition and she responded well with increase in FV activity to the normal range. At 40 + 2 weeks gestation, the vaginal delivery was done successfully and the baby was born with 3820 gr weight and Apgar score of 9 and 10 in 1st and 5th minute respectively. The newborn was tested for bleeding disorders and diagnosed with congenital FVD. As the patient and her husband were cousins, the infant was a case of congenital FVD with parental consanguinity.