A 41-year-old woman with CF was admitted for a course of intravenous antibiotics after developing worsening respiratory symptoms of increased cough, sputum volume and purulence and worsening breathlessness on exercise. She had lost 3 kg in weight and felt generally unwell. Her FEV1 had fallen from 860 mL to 780 mL. During the course of her admission, she volunteered that she had noted intermittent rectal bleeding and that the blood appeared to be mixed in with her stools.
The patient's CF genotype was DF508/N1303K. She had severe lung disease and was chronically infected with mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa. She was pancreatic insufficient and had CF-related diabetes (CFRD), as well as mild CF-related biliary cirrhosis. Treatment when stable consisted of rotating oral and nebulised antibiotics, nebulised DNAse and hypertonic saline, pancreatic enzyme replacement, fat-soluble vitamin supplements and insulin.
The question of lung transplantation had been raised previously and the patient had undergone formal assessment for this in 2005, but following discussions with the transplant team had decided to delay listing because lung function, albeit very poor, had remained stable over the preceding 5 years and her quality-of-life was still reasonable.
Examination revealed a woman at the lower limit of the healthy weight range (BMI 20.2). She was clubbed but there were no signs of anaemia or stigmata of chronic liver disease. Scattered inspiratory crepitations were present throughout both lung fields, especially over the upper lobes, but these findings were unchanged from previous recordings. On abdominal examination, there was no tenderness or palpable masses. Rectal examination was normal. Initial investigations revealed a normal haemoglobin, renal function and serum amylase. Liver enzymes were normal except for a slightly raised serum alkaline phosphatase at 155 IU/L (normal range 45 to 115 IU/L). Chest radiograph showed over-inflated lungs with fibrotic scarring and ring shadows, particularly in the upper lobes, consistent with her advanced lung disease. Full lung function testing showed an FEV1 of 0.78 L (29% predicted), forced vital capacity (FVC) of 1.29 L (41% predicted), and evidence of gas trapping with a residual volume of 210% predicted as well as a reduced carbon monoxide transfer factor (TLCO) of 12.86 mL/min/mmHg (52% predicted) that normalised when corrected for alveolar volume.
At colonoscopy, a large pedunculated polyp was seen in the distal sigmoid colon and the top of this was removed. Histopathology demonstrated a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma arising on a background of a severely dysplastic tubulovillous adenoma. Invasive tumour was apparent at the surgical resection margin. There was no immunohistochemical evidence of mutation in the mismatch repair genes MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6.
A staging computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast of the chest, abdomen and pelvis did not demonstrate the primary malignancy or any metastases within the abdomen.
After a second unsuccessful attempt at endoscopic resection, the patient elected to undergo potentially curative laparoscopic resection. She was transferred to a large tertiary referral hospital in another state that has a fully staffed multidisciplinary CF Unit providing care to over 220 patients. Tasmanians do not have access to this sort of dedicated care team and it was thought that the patient's chances of survival postoperatively would be increased if 24-hour access to a multidisciplinary CF team was available.
As part of the pre-operative staging, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan was undertaken and this demonstrated increased uptake in enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes which were thought reactive and consistent with her chronic pulmonary sepsis. There was no uptake in the abdomen to suggest loco-regional metastatic disease. A laparoscopic anterior resection was performed under general anaesthetic. The procedure was tolerated remarkably well. Operative time was 4 hours during which she maintained oxygen saturations between 97% and 100% on a FiO2 of 38%. She was extubated successfully and had an uncomplicated postoperative course. She rapidly weaned herself off a fentanyl infusion (Patient Controlled Analgesia) within 24 hours and was able to undertake chest physiotherapy and airway clearance techniques under the supervision of a CF physiotherapist on the first evening post-operation. Before the operation, she had received continuous intravenous antibiotics for 41 days and these were continued for a further 6 days postoperatively until she was discharged. Histopathology of the resected segment of colon revealed a Stage I (T1N0) moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with clear resection margins. Adjuvant therapy was not considered appropriate. She has remained very well over the 12 months since her return to Tasmania and a restaging CT scan of the abdomen and colonoscopy have shown no evidence of recurrence.