A 56 year old male presented with a non tender hard atrophic left testicle. The rest of the examination was normal. There had been no previous scrotal surgery or trauma.
Tumour markers including lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG), alpha fetoprotein (AFP) and prostate specific antigen (PSA) were normal. His total white cell count was normal. An ultrasound of the scrotum demonstrated a localised tumour of the testis. Chest x-ray was normal. A standard left radical orchidectomy was performed by the inguinal approach. The tumour appeared to be confined to the upper pole of the testis and was clinically described as T1 or T2. Macroscopic histological examination suggested no involvement of the tunica albuginea, epididymis or spermatic cord. Microscopic examination demonstrated infiltration of the testis by uniform ovoid cells with clear cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli consistent with seminoma . Tumour involved the tunica albuginea but did not extend through it. There was no vascular invasion. Surprisingly, seminoma cells were present beneath the epithelial lining of the vas deferans extending to the spermatic cord resection margin but nowhere else within the spermatic cord. . The microscopic slides gave the appearance of sub epithelial spread of seminoma cells along the vas deferans. Other structures in the spermatic cord were not involved.
A post operative CT scan demonstrated two separate masses. A 2.8 cm by 2.3 cm central abdominal mesenteric mass and a 7.6 cm by 5.4 cm irregular heterogeneous lobulated soft tissue mass within the pelvis arising from the prostate and extending into the mesorectal fascia. There were no enlarged retroperitoneal, pelvic, inguinal or thoracic lymph nodes. . The chest CT scan was normal. The patient has received chemotherapy and is currently under follow up according to standard EUA guidelines. There is no evidence of residual or recurrent disease. The CT scan performed after completion of the course of chemotherapy demonstrated complete resolution of the two metastatic masses. .