A 39-year-old male was transferred to our hospital from another hospital. He had mild tenderness, an obvious bowel pattern and hyperactive bowel sounds; he was able to pass gas occasionally. Before admission, he suffered progressive abdominal distention and gradual deterioration, and he developed malnutrition for two months. A total alimentary tract angiography showed partial enlargement of the ascending colon and transverse colon and partial dilation of the distal small intestine . He was diagnosed with “adult megacolon” and recommended for surgical treatment. However, the operation was not performed because of a significant decrease in platelets (with a minimum of 19 × 109/L) and severe malnutrition. He had been in a car accident 2 years previously. He was the driver and was wearing a seat belt at the time of the accident. During that admission, he was always conscious and was found to have left clavicle fractures and multiple rib fractures. Abdominal examination showed seat belt marks and mild localized tenderness at the site of the abrasions. An abdominal CT scan showed a small amount of fluid (approximately 150 ml) in the abdominal cavity with no solid organ abnormalities. He was hemodynamically stable and was able to pass gas and defecate. He improved rapidly with conservative treatment, was discharged after several days and was asymptomatic. Two months after discharge, he started to have episodes of abdominal distension and intermittent mild tenderness, and he passed gas less frequently than before. However, he improved rapidly again after receiving treatment with traditional Chinese medicine.
After admission, we first tried to improve the general condition of the patient by strengthening parenteral nutrition and correcting electrolyte imbalances. Then, a series of additional examinations were performed to explore the possible reasons for these problems. An abdominal CT scan showed an abrupt narrowing zone at the jejunum . Small balloon colonoscopy found a narrow zone approximately 40–50 cm from the ileocecal valve; the surface mucosa was swollen and erosive, and the upper segment of the intestine was obviously expanded . Laparoscopy was performed on the patient after multidisciplinary discussion and detailed preoperative evaluation. We found severe adhesion between the abdominal wall and intestine as well as a narrow small bowel with a length of 12 cm at approximately 40–50 cm from the ileocecal valve. The mesentery corresponding to the narrow part of the small intestine was also absent, and the proximal intestine was markedly dilatated. Additionally, a thick adhesive band was also found between the dilated proximal intestine and the sigmoid colon, and we thought it might be the main cause of colonic dilation . Therefore, we performed laparoscopic adhesiolysis and partial small bowel resection, and the thick adhesive bands were destroyed. The narrow small bowel with length of 20 cm was removed. Histologically, the area was fibrotic . The patient recovered rapidly and gained 5 kg in the 3 months after surgery. He was very satisfied with the treatment.