A 34-year-old Nepalese male, presented with confusion and abnormal behavior of 8-days duration. No witnessed seizures were reported. Examination showed a thin man with normal vital signs. He was drowsy, needed to be prompted continuously to respond, and was echolalic. There was prominent neck rigidity and bilateral 3rd nerve palsies in addition to peripheric facial palsy on the right. Gag and palatal movement were intact. The patient could move all 4 limbs equally, had bilateral extensor planter responses and an unsteady gait. Other systemic examination was unremarkable. Complete blood count, coagulation profile and serum chemistry were all within normal limits. HIV test was negative. A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the brain revealed hydrocephalus necessitating the insertion of an emergent external ventricular device (EVD) which was changed later to a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. CSF examination showed predominately lymphocytic inflammatory picture with around 330 cells, a moderately elevated protein of 0.75 g/l and a severely depressed glucose of 0.5 mmol/l. CSF Gram staining and cultures were negative. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for TB as well as Acid fast bacilli (AFB) staining, and TB culture was negative on 3 different occasions. CSF viral serology was also negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast including a MR venogram (MRV) (a–d) showed extensive basal enhancement, a solitary ring enhancing lesion (likely tuberculoma), left transverse and sigmoid sinus thrombosis extending to the jugular vein and two discrete vasculitic infarcts in addition to the presence of hydrocephalus with an EVD in place. Based on a score of – 5 on the Thwaites Diagnostic Score (TDS) and a score of 14 on the Lancet Consensus score (LCS) the patient was diagnosed with probable TBM and started on antituberculosis treatment (ATT) using the standard 4 drug regimen of rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol and pyrazinamide in weight adjusted doses in addition to dexamethasone. Further work up including a mantoux skin test, chest x-ray, an autoimmune screening, and a thrombophilia screening had a negative yield. The patient was not commenced on anticoagulants as the risk of bleeding with EVD in place was deemed high.
Patient showed good recovery with restoration of normal cognitive function, but residual right sided oculomotor and facial palsies persisted. CSF showed reduction of cells and protein and normalization of CSF glucose after 20 days of treatment. The patient was sent to rehabilitation on ATT where he continued to improve and was discharged home after 2 months of rehabilitation with the above-mentioned deficits. The patient thereafter traveled back to his country and was lost to follow up.