A 37-year-old white man, suffering from hepatitis B, presented to the emergency department with cough, low grade fever and night sweats. He was heterosexual with no history of intravenous drug use and worked as a bartender. Radiological examination of the abdomen and chest revealed no pathologies. Biochemical and hematological profiling showed: SGOT: 71 U/liter, SGPT: 61 U/liter, LDH: 931 U/liter, CRP: 28.33 mg/dl, leucocytosis (12,900/μL) associated with polymorphonucleosis (88.2%), Ht 35% and Hb 11.8 g/dl. The serologic examinations for HIV and hepatitis C were negative, as well as the Mantoux reaction.
The next day, the patient presented with dyspnea and auscultation revealed diminished breath sounds with diminished vocal resonance in the right hemithorax. A chest X-ray revealed a pleural effusion in the right hemithorax. Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the chest and abdomen revealed a pleural effusion and a liver abscess . The abscess measured 14 × 9 × 7 cm, occupying a great percentage of the right lobe. An echogram of the liver showed septae within the abscess and for this reason echo- or CT-guided drainage was avoided. An operation was scheduled for the following day, but a rapid deterioration of the patient's clinical condition was observed that evening. The patient was febrile (oral temperature 39.2°C) with hypotension, tachypnea (32 breaths/minute) and tachycardia (110 beats/minute) and signs of an acute abdomen. Therefore, emergency surgery was deemed necessary. During exploratory laparotomy, a large volume of free fluid (~2200 ml) together with debris was found on entry into the peritoneal cavity. A rupture of the hepatic abscess at the position of segment VIII was found <Authors: and surgical drainage of the hepatic abscess (that contained many septae) was performed and two wide drains (32G) were placed in the remaining hepatic cavity. Finally, a thoracic drain tube (Büllau) was placed and gave only yellowish reactive fluid. The patient was hospitalized in the ICU for 14 days and for another 14 days in our department. The cultures of the pus were negative for any microorganisms. The diagnosis of an amebic abscess was made by the pathologists who identified E. histolytica in the debris . The patient was discharged receiving metronidazole (Flagyl, Rhone Poulenc Rorer) 500 mg three times a day.