A 68-year-old man was scheduled for elective coronary artery bypass graft surgery. He had a past history of hypertension, bronchial asthma, cerebral infarction, and myelodysplastic syndrome and has been on hemodialysis because of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. He was alert and preoperative laboratory data were unremarkable except white blood cell count 2.24 × 103/μL, red blood cell count 3.83 × 103/μL, platelet count 9.1× 104/μL, creatinine 4.15 mg/dL, and B-type natriuretic peptide 161.9 pg/mL. Echocardiography demonstrated left ventricular ejection fraction 34%, mild aortic regurgitation, mild aortic stenosis, and mild mitral regurgitation. An IABP catheter (TRANS-RAY®, 7.5 Fr, 34 mL, Getinge AB, Lindholmspiren, Göteborg, Sweden) was inserted via the right femoral artery and connected to the console (Cardiosave® IABP Hybrid, Getinge AB), and circulatory support was started before surgery.
In the operating room, a radial arterial catheter was inserted and an electrode for monitoring PSI was placed on the forehead in addition to routine monitors. General anesthesia was induced with midazolam 3 mg and remifentanil 0.3 μg/kg/min and was maintained using sevoflurane in an air–oxygen mix after tracheal intubation. PSI value prior to CPB was between 30 and 50. Propofol was continuously infused with a target concentration of 3 μg/mL using an infusion pump (TERUMO TE-371, Diprifuser™, TERUMO, Tokyo, Japan), and heart rate was approximately 60 bpm during CPB. IABP was continuously operated using electrocardiogram-triggered mode (1:1) in order to provide pulsatile flow.
PSI value was increased from 30 to 50 immediately after starting CPB and remarkably decreased after stopping IABP before partial clamping of the ascending aorta for anastomosis with the saphenous vein . PSI was increased to approximately 70 abruptly after resuming IABP, which did not respond to an increase of infusion rate of propofol and remifentanil and to a bolus administration of fentanyl 100 μg or midazolam 10 mg. PSI values varied between 6 and 88 in accordance with the stopping and restarting of IABP. It decreased to 14 after stopping IABP for hemostasis around the anastomosis and again rapidly increased to 80 corresponding to restart of IABP before weaning from CPB . EEG remained almost electrically silent, mean arterial blood pressure was around 40 mmHg, and rectal temperature was 35.3 °C during CPB with a flow rate of 2.5 L/min. Based on the EEG findings, we were certain that the patient was adequately anesthetized. After weaning the patient from CPB, the PSI value and EEG pattern spontaneously showed sedative status. Postoperatively, there was no evidence of intraoperative awareness, anesthetic drug delivery, or instrument trouble.