A 37-year-old Japanese woman had a history of gender identity disorder from childhood and had taken testosterone injections once every 2 weeks since she was 19 years old. She also had untreated high blood pressure. She had worked in the sex industry and had a tattoo on her right arm. In May 2017, she developed a headache and visual field deficits together with elevated blood pressure and was referred to our hospital. On admission, her blood pressure was 165/105 mmHg with regular heart rhythm. She was alert and well oriented. She had left homonymous hemianopia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a hyperintense lesion in the right parieto-occipital lobe on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map, and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) , which were not enhanced by contrast with gadolinium. MR angiography (MRA) showed steno-occlusive lesions in bilateral middle cerebral arteries (MCAs) . Three-dimensional contrast-enhanced angiography revealed occlusions of bilateral MCAs . She was initially suspected as having PRES related to reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome (RCVS) and received treatment with an antihypertensive drug and 100 mg of aspirin. Routine blood testing showed the patient was HIV-1 antibody-positive. The CD4+ T-cell count was 140 cells/μl and the HIV viral load detected by PCR was 330,000 copies/ml. She underwent lumbar puncture, and no pleocytosis was found. Furthermore, PCR for herpes simplex virus (HSV), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), and JC virus in cerebrospinal fluid was negative. She had also developed pneumocystis pneumonia when she was diagnosed with AIDS. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) comprising dolutegravir sodium, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide fumarate was initiated, and she was discharged from the hospital. Two weeks later, she suffered a severe headache and worsening of visual disturbance in bilateral eyes. Her blood pressure was 153/93 mmHg and her visual acuities were finger counting. MRI showed the hyperintense lesion had expanded to bilateral posterior hemispheres . Stenotic lesions in bilateral MCAs remained on MRA and three-dimensional contrast-enhanced angiography . The CD4+ T-cell count at readmission was 189 cells/μl and HIV viral load was 94 copies/ml, indicating that AIDS activity was alleviated after ART. Although she was initially treated with edaravone, a free radical scavenger, and antihypertensive agents after readmission, her visual acuities fluctuated and contrast-enhanced MRI showed multiple punctate and linear gadolinium-enhanced lesions in the occipital and temporal lobes and the cerebellum . Brain biopsy was performed from the right occipital lobe. Histopathology showed severe tissue destruction, astrocytic gliosis, microglial activation, and vasculitis with marked lymphocytic infiltration in the cerebral white matter in the absence of multinucleated giant cells and lymphoma cells . Infiltrated lymphocytes were mostly CD8+ T-lymphocytes, while CD4+ T-lymphocytes were scarce . We finally diagnosed her as having CD8+ encephalitis, with an exacerbation caused by immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) after ART. After brain biopsy, the patient was treated with 1000 mg of methylprednisolone intravenously for 3 consecutive days followed by 0.5 mg/kg/day of prednisolone. Her visual acuities and headache improved after corticosteroid treatment.