A 67-year-old Caucasian female, former smoker with hypercholesterolaemia, depression, fibromyalgia, and migraine (using propranolol 10 mg t.i.d.), was referred to the outpatient clinic for evaluation of periodic drop attacks since 8 years. The attacks, which presented with and without transient loss of consciousness (TLOC), typically occurred once a month and usually in the first minutes of walking. In general, the duration of TLOC was only seconds and episodes were accompanied by symptoms of headaches, light-headedness, dyspnoea, and chest pain. Aside from the syncopal episodes, she had these symptoms on a regular basis, sometimes every day.
Because of the drop attacks, she fractured her radial head, wrist, and humerus (twice) on separate occasions. Physical examination was unremarkable upon presentation as was blood examination (including normal thyroid/adrenal function). Neurological analysis (including electroencephalogram, computed tomography, and cerebral magnetic resonance imaging) was normal, as were electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and 72 h ambulatory rhythm monitoring.
Exercise testing (max 80 W) provoked symptoms of dyspnoea, chest pain, and light-headedness with a slightly hypertensive blood pressure (BP) course (max 197/67 mmHg) but no signs of ischaemia. An implanted loop recorder registered only normal sinus rhythm during eight consecutive syncope episodes. Unrelated to the drop attacks, regular supraventricular tachycardias of 180 b.p.m. were observed for which propranolol was switched to metoprolol 100 mg q.d., reducing both her tachycardias and some of her symptoms. However, because of progressive dyspnoea, the beta-blocker was halved, unfortunately causing her original complaints to return. Echocardiography, ambulatory rhythm monitoring, and exercise testing were negative again for significant abnormalities. Subsequent coronary computed tomography angiography did not show significant coronary artery disease. Hereafter, supine and upright measurements of BP and a passive head-up tilt test were performed. Both of which interestingly provoked her symptoms. Within 30 s after standing her BP rose from 130/85 to 180/90 mmHg while she developed her familiar complaints of dyspnoea, chest pain, headaches, and light-headedness. After lying down, SBP quickly returned to stable values of 135 mmHg and symptoms declined. The same occurred with 70° tilt testing. After 90 s, her BP had risen to 200/105 mmHg, it remained high for more than 15 min and her symptoms returned. Nitroglycerine also provoked a hypertensive response. Her heart rate remained stable following standing and tilting and she did not faint.
As we suspected autonomic dysfunction with excessive catecholamine release, we started the alpha-blocker doxazosin 4 mg q.d. Two months later, she reported that she was free of symptoms besides minor dizziness after standing up and we repeated the tilt test (. Following standing and 70° tilt testing, SBP decreased from 140 to 120 mmHg and remained stable throughout the next 30 min without any complaints. After nitroglycerine, a typical hypotensive response occurred.
Two years later, she is still free of symptoms.