We report a case of a 72-year-old female patient with a known medical history of hypertension and ischemic heart disease. She was on medical treatment of beta-blockers, aspirin, and nitrates. Her BMI was 33.14 kg/m2. The patient presented to the emergency department with an attack of severe abdominal pain associated with nausea and vomiting (7–8 times per day); the days preceded the attack of abdominal pain the patient was noticed mild cough and nasal sneezing; diagnosed as a mild COVID infection after visiting a physician in an outpatient clinic and a positive nasopharyngeal (RT-PCR) testing. The symptoms were resolved completely with home isolation and conservative treatment (paracetamol and nasal decongestants). The patient denied any history of contact with a confirmed COVID patient or a patient with flu likes symptoms. One week later, the patient complained of myalgia, anorexia, and ageusia that shortly followed by an attack of sharp diffuse colicky abdominal pain associated with nausea and vomiting (7–8 times) for which the patient presented to the emergency department for further evaluation. In the emergency room, CT chest revealed bilateral ground-glass opacities . The laboratory investigations showed elevated total leucocytic count: 14.3 × 109 cells/L, hemoglobin at 11.4 g/dL, CRP 118.2 mg/l, serum creatinine 1.69 mg/dL with markedly elevated serum amylase 1667 U/L and lipase: 710 U/L; other laboratory values were unremarkable . There was no history of fever, shortness of breath, or chest pain. Vital signs showed elevated blood pressure (BP = 150/100), tachycardia (pulse100 b/min), and body temperature was normal (37.1 °C), respiratory rate of 19 breaths per minute, and her oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry was 95% on room air and had markedly elevated blood sugar (RBS = 500 mg/dL). On physical examination, the patient was found to have a dry mucous membrane of the tongue, pallor, and severe generalized tenderness of the abdomen with normal intestinal sounds. She also appeared fatigued and cachectic. Abdominal computed tomography was normal. The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis in a COVID-19 patient was settled. Upon that the patient was referred to the ICU room in the quarantine hospital, 3 days at ICU, the condition was resolved with conservative treatment, bowel rest, intravenous fluids, and analgesia; the patient was discharged after 15 days of admission. Her BMI on discharge was 25.25 kg/m2; she lost 20 kg from her weight and her blood sugar returned to the normal level.