A 64-year-old male initially presented with painless hematuria in September 2017 and was treated by a partial cystectomy as stage I BC. The patient showed local recurrence in August 2018 and underwent transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) followed by regular intravesical chemotherapy with epirubicin after TURBT. In March 2020, the patient approached to our hospital complaining about severe anorexia and fatigue. Subsequent FDG-PET/CT scan showed bladder recurrence with local invasion of the adjacent right lower ureter, resulting in the upper urinary tract dilation. Multiple lymph node metastasis, liver metastasis and lumbar metastasis (L5) were also identified . Ureteral stent placement was performed due to obstructive renal insufficiency and hepatic biopsy confirmed metastatic high-grade urothelial carcinoma with positive PD-L1 expression on 1% of the tumor cells. Then, next-generation sequencing (NGS) by a commercial laboratory (Genecast Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Jiangsu, China) identified ERBB2 p.V842I in both circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) and biopsy sample with an allele frequency of 3.94% and 26.07%, respectively .
The patient received one cycle of palliative reduced-dose albumin-bound paclitaxel due to elevated serum creatinine level (Scr 204μmol/L). The tumor biomarker CA199 was even higher after first cycle chemotherapy without any relief of his symptoms. Based on his NGS result, pyrotinib (400mg orally daily) was started from April 10, 2020. Within one month, his tumor markers dramatically improved with remission of clinical symptoms . Due to renal dysfunction, the patient performed FDG-PET/CT scan for treatment efficacy assessment, which showed significantly decreased FDG uptake of multiple metastatic sites in May 2020 . Even though the overall response was considered stable based on the RECIST 1.1 criteria, the decrease in FDG uptake and remission of clinical symptoms indicated the patient responded well to the HER2 targeting therapy. However, he developed G3 diarrhea and terminated the medication on May 20, 2020 (The pyrotinib treatment lasted for 40 days). The third-line treatment with the PD-1 inhibitor tislelizumab (200mg every three weeks) was next started but the disease progressed after 2 months . ctDNA was collected in August 2020 and ERBB2 p.V842I with an allele frequency of 2.06% was identified by NGS. Ureteral stent removal was performed with improved renal function. Four cycles of PD-L1 inhibitor durvalumab, oxaliplatin and gemcitabine were administered, but level of CA199 gradually increased. NGS was performed again showing the same ERBB2 mutation with an allele frequency of 1.58%. Reduced dose of pyrotinib (240mg orally daily) was added, the patient’s tumor again responded with significant improvement of CA199 within 20 days. Dynamic monitoring of the ctDNA again confirmed ERBB2 p.V842I by NGS with a lower allele frequency of 0.41% . The regimen was generally tolerated this time but the tumor marker gradually increased in this patient. PET/CT evaluation revealed disease progression in March 2021, and the treatment was then discontinued . The length of time for reduced pyrotinib therapy was 4.5 months. The patient passed away on July 1st, 2021, and the post-recurrence survival was 16 months.