A 11 year old female child from South-Asia of Indian origin, presented to the orthopaedics department with complaints of fever, non-traumatic pain and swelling in the right leg for about 3 days. There was no significant past history. She was septic and was noted to have a diffuse swelling over the upper third of right leg with skin erythema, warmth and tenderness. No discharging sinuses were noted. Blood investigations showed a raised white cell count and marginally increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Rest of the haematological and biochemical markers were within normal limits. Blood sample was sent for culture and sensitivity which showed no growth. Anteroposterior and lateral views of plain radiograph of the right leg showed normal tibia and fibula with subtle irregular altered soft tissue density in the lateral aspect of the mid third of the leg . Incision and drainage was performed the following day under general anaesthesia. Thick purulent discharge was drained and about 5 ml of the discharge was sent for culture and sensitivity. The wound was left open and dressed appropriately .
Gram staining of the purulent material showed numerous pus cells and gram negative bacilli. Inoculation in blood agar showed dark yellow pigmented colonies with no hemolysis . On nutrient agar yellow pigmented colonies were seen and were noticed to turn to red when 10 % potassium hydroxide (KOH) was added on to the culture . It did not grow in Mac Conkey agar. The isolate was non-motile, catalase and oxidase positive, indole positive, methyl red negative and Voges–Proskauer’s negative. Urea was not hydrolysed and citrate was not utilized. On triple sugar iron agar, glucose was utilised with gas production. The organism was identified by both conventional method and VITEK-2 systems version: 07.01 as C. indologenes.
Genus was presumptively identified as Chryseobacterium after 24 h and genus confirmation, species identification and sensitivity results were available in 48 h. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values by VITEK-2 system are in Table .
Our isolate was susceptible to imipenem and resistant to meropenem and doripenem. Chryseobacterium species are intrinsically resistant to most beta lactams including carbapenems due to the production of chromosomally mediated metallobetalactamases (MBL). The isolate was a MBL producer which was confirmed by double disk diffusion method with ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA).
Patient was empirically started on parenteral cefotaxime, metronidazole and gentamicin, was changed over to intravenous ceftazidime 1 g twice daily and metronidazole infusion 500 mg thrice daily for 5 days based on the sensitivity report following which significant clinical improvement was noted. Subsequently secondary closure was done 10 days later. The wound healed well and the patient was discharged on oral antibiotics with follow up. Consent for publication was obtained from the patient’s parent.