We present the case of a 50-year-old female receptionist who, early in 2011, developed loss of energy and feelings of exhaustion but without any identified psychosocial stressors. At the end of the same year, she presented with a classical depressive syndrome (suffering from impaired concentration, slowed thinking processes, disturbed memory, low mood, decreased activity, reduced energy, fearfulness, symptoms of demoralization with hopelessness, reduced self-awareness, excessive guilty, sleep disturbance, inability to work, and social withdrawal). For the patient, the adynamia and cognitive impairment were the most debilitating symptoms. Hence, a major depression was diagnosed. Treatment with venlafaxine (up to 112.5 mg; higher doses were not tolerated) plus agomelatine (25 mg) together with cognitive-behavioral therapy was started without sufficient therapeutic success. In the autumn of 2012, occupational reintegration with reduced working hours was initiated, but it soon had to be stopped because of cognitive and also physical exhaustion. The patient would forget things and fail to understand more complex tasks. Reaction times were described as extended; memory was still disturbed, mood depressed, and energy level reduced.
In January 2014, the patient was admitted to our hospital. Her somatic history only showed high blood pressure, which was treated with telmisartan (80 mg), and a history of a clinically remitted lumbar disc prolapse. Thyroxine (T4) substitution had been started at the beginning of 2012 (because TPO and TG antibodies were elevated in an initial outpatient examination, whereas thyroid hormones were normal). On admission to our hospital, 75 μg T4 were taken. The patient had no history of psychiatric disorders prior to 2011, and her familial history was negative for psychiatric, neurological, or autoimmune disorders.
Internal and neurological examinations revealed no relevant abnormalities. Serum analysis showed increased TPO (804 IU/mL; normal range <34 IU/mL), increased TG (661.4 IU/mL; normal range <115 IU/mL), and normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor antibodies. The levels of thyroid hormones (triiodothyronine [T3], T4 and TSH) were normal. No antibodies against intracellular onconeural antigens (Yo, Hu, CV2/CRMP5, Ri, Ma1/2, SOX1) or intracellular synaptic antigens (GAD, amphiphysin) were found. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis illustrated a slight blood–brain barrier disturbance (protein 678 mg/L [reference <450 mg/L], albumin-quotient 7.7 [age-related reference < 7.3 × 10−3]), a normal white cell blood count (1/μL), and no intrathecal immunoglobulin synthesis or oligoclonal bands. Moreover, there were no antibodies against neuronal cell surface antigens (NMDAR, AMPA-R, GABA-B-R, VGKC-complex [LGI1, Caspr2]) in the CSF. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) depicted unspecific supratentorial white matter lesions and frontal accentuated brain atrophy . Electroencephalography (EEG) was normal. In cognitive testing for attentional performance (TAP), response time was greatly reduced and alertness and processing speed were below average .
The most important differential diagnosis was major depression, because the main symptoms of this were present (lowering of mood, reduction of energy, and decrease in activity ). The leading symptoms were cognitive impairments, including forgetfulness (in particular for short-term memory), so pre-senile dementia also had to be considered. Other reasons for inflammatory brain diseases, such as limbic encephalitis or metabolic disorders, were excluded .
Intravenous treatment with high dose methylprednisolone 1000 mg over 3 days and 500 mg over 2 days was provided and well tolerated. Methylprednisolone treatment was continued with 40 mg orally and tapered by halving the daily dose every fifth day. Treatment with venlafaxine (112.5 mg), agomelatine (25 mg), and T4 (75 μg) was continued unchanged.
Directly after the high-dose intravenous steroid treatment, the patient reported reduced cognitive impairment and improved alertness. Neuropsychological testing confirmed this rapid improvement with reduced response latencies in all attention tasks, compared with measurement before corticosteroid treatment. The basal alertness and processing speed was improved, but still below-average. After around five weeks, however, the mood and energy levels had normalized and cognitive impairment disappeared. After three months, the patient was fully reintegrated at work without cognitive deficits. In the follow-up testing for attentional performance (6.5 months after therapy onset), no relevant neuropsychological deficit remained . No changes in the follow-up MRI were detected . TPO (440.6 IU/mL; initial 804 IU/mL) and TG antibodies (581.7 IU/mL; initial 661.4 IU/mL) decreased but still exceeded the reference limit.