A 33-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our medical institution on May 21, 2018, owing to progressive distension in the upper abdomen.
Two weeks before admission, she was diagnosed with LC, portal hypertension and splenomegaly, based on an upper abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan at another hospital. Although she was taking prescribed medication that exerted effects such as anti-hepatic fibrosis, inhibition of gastric acid secretion, and protection of the stomach, her symptoms did not improve. She developed progressive distension in the upper abdomen with sour regurgitation. There was no nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal pain.
The patient had a history of thrombocytopenia going back more than 10 years and she had undergone surgery for an ovarian cyst on the left side in 2011.
No special personal and family history.
Physical examination revealed dark discoloration and mild tenderness in the left lower abdomen; other examinations were normal.
Complete blood cell count showed a reduced white blood cell count 3.1 × 109/L (normal range 3.5-9.5 × 109/L) and platelet count 74 × 109/L (normal range 125-350 × 109/L). Liver and renal functions, coagulation, and tumor markers were normal. Serum electrolytes were within the normal range. The levels of protein C, protein S, immunoglobulin (Ig) G, IgA, and IgM were also within normal limits. Serology for hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C antibody, anticardiolipin antibodies, and lupus anticoagulant was negative. No other obvious abnormalities were discovered.
Gastroscopy showed mild esophageal varices. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed caudate lobe hypertrophy, cirrhosis, and dilated lumbar and hemiazygos veins . Dilated azygos veins and narrowed IVC were present . Hypersplenotrophy and dilated veins in the lower esophagus and surrounding the hilus lienis were also observed.
To confirm the diagnosis of BCS, liver biopsy was performed under CT guidance. Histochemical staining (hematoxylin-eosin and Masson trichrome) showed hepatocyte degeneration, bridging fibrosis, sinusoidal dilatation, and areas of fibrous tissue with substantial hyperplasia .