A 71-year-old man presented to a regional hospital with gradually worsening dysphagia for two years. He had not experienced any dysphagia or vomiting before, nor had he ever undertaken an endoscopy. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a giant M-ED and multiple small diverticula in lower esophagus with mild stenosis, although the endoscope passed through it without difficulty . He was referred to our hospital for surgery.
Computed tomography revealed an 8-cm-long M-ED on the right side of the esophagus. Barium swallow test confirmed the diagnosis of M-ED and multiple small diverticula in lower esophagus with some narrowing though barium promptly passed through the esophagogastric junction (EGJ) . HRM (Starlet, Star Medical, Inc, Tokyo, Japan) revealed a median integrated relaxation pressure (IRP) of 14.6 mmHg (upper cutoff; 26 mmHg), a distal latency (DL) of 6.4 s (lower cutoff; 4.5 s), and an average maximum IBP of 35.7 mmHg . The patient did not meet the criteria for an esophageal motility disorder according to the Chicago classification (version 4.0) ; however, elevated IBP (> 20.1 mmHg) suggested the presence of an underlying structural restriction or obstruction at the EGJ .
Thoracoscopic resection of the M-ED and myotomy of the lower esophagus were performed. Briefly, the patient was placed in a prone position with bilateral lung ventilation and approached from the right chest under artificial pneumothorax at 10 mmHg with carbon dioxide. A 12-mm camera port and three working ports were inserted at the 5th, 7th, and 9th intercostal spaces. The diverticulum in mid esophagus was identified through the pleura as a pulsion diverticulum without muscularis propria, and the right vagus nerve was running near the ED. The root of the ED was exposed preserving the right vagus nerve and longitudinally transected using linear staplers, and the muscle layers were sutured with 3–0 proline to bury the staple lines. Myotomy was performed in the right posterior wall of the esophagus, extending from immediately below the ED to the level of the diaphragm, ~ 12 cm in length. The lower esophagus looks normal in appearance, but the muscular layer was thickened just as same as achalasia during the myotomy. Finally, intraoperative endoscopy confirmed sufficient opening of the midthoracic esophagus and improvement of the stenosis in the lower esophagus. The operation duration was 119 min, and intraoperative blood loss was minimal.
Histopathologic investigation revealed that M-ED was composed of mucosa and submucosa without the muscle layer and was diagnosed as pseudodiverticulum. Postoperative esophagography showed smooth passage of the contrast medium without leakage or stenosis . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 13. His dysphagia had completely resolved at the 3-month follow-up visit, and the HRM test performed at that time demonstrated that the average maximum IBP was declined to within the normal range .