A 38-year-old-gentleman presented with complains of acute-onset progressive breathlessness with dry cough and fever for 7 days. He was a never smoker and had no previous known comorbidities. On initial assessment, the patient was tachypneic (respiratory rate: 30/minute) and hypoxic (SpO2: 76% at room air which increased to 85% with oxygen supplementation). His heart rate was 132 per minute. His respiratory system examination revealed bilateral crepitations in mammary, infra-axillary, and infrascapular regions. Clinical evaluation of his other systems (cardiovascular system, central nervous system, and per abdomen) was not showing any significant abnormality. Among blood investigations, complete blood count was largely unremarkable (hemoglobin: 13.6 g/dL, total leukocyte count: 9,200/mm3, platelet count: 3.5 lakh/mm3). Similarly, the liver function test (total bilirubin: 1 mg/DL), the renal function test (urea and creatinine were 46 and 1 mg/dL, respectively), and the coagulation profile were also within normal limits except for mild transaminitis (alanine transaminase: 65 IU/L, aspartate transaminase: 59 IU/L). Chest radiograph was showing bilateral middle- and lower-zone infiltrates , and the arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis was showing hypoxia (PaO2: 68 mm Hg with FiO2 nearly 100%). A provisional diagnosis of severe ARDS was made, given the PaO2/FiO2 less than 100, and the patient was intubated. He was ventilated with low tidal volume and high positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) strategy as per the ARDS-Net protocol. On evaluation for the etiology of ARDS, his nasopharyngeal swab was sent for H1N1 testing (reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction), which came out to be positive and he was started on oseltamivir (75 mg twice daily for 5 days) apart from ceftriaxone and azithromycin (empiric institutional protocol for ARDS). The patient was persistently hypoxic despite high PEEP, recruitment maneuvers, and 100% FiO2 . Subsequently, he was put on the prone position for 16 hours/day for 4 consecutive days. The patient improved clinically, and 10 days later, he was weaned off from mechanical ventilation.
Despite ameliorated chest condition and extubation , the patient continued to be tachypneic and hypoxic. During invasive mechanical ventilation, various endotracheal aspirates to look for ventilator-associated pneumonia were done, which all came out to be sterile. He was initiated on HFNC with flow of 45 L/minute at a FiO2 of 45%. On HFNC, he was comfortable and maintaining a SpO2 of 91%. His PaO2/FiO2 ratio was 143 on ABG. At this point of time, the study by Lin Ding et al. was discussed in our departmental journal club, and it was planned to attempt PP in our index case while being on HFNC. As he was quite cooperative, he was asked to lie in a prone position if he felt comfortable . He tolerated prone position well, and 1 hour later of PP when ABG was repeated, his SpO2 had increased to 98% and PaO2 was 136 mm Hg on same settings (PaO2/FiO2: 302) . In the following course of his ICU stay, he himself was inclined to stay in the prone position for prolonged periods. Over the next 48 hours, his FiO2 was tapered off, and he was shifted to the ward. After a stay of 2 days in ward, he was off oxygen supplementation and mobilizing. All parenteral medicines were stopped and he was discharged on 5th day of ward stay.