A 74-year-old male, history of a left A2 aneurysm, presented after a motor vehicle accident at low speeds. At the scene, the patient exhibited confusion. He sustained abrasions above his left eye, around his nose, and above his lip. Upon further investigation, patient had also had a syncopal episode on the prior day, where he fell and hit his head as well. Besides the confusion, he exhibited no focal neurological deficits. A computed tomography (CT) head demonstrated a 4 cm × 6 cm hyperdensity and edema with mass effect on left frontal area . The concerns included possible traumatic brain contusion, aneurysmal hemorrhage (given history of left A2 aneurysm), or hemorrhage from an underlying tumor given profound edema. The patient was started on fosphenytoin. A CT angiography of the head demonstrated a pericallosal cerebral aneurysm . A magnetic resonance imaging of the brain demonstrated a bifrontal, enhancing brain lesion with surrounding edema, concerning for a high-grade glioma . Subsequently, he was started on intravenous decadron.
The patient was discussed at the brain tumor board, where the plan was to address the aneurysm followed by resection of the mass versus close monitoring with subsequent imaging. The high risk of rehemorrhage, given the possibility of an aneurysmal hemorrhage, motivated prompt treatment of the aneurysm. The patient was taken to the angiography suite. An anterosuperiorly projecting azygous A2 aneurysm, measuring 4.5 mm × 5.5 mm with a neck width at 3.5 mm and a small daughter sac, was completely obliterated with primary coiling . Visualization of the external carotid arteries and internal carotid arteries bilaterally did not show any tumor blush. The following day, he underwent a left craniotomy along a forehead skin crease for mass excision. Final pathology revealed glioblastoma. The patient recovered well from both procedures, with a baseline neurological exam. The patient subsequently underwent hypofractionated radiation and temodar. The Medical College of Wisconsin does not require Institutional Review Board approval or patient consent for this case study.