A 63-year-old woman with a history of ESRD was admitted to our hospital on June 3, 2015 after experiencing disorientation for 5 days. The patient had been receiving HD since December 2014 because of acute on chronic kidney disease due to pneumonia. She was also diagnosed with hepatitis B-related liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh B with hepatic encephalopathy), Mycobacterium tuberculosis-related pleuritis, and IgGλ monoclonal gammopathy. Monoclonal gammapathy hadn’t been treated because she was permanently bedridden. She received maintenance HD through a tunneled-cuffed catheter inserted into the right subclavian vein since December 8th, 2014. She denied active intravenous drug use. We observed drowsy consciousness and splenomegaly during physical examination. No crackles were found in either lung field, and no track marks were present on her skin. Her white blood cell, absolute neutrophil, and platelet counts were 2.86 × 103/uL, 2116/mm3, and 14,000/uL, respectively. Her total bilirubin was 3.54 mg/dL. In addition, C-reactive protein was 2.31 mg/dL, and her serum glucose was 992 mg/dL, without metabolic acidosis. Because of the hyperglycemic hyperosmotic status of the patient, blood culture was drawn and empiric vancomycin and cefuroxime were prescribed. The initial blood culture grew Candida guilliermondii without other bacteria. Fluconazole 200 mg once per day was administered intravenously. The tunneled-cuffed catheter was removed on June 30 because of persistent fungemia. The culture of tunneled-cuffed catheter grew Candida guilliermondii.. Blood cultures on July 14 and August 10 and 28 still grew C. guilliermondii, even after replacement of caspofungin by fluconazole on July 28. No positive culture result was found in sputum or urine during the 8 weeks after admission. Transthoracic echocardiography on July 20 and August 21 revealed no vegetation or congenital abnormality. On August 25, repeated transthoracic echocardiograms showed a 1.2-cm mobile mass on the pulmonary valve extending from the right ventricular inflow tract across the pulmonary valve . No other vegetation was found. Surgical intervention was suggested, but the family of the patient declined because of her multiple comorbidities. Therefore, amphotericin B 40 mg was administered once daily from August 30 but was discontinued on September 1 because of allergic reactions (rash and fever). After 8 weeks of caspofungin, the C. guilliermondii septicemia was still present and the vegetation on the pulmonary valve had increased in size (3.73 × 2.70 cm). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen revealed splenic infarction and right upper lung pneumonia with septic embolism . The patient and family requested hospice care, and we discharged the patient with a long-term prescription of fluconazole 200 mg/d. The patient died from hepatic encephalopathy and coma on September 26, 2015.