The patient is a 33-year-old female patient with personal history of NF1 (without any family history in the two previous generations) characterized by multiple Café au lait macules and multiple neurofibroma nodules in distinct regions of the skin which involve the scalp, neck, back, abdomen, and all the extremities.
The patient has a normal evolution of her disease with no incidents; she is an independent professional and refers no other symptomatology. Eventually, she complains of pain due to the mechanical compression of one of the neurofibromas. After considering the genetic counseling, the patient decides to get pregnant. During the second trimester of her pregnancy, she started to note gradual and progressive growth of one of the neurofibromas located in the anterolateral left portion of the neck, in the angle formed by the thyroid gland and the common carotid artery. Such growth gradually increased to the point where by the end of the pregnancy it had a diameter of approximately 10 cm × 15 cm, it made swallowing difficult, dysphonia, and generated local pain (nonneuropathic pain) . The consistency was smooth in the peripheral contours, but firm in the center, mobile, and no skin changes were noted. She has an uneventful full term pregnancy with a C-section delivery.
After neuroimaging evaluation, a surgical approach is decided 3 months after the C-section using general anesthesia and microsurgical dissection. A tumor mass was identified, with a superficial wall, free from vascular or cervical major nerve structures, with a clear serous liquid content that after decompression, modifies the tumoral morphology immediately, allowing identification of the layers of the cystic lesion. The visceral portion of the capsule was found attached to the external plane of the thyroid gland and to the carotid artery adventitia, which was preserved. The postsurgical evolution was normal, without any complications. There were no alterations regarding phonation or deglutition, and there was a normal recovery of the external anatomy of the neck without any evidence of tumoral mass. The analysis of the fluid reported no cytological alterations and culture was negative for infection. The hematoxylin and eosin stain shows the presence of neoplastic cells, nuclear and diffuse cytoplasmic positivity to S-100 protein .