A 58-year-old-woman presented to clinic with a 4-month history of a lump in her right breast close to the axilla. There was no history of nipple discharge or any skin changes. Her most recent screening mammogram was unremarkable and had been performed approximately 2 years and 6 months prior to presentation. There was no family history of breast or ovarian cancer. On examination, a firm non-tender mass measuring 2×2 cm was noted in the right upper quadrant of the breast and the axillary tail, which was not attached to the underlying structures. Mammography revealed a dense irregular mass in the axillary tail and a circumscribed nodule in the 6 O'clock periareolar region. An asymmetric density was also seen in the central right breast. There was no evidence of axillary lymphadenopathy. Ultrasound demonstrated a lobulated solid mass in the axillary tail measuring 2.2×1.8×1.5 cm, and a simple cyst measuring 1.1×0.8×0.7 cm in the peri-areolar region at 6 O'clock. Normal appearing lymph nodes were seen in the right axilla.
Fine needle aspiration cytology of the right breast axillary tail revealed a poorly differentiated invasive carcinoma consistent with mammary duct origin. Biopsy of the areolar region of the right breast revealed a typical duct hyperplasia in a background of dense stromal fibrosis. The patient underwent right-sided total mastectomy with sentinel lymph node biopsy.
On histopathological examination, the specimen revealed a tumor measuring 2.6 cm in greatest dimension, with resection margins negative for tumor. Skin and nipple were negative for tumor. It was an infiltrating ductal carcinoma with metaplastic features of chondroid differentiation ( and ). The tumor was estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and HER-2 negative with 0% nuclear staining. Immunohistochemical stains for pan cytokeratin on the sentinel lymph nodes were negative. Tumor cells showed some degree of anisocytosis with a nuclear pleomorphism score of 3, and mitotic figures in tumor cells were frequent with an average of eight mitoses or more per square mm. The overall ELSTON grade of invasive carcinoma was grade 3. Ki-67 index was 52% with strong nuclear staining. Adjuvant chemotherapy with AC-T (Adriamycin, Cytoxan, and Taxol) was initiated. The patient tolerated chemotherapy well initially but developed taxol-induced sensory neuropathy leading to early discontinuation of taxol. She is currently undergoing surveillance with no evidence of recurrent disease.