A non-smoking 30-year-old woman presented with a 1-month history of progressive dyspnea and productive cough. Her Chest X-ray showed a homogenous opacity invading the entire left hemithorax, and the mediastinum content was attracted to the left side. Hence, a diagnosis of left lung atelectasis was established . Bronchoscopy showed that the tumor completely obstructed the left main bronchus .
In an effort to avoid pneumonectomy and afford rapid palliation of dyspnea, loop electrocautery was selected as the most appropriate therapy. The lesion was partially resected by loop electrocautery under the guidance of a flexible bronchoscopy . Following resection, plenty of sputum was sprayed from the left lower lobe. This intervention completely re-opened the obstructed left main bronchus and the lower subsegment of the left lower lobe . Thereupon, the patient’s dyspnea was resolved. Nevertheless, chest X-ray showed a re-expansion of the left lung and a mass on the left upper lobe . After bronchoscopic procedure, the chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a tumor on the left upper lobe .
Histologic examination of the lesion indicated inflammatory granulation tissue, the immunohistochemical (IHC) examination showed: CK (−); EMA (−); Vimentin (+); SMA (+); Desmin (−); Calponin (−); ALK (−); S-100 (−); CD34 (−); Ki67 (+); EBER (−), and thus the pathological diagnosis was IMT.
Thus, the surgery was resorted for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes after 45 days, consisting of a left upper lobectomy by thoracoscopy. We sent the specimen for frozen section and the pathological diagnosis was Inflammatory granulation tissue hyperplasia. Under gross examination, the tumor was 5 cm in size, and it was soft, jelly-like, homogeneous and invaded the bronchial wall locally. Besides, microscopic examination revealed proliferative regular spindle cells arrayed in fascicles, as well as admixed with lymphocytes, plasma cells and eosinophils . IHC examination revealed: Vimentin (+); SMA (+); CK (−); Myogenin (−); Desmin (−); S100 (−); CD117 (−); ALK (−) . No histologic evidence of metastasis to the lymph tissue was observed (0/8) and the bronchial resection margin was negative. Only the residual scar tissue was found in CT after the surgery . Based on these data, the diagnosis of IMT was established. The patient was followed up every 3 months and received CT scan every 6 months. After 1 year of follow-up, no evidence of recurrence was found. The patient was lost to follow-up in the past 6 years until 8 months ago in 2019.12. Meanwhile the CT demonstrated no recurrence in the past 6 years .