A 44-year-old man with right vocal cord palsy and recurrent aspiration was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for respiratory failure due to carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii pneumonia. He was put on mechanical ventilator support and the ventilator (Servo-U, Maquet) was connected to a scavenging system (EVAC 180) as an additional infection control measure in face of the COVID-19 epidemic. On the fifth ICU day, the heat moisture exchange (HME) in the breathing circuit was changed to a heated humidifier (Fisher and Paykel MR850) due to copious amount of sputum. On the sixth ICU day, his condition continued to improve and he was on PS mode with PS of 10 cmH2O above a PEEP of 6 cmH2O. Twenty-eight hours after he was put on PS mode, he became dyssynchronous with the ventilator, and labored breathing was observed. Despite the patient's respiratory effort, the backup pressure control (PC) was activated with a backup mandatory breath rate of 15 breaths/minute (bpm). Despite low inspiratory flow being delivered at a rate of 15 bpm, neither triggered nor mandatory breath could be recorded . Paradoxical changes in airway pressures were observed with a decrease in pressure from 28 to 20 cmH2O during the inspiratory phase and an increase in pressure from 20 to 28 cmH2O during the expiratory phase. The ventilator wrongly regarded the expiratory pressure of 28 cmH2O as peak pressure and the inspiratory pressure of 20 cmH2O as PEEP. Ten to 20 seconds afterward, PS breaths were seen to be superimposed on a similar pattern of paradoxical pressure changes. Specifically, PS breaths of 10 cmH2O (with airway pressure up to 17 cmH2O) were triggered by flow when the airway pressure dropped below 8 cmH2O . End-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) varied between 75 and 90 mm Hg. It was also noted the reservoir bag of the scavenging system was hyperinflated and water condensate was seen in the tubing connecting the ventilator exhaust outlet and the scavenging system. The reservoir bag was removed for inspection and was found filled with water condensate. Patient-ventilator dyssynchrony was abolished immediately after the water condensate was drained . Such an event did not recur when the emptied reservoir bag was reinstalled into the scavenging system .
The patient was weaned and extubated on the 8th ICU day. On the 15th ICU day, he developed right pneumothorax for which did not require drainage. He underwent further rehabilitation and was discharged from ICU after 29 days.