A 37-year-old woman (gravida 3, para 3) with a history of type 2 diabetes presented with the acute onset of difficulty looking downward. She described that this predominantly occurred during driving, noticing that when she looked up into the rear view mirror she was unable to look back down to the dashboard. Other complaints included new daily holocephalic headaches and a 30-pound weight gain over 3 months, without an obvious increase in appetite. She reported fatigue, but no excessive sleepiness. Her medical history was significant for stage IB1 squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix diagnosed 7 years prior to the onset of neurological symptoms. She was treated with a radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. Pathology revealed a poorly differentiated tumor with a greatest thickness of 1.5 cm and a total cervical thickness of 1.7 cm, and extensive lymphovascular invasion. She received pelvic radiation with weekly cisplatin followed by brachytherapy, and was then lost to follow-up.
Neurological complaints began approximately 7 years after completing the above-mentioned treatment. Comprehensive neurological examination was normal with the exception of vertical supranuclear gaze palsy with absent voluntary vertical saccades or pursuit. Downward gaze was more affected than upward gaze. Oculocephalic maneuvers showed full ocular range of motion. Horizontal gaze was unaffected. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed T2 hyperintensities with contrast enhancement of the hypothalami extending into the mesial temporal lobes and midbrain . Significant laboratory studies included an elevated serum alkaline phosphatase level of 138 U/L (normal range, 39-117 U/L) and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 21 mm/h. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) exhibited a white blood cell count of 15/µL, a red blood cell count of 10/µL, a protein level of 31 mg/dL (normal range, 15-45 mg/dL), and a glucose level of 106 mg/dL (normal range, 40-80 mg/dL). Cytological analysis of the CSF yielded no malignant cells. Commercial paraneoplastic antibody testing revealed that the following antibodies were absent from the serum and CSF: antineuronal nuclear autoantibody types 1, 2, and 3; Purkinje cell cytoplasmic autoantibody types 1, 2, and Tr; amphiphysin; antiglial nuclear antibody type 1; and collapsin response-mediator protein 5 IgG. Serum striational (striated muscle), P/Q-type calcium channel, N-type calcium channel, acetylcholine receptor (neuronal and muscle), and voltage-gated potassium channel antibodies were also absent. Ma antibodies were absent in initial serum and CSF samples evaluated at a separate commercial laboratory using immunoblot testing (reference value: negative). Anti-Ma2 antibodies were eventually found in the serum during an evaluation at an independent laboratory using immunofluorescence (reference value: negative).
These findings prompted a systemic search for an occult cancer versus a recurrence of her cervical cancer. Positron-emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography (CT) scans revealed enlarged retroperitoneal and common iliac lymph nodes with avid 18-F fluoro-2-deoxyglucose uptake, consistent with an active malignancy . During staging the patient received intravenous corticosteroids (1 g of methylprednisolone per day for 3 days). Her headaches resolved without a significant change in her vertical gaze paresis. She subsequently underwent a retroperitoneal lymph-node biopsy that revealed squamous cell carcinoma, consistent with her known malignancy of the cervix . She was treated with docetaxel and carboplatin along with directed radiation therapy to the involved lymph nodes. Follow-up MRI of the brain revealed significant improvement of the previously observed abnormal contrast enhancement and T2 hyperintensity , although her neurological findings were unchanged. Follow-up PET/CT revealed new metabolically active retroperitoneal lymph nodes. The patient elected to enroll in a phase I study with the multitargeted kinase inhibitor crizotinib. She completed two cycles of the study protocol, with subsequent progression of disease and evidence of new liver and lung metastases. The patient died 3 months later, 1 year after the presentation of neurological deficits. No autopsy was performed.