We present the case of a 40-year-old male patient who sustained a L2 vertebral burst compression fracture with a large frontal bone fragment, after falling from a horse, treated with off-label use of teriparatide.

At initial visit, the vertebral fracture has been classified as A2/A3 type according to the AO spine thoracolumbar classifications system through CT/MRI, without involvement of the spinal cord canal or damages to other soft tissues. The fracture was stable without any compromission of the posterior vertebral wall. Surgical indication was immediately given due to the presence of a voluminous anterior bone fragment, comminution and risk of anterior wall separation.

Initially, it was nevertheless decided for conservative treatment with rest, waiting and seeing if the fracture would have spontaneously healed since the young age of the patient. The patient started to use a C35 rigid back brace by night and day for the first 2 months and only during day for the third month, in order to keep the fracture stable, avoiding any other damages. The patient continued to work, without driving for 35 days.

To reduce back pain, morphine (5 mg twice per day) was subcutaneously administered for 2 days, paracetamol (1000 mg twice per day) for 15 days and dexibuprofene (400 mg twice per day) for 6 days.

However, after 40 days from the start of conservative treatment, there was no improvement in bone healing process, but an extensive bone edema was present. Thus, the previous recommendation of surgical treatment with spine fusion and later implant removal was strengthened.

To avoid surgery and its related possible complications, the patient did not give his consent to undergo surgery and, in agreement with his spine surgeon and neurologist, decided to undergo an off-label treatment combining nocturnal Pulsed Electro-Magnetic Field (PEMF) therapy for 6–7 h/day with daily subcutaneous injection of 20 μg of Teriparatide (Forsteo®, Eli Lilly & Co Ltd., Liverpool, England), and with further administration of calcium (2 tablets/day of cal-mag-vitD3) and vitamin D (14 drops of Didrogyl® once a week) supplements for the subsequent 5 months, to enhance bone healing.

In addition, a cane has been used as a support and to prevent the occurrence of other fractures and/or injuries to the spinal cord. Moreover, physiotherapy was performed with 10 min of elliptical machine twice a day, and 10 min of rowing ergometer, for the first 15 days after rigid back brace removal. The patient underwent periodic radiological follow-up.

After this period of 5 months, complete healing of the vertebral fracture was shown by Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI).

Laboratory exams were performed to inspect the degree of inflammation, and they showed optimal results, with testosterone and thyroid levels within normal parameters.

After complete fracture recovery, the patient does not complaint pain anymore but only a moderate stiffness of the spine segment involved. Nevertheless, he was able to move as before the trauma and to return back to horse riding.