We report here two cases of pulmonary hypertension after the second dose of the Pfizer mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (BNT162b2).
Case #1 is a previously healthy 49-year-old male physician athlete, body mass index (BMI) 23, non-smoker with a history of mild exercise-induced asthma treated with albuterol. The patient completed the primary series of Pfizer mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (BNT162b2), Dose 1 in December 2020 and Dose 2 in January 2021. Approximately three weeks after the second dose, the patient suddenly developed severe fatigue, flu-like symptoms, tachycardia, palpitations, orthostasis, right-sided chest pressure and dyspnea on exertion. SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing was negative at the time of the onset of these symptoms. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular function with an ejection fraction (EF) of 65%, normal right ventricular size and function and a maximal tricuspid regurgitation velocity (TRVmax) of 3.09 m/s. The estimated right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 42 mmHg was interpreted as mild/moderate pulmonary hypertension . Laboratory studies including measurement of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) (22 pg/mL; reference range < 900 pg/mL) were unremarkable except for elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and a hematocrit of 50%. Pulmonary computer tomography (CT) angiogram with 3D reconstruction of the PA tree was normal without evidence of pulmonary clots . The patient subsequently developed 15 lbs of fluid gain and generalized swelling, neck pressure, headaches and a feeling of “being hung upside down” consistent with jugular vein distention (JVD) and cerebral venous congestion. The resting oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 92% and there was new onset systolic and diastolic arterial hypertension. Symptoms and chest pressure occurred at rest and were exacerbated by exertion. Exercise and functional limitations were consistent with New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class 3–4. Serial echocardiograms showed no worsening of RVSP and continued normal RV function . Symptoms and exercise tolerance improved to NYHA class 1–2 over one year. Fluid weight gain, swelling, tachycardia and arterial hypertension resolved and the resting SpO2 increased to 98–100%. Flu-like symptoms and fatigue diminished but did not disappear. RVSP remained elevated and essentially unchanged by follow up echocardiography . This case was reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS ID 1039123).
Case #2 is a previously healthy and active 56-year-old male, BMI 25, non-smoker, with a history of spontaneous deep venous thrombosis (DVT) on two occasions which were resolved with courses of anticoagulation without symptoms of pulmonary emboli. Hematologic investigation identified no clotting abnormalities. In 2005, an incidental isolated left superior vena cava was suspected by an otherwise normal transthoracic echocardiogram and confirmed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The patient completed the primary series of Pfizer mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (BNT162b2) Dose 1 and Dose 2 in April 2021. Twelve days after the second dose, the patient experienced sudden onset fatigue, flu-like symptoms and dyspnea on exertion. SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing was negative at the time of the onset of these symptoms. Exercise tolerance was consistent with NYHA Class 2. The patient sought medical attention two weeks later, but a stress echocardiogram and CT pulmonary angiography were not performed until almost 4 months after vaccination. The stress echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular function, an ejection fraction (EF) of 60%, ventricular ectopy and mild right-sided chamber enlargement. No right-sided pressures were measured. A pulmonary CT angiogram with 3D reconstruction revealed mosaic attenuation of lung parenchyma with relative pruning of distal pulmonary vessels and mild enlargement of the PA without evidence of pulmonary emboli . A Ventilation Perfusion (V/Q) scan was interpreted as near normal and a very low probability for pulmonary emboli. Despite the negative studies, anti-coagulation with rivaroxaban was started out of an abundance of caution due to patient’s distant history of DVT. A complete echocardiogram performed 5 months after vaccination measured a TRVmax of 2.82 m/s and calculated an RVSP of 40 mm Hg , suggesting a diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension. Follow-up echocardiography three months later measured a TRVmax of 3.22 m/s and estimated an RVSP of 46 mmHg . Subsequent right heart catheterization confirmed the diagnosis with directly measured systolic and diastolic PA pressures (PAP) of 44/18 mm Hg (mean 28 mm Hg) and elevated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) calculated at 3.6 Woods units. An endothelin receptor antagonist was prescribed and then a phosphodiesterase inhibitor. Fifteen months after vaccination, the patient’s exercise tolerance remained unchanged and consistent with NYHA Class 2 and the RVSP remained elevated at 49 mm Hg, estimated by a TRVmax of 3.22 m/s . The patient’s course was complicated by transient episodes of new onset atrial fibrillation. BNP remained in normal range at 99 pg/mL. A subsequent Cardiac MRI revealed a mildly enlarged right ventricle with normal systolic function and normal main PA. A pulmonary hypertension screening panel by Invitae Genomics was negative for twelve genetic predisposition markers.
The clinical findings of the two cases are summarized in .