A 45-year-old woman was admitted with acute onset of short-term memory loss, intermittent headaches, dizzy spells and an obvious change in personality which had progressed over a ten day period. Intermittent vomiting, confusion and unsteadiness were also reported. These symptoms worsened over the three days prior to admission. Her past medical history included an episode of herpes simplex virus infection about one month earlier. A non-smoker, she consumed alcohol in moderation.
On examination, she had disorientation of time and place and her mini mental score was found to be 2/10. Confusion with nominal aphasia was also noted. She was apyrexial. Cardiovascular, respiratory and gastrointestinal system examination was unremarkable. Neurological examination showed normal power and tone in both arms and legs with normal symmetrical deep tendon reflexes. Her gait, coordination, cranial nerve and fundus examination were normal.
Investigations revealed a normal full blood count and unremarkable routine biochemical tests and inflammatory markers. Contrast enhanced CT of the brain showed low attenuation areas adjacent to the anterior ends of both thalami. Appearances were reported as an unusual form of cerebral infarctions and it was suggested that other pathology could not be ruled out.
Examination of CSF revealed isolated lymphocytosis. Glucose and protein were normal. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) tests for herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster were negative.
Electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings showed intermittent low frequency activity suggesting focal abnormality of cortical function, probably associated with a vascular or structural lesion but no clear evidence of encephalitis or epileptiform activity. On MRI scan of the head there were bilateral symmetrical lesions in both thalami giving high signal changes on the T2 weighted and proton density images. In addition there were asymmetrical multiple high signal areas on T2 weighted images in both cerebellar hemispheres. CNS lymphoma and demyelination were two of the possible differential diagnoses for the MRI appearances. Subsequently performed vertebral and carotid MR angiograms were reported to be normal and the possibility of basilar artery aneurysm or thrombosis was ruled out.
Over a period of two weeks there was a progressive worsening of confusion, with increasing agitation, memory impairment and personality change. With deterioration in Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), the possibility of other systemic causes was considered. She was empirically treated for encephalitis and/or viral meningitis and a possibility of vasculitis was considered, for which a trial of methylprednisolone and cyclophosphamide was given without any significant benefit. Further investigations, looking for a possible systemic cause, by an autoantibody screen including anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and a vasculitic screen was reported as normal.
A saline contrast transthoracic echo confirmed a diagnosis of Patent Foramen Ovale (PFO) as a significant number of microbubbles appeared in the left atrium within 3 cardiac cycles of their appearance in the right atrium and this was facilitated with valsalva release. Further assessment for atrial septal separation was not done with transesophageal echocardiogram because of the above positive findings from the transthoracic echocardiogram.
A diagnosis of embolic basilar artery ischemic stroke with thalamic and cerebellar infarcts secondary to paradoxical embolism via the PFO was made. She was started on aspirin and clopidogrel and later anticoagulated with warfarin before she underwent percutaneous device closure.
There are three treatment options in patients with a presumed paradoxical embolism and PFO.
1. Antiplatelet therapy with aspirin
2. Oral anticoagulation with warfarin
3. Surgical or percutaneous device closure
Despite the growing evidence for association between PFO and atrial septal aneurysm with paradoxical embolism causing neurological events there is no consensus as how to treat a cryptogenic stroke and none of the above treatments have been evaluated in randomised controlled trials.
There was a gradual improvement over four weeks and subsequently the patient went on to have a complete recovery without any neurological or physical residual effects.
Later she underwent percutaneous endovascular closure of the PFO with a Biostar device. In our patient percutaneous device closure was used because of her young age and absence of deep vein thrombosis or procoagulant state. It was felt inappropriate to leave the patient on life long warfarin with all the risks that anticoagulation might entail. Our patient had further follow up after the device closure of the PFO and had had no further episodes of transient ischaemic attack or any recurrence of stroke.