A 33-year-old man presented with a five-month history of bilateral radiating pain through the hips, legs and ankles. Additionally, he reported numbness, paresthesia and mild weakness in one lateral lower extremity. A pin-prick sensation test showed bilateral patchy loss of sensation and vibration in the legs and feet. The patient did not report bowel or bladder problems. He did not exhibit hyper-reflexia and was negative for Babinski’s sign.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a lesion extending from L3 to L5. T1-weighted MRI of the lumbar spine revealed an intradural, extra-medullary, isointense mass behind the vertebral bodies of L3 to L5 that was eccentric to the left and showed homogenous enhancement with contrast. The vertebral body of L4 exhibited a compressed deformation . Extensive examination, including gastroscopy, colonoscopy and computed tomography scans of the abdomen and the thorax, identified no additional masses in the body.
A lumbar laminectomy of L3 to L5 was performed. The tumor was soft with a rich blood supply and closely adhered to the medulla spinalis. There were no signs of dural invasion and it maintained a clear separating plane. A total tumor resection was performed.
The patient recovered well from the operation. Lower extremity pain resolved immediately following surgery, and lower limb strength began to improve within a few days. The patient reported symptoms of postoperative dysuria, which could be attributed to intraoperative injury to the nerve roots. Dysurea symptoms showed improvement after one week. During the two-year postoperative follow-up examination the patient exhibited no clinical or MRI radiological signs of tumor recurrence or metastasis .
Postoperative histopathology of the tumor confirmed a completely resected solid tumor. The specimen was a fully encapsulated smooth soft-tissue mass. Standard hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed sheet-like proliferation of NET cells in a trabecular pattern and no visible mitoses or necrosis. Additional immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that the tumor was positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin (CgA), cytokeratin and CD56, and negative for S-100 . The Ki-67 labeling index was 2%. These findings are consistent with the known cellular characteristics of a typical CT.