A 79-year-old male presented to the dermatology clinic with a new rash. He had a past medical history of chronic kidney disease stage 3, gout, and papillary and invasive urothelial carcinoma, extravesical high-grade invading into the lamina propria and muscularis propria Stage IVA (pT4b, pN0, cM0) diagnosed by transurethral resection of bladder tumor 05/2020 on pembrolizumab. Of note, his urothelial carcinoma biomarkers were programmed death-ligand 1 negative (immune cell 5%, tumor <1%), Tempus XF (liquid) = IDH1 GOF, xT = ERBB2, RB1, TP53, CDKN2A, GATA-3, MTAP, TMB 4.2 m/MB, MS-S. He was treated with neoadjuvant Gemcitabine/Cisplatin ×3 cycles complicated by sepsis. The patient underwent cystoprostatectomy 09/2020. In 07/2021, he was found to have metastasis to the rectum after sigmoidoscopy biopsies show rectal mucosa and submucosa containing rare foci of malignant cells in lymphatic spaces. GATA-3 immunostaining was positive in these cells, compatible with a spread from the patient's known urothelial primary carcinoma. Surgery was offered at this time, but the patient declined. He was then started on pembrolizumab. Recent CT and sigmoidoscopy were concerning for the progression of rectal mass. After receiving 15 cycles of pembrolizumab, the patient was started on enfortumab vedotin plus pembrolizumab. On cycle 3 day 1, he presented to dermatology with a rash of the right inguinal region for 5 weeks which was painful and pruritic. He had previously been treated with oral valacyclovir and topical clotrimazole cream with no improvement. The patient denied a history of fevers or night sweats.
His physical exam was notable for firm papulonodules, several of which formed confluent, hyperpigmented to violaceous plaques involving the right inguinal fold . Similar lesions also extended onto the proximal anterior thigh. A punch biopsy was performed which revealed a dermal proliferation of neoplastic cells in irregular nests with retraction artifact and focal glandular differentiation. The cells show high-grade nuclear features with background apoptosis. There was no involvement of the overlying epidermis. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells were positive for CK20 and GATA3 and negative for CK7 . The presence of a glandular proliferation in the dermis, without overlying connection to the epidermis, and with a staining pattern consistent with the patient's known urothelial carcinoma, led to the diagnosis of cutaneous metastasis. Of note, the papillary dermis showed edema and perivascular inflammation that corroborated the clinical appearance of the rash and can be seen in metastatic lesions, adding to diagnostic challenge on clinical grounds. After confirmation of skin metastasis, the patient received one fraction of intensity-modulated radiation therapy to the right pelvis/groin. He was continued on enfortumanb vedotin plus pembrolizumab at that time. Significant decline in CA19-9 and ctDNA had stabilized. The newest CT imaging demonstrates a decrease in abdominal/pelvic lymphadenopathy with no new findings.