A 28-year-old male was referred to the emergency department coupled with fever and chills for 2 weeks and was diagnosed with infective endocarditis in another hospital. He reported that he had traveled for 2 weeks across deserts in the United States and accidentally tore the skin of his left ankle 2 weeks ago. There was no history of diabetes or hypertension and no family history. Then, he presented to a hospital in the US and was treated with ibuprofen for high fever (value unknown); however, his body temperature normalized for a few hours and then rose again, with decreased appetite. With a body temperature of 40.3 °C, he was admitted to a hospital in Beijing 10 days prior. Investigations revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 14.30*109/L, urine WBC count of 106.8/μl, urine red blood cell count 34.9/μl, and urine culture bacterium count of 203.2/μl, and repeated blood cultures showed Staphylococcus aureus. Chest CT (computed tomography) showed multiple inflammatory changes in both lungs, so the patient was started on anti-infective therapy with ceftriaxone and clarithromycin. During the treatment, fever occurred again, and his body temperature ranged from 38.6 to 40.3 °C, with cough and white phlegm. An echocardiogram revealed 2 masses (measuring 14*13 mm、11*16 mm in size), that were very mobile and appeared to be attached to the pulmonary valve. Then the patient was referred to our hospital with a WBC count of 16.4 × 109/L, and a CRP(C-reactive protein) level of 113.2 mg/L, and echocardiogram (just 1 day later than the previous one) showed a mass attached to the pulmonary valve, which is measured 43.8*19.9 mm in size. Chest radiology revealed that multiple patchy and large lesions with cavities in both lungs. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with endocarditis, septicemia and pulmonary infection, and was admitted to our hospital.
Given the patient’s age and short antibiotic treatment duration, valve replacement surgery was not the priority option and the patient wished to reconsider the surgery, so the treatment was mainly anti-infective and supportive therapy. Two days later, the patient reported chest tightness and dyspnea with increased DDi (D-dimer) (5.60 μg/mL) after using the toilet, and CTPA (computed tomographic pulmonary angiography) revealed filling defects of the right pulmonary artery and its branches as well as some branches of the left pulmonary artery, and a pulmonary embolism was considered. Therefore, the patient was transferred to the ICU (intensive care unit), and interventional pulmonary artery thrombectomy was immediately conducted. After 1 week of treatment in the ICU, the patient was transferred to the cardiac surgery department to prepare for valve replacement surgery, as the last echocardiogram showed multiple masses attached to the pulmonary valve with severe pulmonary insufficiency and the possibility of pulmonary cusp destruction . Nevertheless, repeated blood culture was negative. With the strike of both infection and pulmonary embolism, the patient’s hemachrome and albumin levels continued to decrease. Moreover, together with the recurrent fever and an increase in inflammatory indicators, the patient was too vulnerable to undergo surgery, so anti-infective therapy was conducted temporarily utill the patient was in a stable condition. The latest CTPA and chest CT results showed a right lower pulmonary embolism and right lower lobe pneumonia . Twenty days later, given the poor effect of the anti-infective treatment and the strong operation desire of the patient, pulmonary valve replacement, vegetation removal and right pulmonary thromboendarterectomy were performed. Destroyed pulmonary valve leaflets with friable vegetation measuring 2.5*1.0 cm in size and gray vegetation in the right pulmonary artery were revealed . Radical debridement with valve excision was performed, and then the St. Jude bioprosthetic valve (size 23 mm) was closed with interrupted sutures. Under direct vision through an incision into the right pulmonary artery, the thrombus was removed with a double-lumen catheter. During the operation, bronchoscopy showed that blood filled all levels of the bronchus on both sides, and active hemorrhage occurred in the distal right middle bronchus. After a brief multidisciplinary discussion, resection of the middle and lower lobes of the right lung was conducted.
Histopathology revealed infectious destruction in the specimen from the pulmonary valve and extensive hemorrhage and infarction of lung tissue with inflammatory cell infiltration. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and his laboratory parameters were all normalized before his discharge. He was discharged on the 30th postoperative day. The patient continued antibiotic therapy for 1 month after the operation. The mean peak systolic transvalvular gradients were 19 mmHg, 24 mmHg and 23 mmHg on postoperative days 8, 23 and 85, respectively, according to echocardiography.