A 4-year-old Indian girl was referred to us with a diagnosis of hemorrhagic pericardial effusion that recurred despite aspiration twice in the past 6 months. The child had insidious onset of breathlessness for six months and had episodes of lower respiratory tract infection. Pericardial effusion was detected on chest X-ray and hemorrhagic fluid was aspirated. She was started on antitubercular drugs with steroids, but her condition did not improve significantly. Our patient had normal development in her early infancy stage and normal growth prior to this illness. There was no family history of heart disease, developmental defects, tuberculosis or connective tissue disease.
On examination, our patient was found to be in mild respiratory distress. She had a heart rate of 110/mt, BP of 90/60, respiratory rate of 30/mt, temperature of 37°C, and oxygen saturation of 96%. Her weight was 14 kg and her height was 110 cm. There were few basal crackles in her lungs and her heart sounds were distant. Chest X-ray showed marked cardiomegaly and streaky lung fields . Her hemoglobin count was 8.7 gm/dl, and her total leukocyte count (TLC) was 10600/mm3 with 65% neutrophils. An echocardiogram showed large pericardial effusion (2.0 cm circumferentially) with evidence of tamponade. There was no structural lesion in her lungs. A total of 300 ml of hemorrhagic pericardial fluid was aspirated with a pigtail catheter in the pericardium. The pericardial fluid showed numerous red blood cells (RBCs) but no malignant cells were found. The adenosine deaminase in the fluid was not elevated. The bacterial and fungal cultures were sterile. Results of her abdominal ultrasound examination were normal.
The fluid in our patient's lungs re-accumulated within weeks of drainage. The antitubercular treatment and steroids were stopped. Meanwhile, results of her thyroid function tests were normal. Her rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibodies, and antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. She tested negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) via rapid screening test. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan showed peculiar diffuse polygonal lobular architect and soft tissue mediastinal mass. A needle biopsy of the mediastinal mass revealed only fat and connective tissues. Repeated pericardial fluid analyses for malignant cells were negative. Her platelet counts were 50 to 70,000/mm3 on multiple occasions. She also tested negative for disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Her bone marrow was normal.
The diagnosis was unclear. A review of literature on similar HRCT picture prompted a skeletal survey which showed lytic lesions in her bones . Consequently, diffuse multisystem involvement, lytic bone lesions and HRCT findings led to the diagnosis of diffuse lymphangiomatosis. The triglyceride levels in our patient's pericardial fluid were high, but her pericardial fluid was always hemorrhagic. During the course of her illness, she required multiple pericardiocentesis due to the large reaccumulation of fluid, as well as respiratory distress. Multiple blood transfusions were also given to our patient.
Treatment with interferon alpha was discussed but her parents did not consent to it. Thalidomide (50 mg/d), octreotide and epsilon-aminocaproic acid were tried empirically, but her response to this treatment was not sustained. Low-dose radiotherapy of 20 Gy over 10 days were also given to her pericardium. A pericardiectomy was done after exhausting all options. Lung biopsy taken at that time showed diffuse hemangiolymphangiomatosis . There were numerous anastomotic proliferating, and cystic spaces in the pulmonary interstitium were lined by endothelial cells. The cells lining the spaces were CD31+, which is a marker of endothelial cells, although it does not differentiate vascular from lymphatic capillaries. Many of her capillaries contained blood. The connective tissue stroma was predominantly lymphoid. Our patient's pericardium also showed similar findings. A diagnosis of diffuse lymphangiohemangiomatosis was thus made. Our patient had progressive respiratory failure and died after two months.