A 77-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital with complaints of loss of appetite for 2 mo and a 10-d history of palpable purpura.
The patient had developed progressive palpable purpura over his lower legs without fever, chills, or other clinical signs.
The medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, old myocardial infarction, and appendicitis. The patient was on regular treatment with medications, including aspirin, lansoprazole, enalapril, valsartan, and carvedilol. He had no notable family or social history.
His family history was noncontributory.
On physical examination, the patient’s vital signs were normal: blood pressure, 102/58 mmHg; heart rate, 94 bpm; and percutaneous oxygen saturation, 99% in room air. However, multiple palpable purpuric lesions were noted on bilateral lower extremities, the lower abdomen, and part of the upper extremities . Lymphadenopathy was noted in bilateral inguinal, cervical, and supraclavicular nodes, measuring up to 1 cm in diameter. No clinically relevant abnormalities were observed on the electrocardiogram and chest radiograph.
Laboratory data on admission was shown in Table : White blood cells and platelet counts were normal but normocytic normochromic anemia was seen. An elevated level of serum lactate dehydrogenase has been found. Although several abnormalities were observed, none of them were specific to the diagnosis.
We performed skin biopsy, which demonstrated superficial perivascular dermatitis. However, this did not help in diagnosis. Subsequently, a right inguinal lymph node excisional biopsy was performed, which showed vascular proliferation with high endothelial cells, including small-to-medium-sized atypical lymphocytes and follicular dendritic cells. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the expression of T-cell markers (CD2, CD3, CD4, and CD5) with CD10. These characteristics were consistent with those of AITL.
Subsequently, several days after hospitalization, the patient developed progressive normocytic normochromic anemia. His hemoglobin levels remained much lower than normal at 4.9-6.0 g/dL, with normal white blood cell and platelet counts, similar to those on admission. His absolute reticulocyte count also remained extremely low at less than 10000/µL, necessitating blood transfusion support almost every day. Peripheral blood smear examination revealed a normochromic normocytic picture and there was no evidence of hemolysis. We performed bone marrow aspiration and biopsy for evaluation, which showed characteristic findings of relative erythroid hypoplasia. The myeloid and lymphoid series were essentially unremarkable, whereas the megakaryocytes were slightly increased in number and had normal morphology. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with PRCA.