A 75-year-old woman from Ghana with medical comorbidities of hypertension (not on an ACE inhibitor) and chronic cough was referred to our gastroenterology (GI) clinic for management of suspected gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) as the cause of chronic cough. As per the patient, she had been having a chronic cough for more than ten years. The cough was nonproductive, without any aggravating or relieving factors. She had reported postprandial heartburn. She recalls that cough started before her heartburn. She reported using albuterol and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) without improvement in her cough. She did notice some improvement in her heartburn. She had never smoked, and her PPD was negative. There was no prior or current occupational exposure or pet exposure.
She underwent extensive otolaryngology evaluation including a laryngoscopy that showed evidence of chronic laryngopharyngeal reflux. She had been evaluated by pulmonologist and underwent spirometry, imaging studies, bronchoscopy, and fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) testing and all the test results were normal.
She had been prescribed various therapies including oral, nasal, and inhaled corticosteroids, montelukast, and proton pump inhibitors without any improvement in cough.
Because of her typical GERD symptoms, she had a 48-hour Bravo pH testing done in 2011. The study revealed 4.9% of the time with pH below 4 and a total of 106 reflux episodes consistent with GERD. She was evaluated for the surgical intervention, and as a preoperative work-up, high-resolution esophageal manometry was performed. The manometric finding consistent with GERD revealed a hypotensive lower esophageal sphincter (LES). Subsequently, the patient underwent laparoscopic Nissen's fundoplication in 2012.
After fundoplication, she was symptom-free. However, in few months her cough recurred but absence of heartburn and overt acid reflux symptoms was intriguing. She again sought evaluation for cough. She underwent EGD and Bravo pH testing in 2013. There was no evidence of esophagitis and the endoscopic evidence of the fundoplication was appreciated. The ambulatory pH test revealed 0.1% of total acid exposure time and no symptom correlation. She had moved to Ghana for a brief period and did not seek any medical attention. She continued her PPI with no significant improvement.
Gastroenterology consultation was sought again as the cough persisted. The physical examination including vital signs was unremarkable. She underwent a repeat Bravo pH study in February 2018 that revealed zero acid exposure and the study was not consistent with GERD ( and ).
Subsequently, a high-resolution esophageal manometry was done in April 2018 with the findings indicating ineffective esophageal motility .
A second opinion was sought from the gastrointestinal motility expert for the medical management of ineffective esophageal motility disorder. Given the absence of dysphagia, she was not considered a good candidate for medical management. To rule out nonacid reflux as a possible etiology of recurrent cough, patient was offered 24-hour Multichannel intraluminal impedance (MII) assisted pH monitoring. However, given the chronic cough and nasal discomfort, patient declined further intervention. Repeat laryngoscopy revealed laryngeal edema. To better assist with esophageal clearance, she was recommended to take frequent sips of water. She was suggested to carry a water bottle and take 1 to 2 sips of water every 15 minutes. Subsequently, patient presented to our clinic for a follow-up visit and was excited to report that her cough after years of work-up and medication use had finally subsided. She reported compliance with frequent sips of water. Patient had multiple interval follow-up for next 6 months where she reported continued absence of cough with multiple sips of water during the day.