A 43 years old female of Han ethnic group from Northeast China, farmer by occupation, presented to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Hospital of Stomatology, Jilin University, Changchun, China with an asymptomatic swelling in her anterior mandible. The swelling had started 1 year previously and since then, there had been a gradual increase to its present size. She denied experiencing any bleeding, pain or sensory changes. She also denied any history of trauma and the past medical, dental and family history was insignificant.
On physical examination, facial asymmetry due to swelling on the left side of the face was noticed. The swelling was oval in shape crossing the midline thereby obliterating the labiomental sulcus.
The swelling had smooth surface with normal overlying skin but stretched. It was non-tender on palpation.
The intra-oral examination revealed a large mass approximately 5 × 4 cm in size, extending from lower right canine to left 2nd premolar buccally. Buccal expansion of the mandibular left and right symphyseal and para-symphyseal region was evident. The overlying mucosa appeared normal. There was labial displacement of 32 .
On palpation, the swelling was found to be firm, bony hard in consistency, non-tender, non-fluctuant, irreducible, non-compressible and non-pulsatile. The teeth in the vicinity were non-tender to percussion; there was slight mobility of 32 and 33. On electric pulp vitality testing, all teeth in the affected area were vital except 32 and 33. No lymphadenopathy or fistulae were present.
Radiographic examination of the mandible revealed a diffuse ill-defined mixed radiolucent radio-opaque lesion extending from mesial surface of lower right canine to the mesial surface of the lower left 2nd premolar with an approximate size of 5 × 4 cm . The lesion resulted in the displacement of the roots of 32 and 33 without any signs of root resorption. There was loss of periodontal ligament space on the involved teeth except lower right canine and lower left first premolar. There was loss of lamina dura around the involved teeth. Computerized tomography (CT) of the lesion showed a multiloculated lesion 5 cm mediolaterally, 4 cm superoinferiorly and 2.5 cm anteroposteriorly . Areas of calcifications were present within the lesion giving it a soap bubble appearance. The lesion almost involved the lower border of the mandible.
A provisional diagnosis of a fibro-osseous lesion of the anterior mandible was made based on clinical and radiographic appearance. The lesion was non-productive on aspiration. Blood profile showed no abnormality except slightly raised levels of serum alkaline phosphatase, 148 IU/L, suggestive of a bone forming lesion. The final diagnosis was established through incisional biopsy performed under local anesthesia. The histologic features were corroborating with those of desmoplastic ameloblastoma.
A segmental resection of mandible from 44 to 35 was done under general anesthesia with proposed incision as shown in Figs. and and temporarily reconstructed with 2.4 mm reconstruction plate. The surgical specimen consisted of a segment of mandible with the lesion and the associated teeth. The frozen sections were found to be free of tumors. The post-operative period was uneventful. The patient is advised for routine follow-up and has no signs of recurrence so far for a period of 10 months.