A 71 years old male came to our attention because of dyspnea during the last three months.
A chest computed tomography scan showed a 35 × 25 mm central pulmonary nodule of the lower left lobe with no evidence of thoracic lymphoadenopaties.
A positron emission tomography (PET) scan demonstrated the concentration of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in that nodule, with a peripheral rim of hyperfixation (standard uptake value max 6.9).
The patient underwent a left lower lobectomy with omolateral mediastinal lymphoadenectomy; gross examination of the specimen showed a 3.8 cm greyish nodule, with stellate margins and no involvement of the visceral pleura.
Light microscopy showed a moderately-differentiated (G2) acinar adenocarcinoma, with marked stromal fibrosis. Necrosis was not found .
A massive lymphocytic reaction, with a diffuse pattern of growth and several aspects of infiltration of neoplastic glands was present in the tumoral stroma. No germinal centers were highlighted. Immunohistochemistry revealed a strong positivity of the tumoral cells for TTF-1 (DAKO, clone 86763/1) and Napsin-A (DAKO, policlonal) antibodies, confirming the glandular histogenesis and the pulmonary primitivity .
The lymphoid component was found to be policlonal and made up mainly by CD3+ (DAKO, clone 2GV6, Rabbit) T-cells. Cytotoxic (CD8+, DAKO, clone C8/144B) T-lymphocytes were more represented than helper (CD4+, DAKO, clone 5835) cells . EBV infection was excluded by an EBV Encoded Small RNAs (EBER) probe negative in situ hybridization.
According to these histological findings, we made a diagnosis of pulmonary adenocarcinoma with massive lymphocytic infiltration.
All the mediastinal lymphnodes showed antracosis and sinus hystiocitosis without evidence of metastasis.
Molecular testing of the EGFR gene (regions investigated: exon 18 codon 719, exon 19 codon 746–750, exon 21 codons 858 and 861) performed by pyrosequencing, using the "Pyromark Q96 ID System" with the diagnostic kit IVD / CE EGFR TKI response (Diatech Pharmacogenetics srl) showed no mutations.
Molecular testing of the KRAS gene (regions investigated: codon 12, 13, 61 and 146) performed by pyrosequencing using the "Pyromark Q96 ID System" with the diagnostic kit IVD / CE Anti-EGFR mAb response (KRAS status) [Diatech Pharmacogenetics Srl] showed a wild type phenotype.
Lastly, immunostaining for ALK (Novocastra, clone 5A4) resulted negative.
After a follow up period of six months, the patient is in good health with no evidence of residual or recurrent disease.