15-year-old overweight female adolescent (BMI/E z-score + 1.3 SD), with no other medical or family history, presented to the emergency department with a two-week history of non-quantified fever, anorexia, and diffuse abdominal pain. Initial laboratory tests included a lipid profile with TG levels of 17,580 mg/dL, total cholesterol (TC) 1,633 mg/dL, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) 1.8 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) 1,573 mg/dL, blood glucose 200 mg/dL, lipase 723 U/L, and unprocessed amylase per lipemic sample.

An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed an enlarged and edematous pancreas without peri-pancreatic collections. The patient was hospitalized with a diagnosis of severe PA and HTG and was started on continuous intravenous infusion of insulin. On the third day, a new abdominal CT scan showed signs of necrohemorrhagic pancreatitis.

He was transferred to the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit of the UC-Christus Health Network Hospital to continue his management, where he arrived in good general condition, haemodynamically stable, afebrile and with mild abdominal pain. The physical examination did not reveal xanthomas, xanthelasma, acanthosis nigricans or hepatomegaly. Control laboratory tests were performed: TG 3,222 mg/dL, CT 887 mg/dL, C-HDL 12 mg/dL, C-LDL 231 mg/dL, glycaemia 150 mg/dL, amylase 161 U/L and lipase 643 U/L.

Given the persistence of TGs above 1000 mg/dL (> 11.2 mmol/L), it was decided to maintain the continuous intravenous infusion of insulin at 0.05 U/kg/hour, with a glucose load of 2.27 mg/kg/min and gemfibrozil was initiated at a dose of 900 mg/day. On day 6, the TGs dropped to 500 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L), so the continuous intravenous infusion of insulin was discontinued. However, the patient developed persistent metabolic acidosis, a fasting blood glucose of 206 mg/dL and a capillary blood glucose of 326 mg/dL. Because of suspicion of DM and in search of the classic triad of this disease, the patient's medical history was investigated, highlighting a history of polydipsia, polyuria and unobjectified weight loss during the last 3 months. A glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was requested, which resulted in 14.7% (ref value < 5.7%), along with anti-TPO antibodies < 1, which determined a DM of pre-PA onset. Treatment with insulin (Lantus®) was initiated

11 IU/day.

On day 10, an abdominal MRI and cholangiography were performed, which showed images consistent with PA with a right anterior parrenal acute hemorrhagic necrosis collection and another in the transverse mesocolon, without signs of pancreatic necrosis or gallstones.

Subsequently, insulin therapy was adjusted with improvement of metabolic parameters, stabilisation of glycaemia and reduction of TG. After 15 days of favourable clinical evolution, without fever or abdominal pain and with good oral tolerance, control laboratory tests were performed that showed TG 244 mg/dL, glycaemia 175 mg/dL, lipase 73 U/L and amylase 26 U/L. Given the improvement of the clinical, laboratory and imaging picture, hospital discharge was decided.

One month after discharge, outpatient examinations showed normal levels of TG and CT, along with good metabolic control as a result of insulin treatment. Gemfibrozil was discontinued and continued on controls for DM1. A control CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed a decrease in the size of the anterior pararenal collection and resolution of the collection in the transverse mesocolon. Two months after discharge, a follow-up MRI showed findings similar to the CT, with a decrease in the size of the anterior right pararenal collection. Abdominal ultrasound performed one year after discharge showed a complete anatomical resolution of the pancreatic anomalies.
