On March 11, 2016, a 64-year-old mestizo man with a history of benign prostatic hyperplasia and use of an indwelling catheter presented to our emergency department with urinary retention. Cystoscopy revealed intravesical clots and obstructive bilobar prostate. Following the procedure, the patient exhibited signs of systemic inflammatory response syndrome and pathologic urinalysis. Therefore, antibiotic therapy with ampicillin/sulbactam was initiated without improvement in the clinical features. The urine culture report showed the presence of carbapenem-sensitive Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacter cloacae. Therefore, the therapy was subsequently escalated to meropenem (1 g every 8 h). The patient presented with clinical deterioration and ventilatory failure and was referred to the ICU for orotracheal intubation. He also developed cardiopulmonary arrest, which required basic and advanced resuscitation techniques for 11 min with subsequent sinus rhythm. On physical examination, the patient was under sedation, tachycardic, and hypothermic with evidence of purulent urethral discharge, and he required vasopressor support and sedoanalgesia. He had multiple organ dysfunctions due to urinary and pulmonary sepsis with the identification of carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae in the blood and lower respiratory tract secretions. The antibiotic therapy was adjusted to colistimethate (90,000 IU/kg) divided into three daily doses, doripenem (1 g every 8 h), and fosfomycin (4 g every 6 h). The patient initially progressed toward improvement, but 72 h later, he presented with new signs of inflammatory response. Therefore, a new blood culture was performed, revealing a carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii isolate (minimum inhibitory concentrations [MICs] ≥ 16, ≥ 16, and ≥ 8 μg/ml for imipenem, meropenem, and doripenem, respectively) that was also resistant to gentamicin (MIC ≥ 16 μg/ml), ciprofloxacin (MIC ≥ 4 μg/ml), and colistin (MIC 16 μg/ml) and sensitive only to tigecycline (MIC 1 μg/ml). Following this test, tigecycline administration was initiated (100 mg every 12 h), and colistimethate was suspended, with fosfomycin and doripenem continued until the completion of 14 days of treatment. Nevertheless, due to the persistent systemic inflammatory response on day 10, rifampicin (600 mg/day) and ertapenem (1 g every 12 h) were initiated for pharmacological synergism until day 14. With the prescribed antibiotic therapy, the patient improved in terms of infection, with an absence of fever and decreased leukocyte count. New blood and urine cultures were done, with negative results.
Molecular typing confirmed the genus and species of the isolate as A. baumannii (excluding other species of the Acinetobacter genus), as well as the presence of the blaOXA-23 gene (associated with carbapenem resistance). The isolate belonged to the sequence type (ST) 944, which has also been described in isolates identified in Russia, Italy, and the United States. Studies have identified intrahospital outbreaks of colistin-resistant bacteria with predominant genotype according to multilocus sequence typing was ST-258, ST11, ST273, and ST15 for K. pneumoniae; ISAba1 in P. aeruginosa, and pmrA1 and pmrB genotype ST94 for A. baumannii . There are few reports on the resistance mechanisms associated with resistance to colistin in A. baumannii, the most important one being that related to loss in the production of lipid A of lipopolysaccharide. This loss has been associated with mutations in the pmrAB and lpxACD operons, lpxK, or the ISAba11 insertion [, ]. The sequencing of these two operons in the A. baumannii isolate identified two nonsynonymous mutations (H31P and I215M) in the lpxC gene from the ATCC 19606 strain and another nonsynonymous mutation (A178G) in the pmrC gene from the ATCC 17978 strain [–]. None of these mutations has previously been reported in colistin-resistant strains. Although they have been found in the A. baumannii isolate, their possible association with resistance should be confirmed experimentally.