A 40-year-old female presented with chronic headache with infrequent exacerbations. She presents with worsening headache for three months with associated vertigo, nausea, and vomiting not responding to analgesics or vestibular sedatives. Her symptoms initially started twelve years ago as a diffused mild headache, which persisted through the day. Gradually, the headache worsened to a severe headache episodically associated with vertigo, nausea, and vomiting. These episodes lasted for two to three days and got resolved. She was treated with flunarizine for suspected basilar migraine but did not show any response. From the last year, she had monthly exacerbations of headache associated with distressing vertigo, unsteadiness of gait, and right-sided body numbness. In between these episodes, she had a significant dull diffuse headache not responding to simple analgesia. She did not complain of fever or night sweats but had constitutional symptoms lasting for several months. All of these symptoms severely affected her daily activities and functionality.
During the last 17 years, she had repeated episodes of neurological deficits. Even before the headache appeared, she has presented with visual impairment of the right eye and right lateral rectus palsy and was treated as retrobulbar neuritis with good response to methylprednisolone. One year later, she developed left-sided visual impairment, which fully responded to methylprednisolone. MRI imaging at that time revealed normal results. Few months after this event, she got admitted with right hemisensory loss with hemiplegia, and a demyelination disease or hemiplegic migraine was suspected. Second MRI was performed at this admission, and no abnormalities were detected again. Eight years ago, she had developed a left lower motor type facial nerve palsy, which was attributed to Bell's palsy. Within the last year, she was diagnosed to have depression and anxiety for which she was treated for few months. Other than the first two instances, she was not treated with steroids thereafter. She did not complain of weight loss and did not have constitutional symptoms or chest symptoms during these periods.
On examination, she is an averagely built female with a BMI of 23 kg/m2. She is afebrile, pale, and did not have lymphadenopathy. Her GCS was 15/15, and she was conscious and rational with normal pupillary response, visual acuity, visual field examination, and fundoscopy. There was no neck rigidity, and she had residual left lower motor VII palsy. She had an ataxic broad-based gait with unsteadiness. Upper and lower limb examination is clinically normal. Her respiratory, cardiovascular, and abdomen examinations were unremarkable.
Investigations revealed a hemoglobin count of 9 g/dL with normal white cells and platelets. ESR was elevated to 86 mm/1st hour. Renal- and liver-related biochemical investigations were normal with an alkaline phosphatase within the normal range. Initial MRI scans of the brain done 10 years ago did not reveal any abnormalities such as demyelination, optic nerve enhancement of focal lesions in the cerebrum, or cerebellum. CSF examination revealed an elevated protein level of 55 mg/dl with normal glucose and cells with negative oligoclonal bands or TB-PCR. Vasculitis investigations including ANA, ANCA (ELISA and Immunofluorescence), and RF were negative. Syphilis serology and HIV testing were also negative. Chest radiograph, ultrasound abdomen, and CT scan of chest and abdomen did not reveal any mediastinal lymphadenopathy or focal lesions in visceral organ or evidence of any malignancy. Serum ACE levels (19 µ/l) and ionized calcium levels were normal. We performed a new MRI scan of the brain with contrast, which revealed a diffuse and patchy meningeal thickening and enhancement mainly in the right frontoparietal and left occipital regions with a minor enhancement of bilateral optic sheaths . Her NMO antibodies were normal, and the MRI did not show any areas of demyelination. Therefore, she underwent a dural biopsy from the thickened dura, which revealed large areas of caseous necrosis surrounded by epithelioid histiocytes and lymphoid cells with a few isolated giant cells in the adjacent vicinity . There were no features of vasculitis or sarcoidosis. TB-PCR of tissue and acid-fast bacilli were negative. Final conclusion was necrotizing granulomatous inflammation suggestive of dural tuberculosis. This diagnosis was presumed by the presence of necrotizing granulomatous necrosis with caseation with a strongly positive Mantoux test of 25 mm , and later was supported by a marked response to antituberculous medication.
We initiated her on antituberculous therapy (all four drugs for 3 months and 9 months of rifampicin and isoniazid) without streptomycin as she is already having vestibular symptoms. Steroids were added concurrently (1 mg/kg) and was continued for 6 weeks and was tailed off over a month. She experienced a marked improvement of her headache, and she could do her daily activities normally. After a year of anti-TB medication and follow-up, she did not complain of any worsening of symptoms.