A 55-year-old female patient was referred to the orofacial pain unit of the OPH clinic for showing symptoms of temporomandibular joint arthralgia and osteoarthritis, orofacial myofascial pain, and sleep bruxism. An experienced Orofacial Pain Specialist performed a comprehensive clinical history and examination following the Diagnostic Criteria for Temporomandibular Disorders (DC/TMD) protocol and the International Classification of Orofacial Pain-1 (ICOP-1) criteria. At the moment of the examination, the patient was taking 150 mg of Venlafaxine for major depressive disorder, 4 mg of Clonazepam for sleep onset insomnia, and hormone replacement therapy for menopause.
Another major complaint of the patient was difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep. Thus, an Epworth Sleepiness Scale and Insomnia Severity Index were performed to complete the sleep evaluation. Due to the high scores presented by the patient and clinical history consistent with chronic sleep insomnia, polysomnography (PSG) was requested Even though the PSG revealed no sleep breathing disorders, the exam showed severe modifications in the patient’s sleep architecture, a mild increase in the arousal index, and low-frequency sleep bruxism. The PSG results led us to hypothesize that the patient’s sleep architecture alterations were because of the chronic consumption of benzodiazepines. Thus, the patient was derived to her treating psychiatrist to gradually diminish and eliminate the intake of Clonazepam.
During this time, the patient successfully underwent her osteoarthritis and orofacial myofascial pain treatment. In addition, an upper oral occlusal splint was prescribed to manage low-frequency sleep bruxism.
In order to manage sleep initiation and maintenance insomnia, the psychiatrist tapered the dosage of Clonazepam and progressively replaced it with Trazodone until a target dose of 100 mg was reached. Throughout this period, the patient did not experience any extrapyramidal symptoms.
Almost three months later, after the end of the orofacial pain treatment, the patient returned complaining of a sudden worsening of her awake bruxism. The patient presented abrupt rhythmic involuntary muscle contractions, similar to jaw-closing and jaw-deviating dystonic-like movements affecting the right side of her masticatory muscles. (See , and ) The dystonic-like episodes were spontaneous or triggered by everyday activities such as talking, chewing, and yawning. The severity of these motor contractions tended to be exacerbated by emotional stress and nervousness produced by these uncontrollable movements. During these episodes, some typical features of oromandibular dystonia were noticed, such as some sensory tricks (gentle pressure on the inferior incisors would milden the jaw-deviating dystonia as the placement of a tongue depressor between the molars for jaw-closing dystonia), and phenomena (e.g., oromandibular dystonia overflowing the right eyelid, resulting in right blepharospasm).
A video examination protocol suggested by Yoshida was carried out to assess the type and magnitude of involuntary movements . In addition, a complete haematological and biochemical blood examination was required and all the parameters were within normal range. Thus, both thyroid and parathyroid hormonal dysfunction were ruled out.
Since the literature indicates that Trazodone can induce extrapyramidal symptoms and abnormal oromandibular movement disorders only start after the addition of this medication. The authors, in agreement with her treating physician, suggested performing a slow taper until complete discontinuation of Trazodone was achieved.
A progressive dose reduction of 25 mg of Trazodone was scheduled every two weeks. In the meantime, an inferior occlusal splint was prescribed, considering that mild contact in the inferior incisor tended to ease the intensity of the dystonic-like movements.
During the progressive discontinuation of Trazodone, the authors noticed an immediate attenuation of the dystonic symptoms. However, only achieving a partial but clear remission of them. No video protocol was recorded during the tampering of Trazodone.
Considering that the patient’s mental health status was stable, it was decided to take a more conservative approach, only eliminating the most likely offending drug, namely, Trazodone. Consequently, the authors maintained that Venlafaxine intake was unchanged in order not to jeopardize the psychiatric treatment, and also closely monitored the evolution of the clinical symptoms. Additionally, the authors indicated the administration of 25 units of incobotulium toxin (Xeomin®, Merz, Germany) per masseter muscle, 20 units per temporalis muscle, and 15 units were applied to the inferior head of the right lateral pterygoid with electrical stimulation guidance (See anatomical landmarks in ).
During the two-week follow-up consultation, the authors could recognize a substantial decrease in the magnitude and intensity of the oromandibular movement. Two months and seven months after the discontinuation of the offending drug and botulinum toxin application, the authors re-recorded Yoshida’s video protocol to carry out an objective before and after comparison of the treatment results. See for comparison prior to and after the treatment.