We report a case of a 29-year-old male patient with chief complaints were pain and instability on his left knee. He got injured when playing futsal with knee twisted externally. He suffered severe pain, swollen and difficult to walk. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination after the injury revealed ACL and PCL rupture of the left knee. He underwent arthroscopic surgical reconstruction for both ACL and PCL by previous surgeon. Two years after surgery, he felt instability, swollen knee without pain and no history of other trauma during the time after operation. On the physical examination we found posterior sagging and positive posterior drawer test as well as quadriceps active test. Anterior Lachman test for anterior cruciate ligament was negative.
On the MRI, we found failure of PCL graft with intact ACL. On the MRI and three dimensional CT scan, with more clear projection for bone structure, it was found that the tibial tunnel placement done in previous surgery was not placed on its anatomical position. The tunnel was placed too anterior to the PCL footprint .
Subsquently we performed the PCL revision reconstruction surgery. We performed the arthroscopic-assisted reconstruction surgery using transseptal portal approach. We avoided to use only the jig to guide us when tunnelling the tibia instead, we used additional technique to see the posterior aspect of proximal tibia clearly. In this case, we choosed to make a transseptal portal that penetrated from posteromedial side of the knee inside-out to the posterolateral side of the knee . An incision was made on the posteromedial side of the knee with guidance of arthroscopic view and also transiluminatic arthroscopic light. Blunt obturator with sheath was inserted gently passed through intercondylar notch to posterolateral side of the knee and we made inside-out incision on it.
During arthroscopy procedure, we found that the PCL was gone with small PCL remnant on femoral site. The ACL was still intact and adequately attached. We performed the reconstruction of PCL using peroneus longus tendon as the graft from the left ankle. When tunneling the tibia, we used jig guide for tibial tunnel placement, we also made a transseptal portal from medial to lateral in order to get better view of posterior aspect of the tibia ( and ). We used it as the graft because hamstring tendon was already used in previous surgery. showed post-operative X-ray of the left knee that tibial tunnel was revised to appropriate site of its footprint. The shadow of two endobuttons on the lmedial femoral condyle was seen because the endobutton of previous surgery was not removed.