29-year-old patient, Congolese, with no significant history, seen in consultation in June 2022 for bilateral epistaxis of moderate abundance that occurred spontaneously. She has had progressive abdominal swelling with an intra-abdominal feeling of heaviness, weight loss and hyperhidrosis for more than 3 years. The diagnosis of cirrhosis was initially considered. The clinical examination noted a conscious patient, slightly icteric and with a good haemodynamic status. The liver was enlarged with a hepatic arrow at 17 cm, painless, firm, with an irregular surface. There was a splenomegaly measuring 16 cm. The anterior rhinoscopy, cardiac and pulmonary auscultation were normal.

Paraclinical findings included cytolysis with ASAT 421.5 IU/L, ALT 204.3 IU/L, and cholestasis with alkaline phosphatase 670 IU/L. The bilirubin level was increased (50.4 µmol/L) at the expense of the conjugated form (30.8 µmol/L). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 150 mm in the first hour, and the serum level of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) was increased to 130 IU/L. The blood count showed moderate microcytic and hypochromic anaemia. The intradermal tuberculin reaction was negative and the alpha-fetoprotein level was normal. The creatinine level, coagulation profile, ferritin level and serum protein electrophoresis were normal. The viral serologies were negative (Ag HbS, anti-HCV antibodies) indicating the absence of hepatitis B and C.

An abdominal ultrasound revealed a nodular hepatomegaly, a splenomegaly, a low-grade ascites and a dilated portal vein.

The chest radiograph was normal.

The preoperative exploration for splenectomy revealed a large, 18 cm, bulging splenomegaly, a multi-nodular hepatomegaly, and very dilated splenic and portal vessels. There were no adenopathies.

Histological examination of the liver biopsy noted signs of chronic inflammation without signs of cirrhosis. Histological examination of the splenectomy piece noted hemorrhagic remodeling. Microscopy revealed an inflammatory granuloma without caseous necrosis, in favor of a hepatic and splenic sarcoidosis. However, we were unable to carry out additional immunohistochemical analyses.

Treatment consisted of oral corticosteroid therapy with 60 mg prednisone daily, then tapered to less than 20 mg daily, and marrow support (200 mg daily).

The clinical and paraclinical evolution after more than 18 months is satisfactory.
