A 50-year-old Iranian housewife with a total replacement of the left knee joint presented to our department. On the primary examination, fever (38 °C), blood pressure (BP) of 125/75 mmHg, pulse rate (PR) of 75 beats per minute, and respiratory rate (RR) of 15 breaths per minute, along with chilling, nausea, swelling, and pain in the left knee that had started 3 days ago, were recorded. Except for decreased ability to move the joint, other predominant physical and neurological symptoms were not observed.
In the past medical history (PMH), the patient had a history of diabetes mellitus with insulin therapy and a left knee joint replacement 1.5 years ago. Except for these cases, she had no other significant past medical history or notable family or hereditary history of specific disease and medication use. She had given birth to three children and denied alcohol consumption and smoking. For controlling diabetes, she used neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) insulin [20 units every 12 hours, subcutaneous injection (SQ)] and regular insulin (12 units in the morning and 8 units at night, SQ).
For diagnosis, a peripheral blood sample and aspirated synovial fluid were taken and were subjected to biochemical, hematological, and microbiological testing.
A peripheral blood sample of 10 ml was obtained and inoculated into a blood culture bottle aseptically; it was negative after a 72-hour period of incubation at 37 °C. A synovial aspiration sample of 2 ml was taken from the patient and was dropped into collection tubes containing liquid ethylenediaminetertraacetic acid (EDTA) aseptically. The specimen was cultured into selective media including blood agar (for isolating aerobic bacteria), chocolate agar (incubated in a candle jar for isolating aerobic capnophilic bacteria), thioglycollate broth (for recovering anaerobic bacteria), eosin methylene blue agar (EMB; for recovering gram-negative bacteria), and subro dextrose agar (for isolating fungi). Also, two sets of slides were prepared and stained with gram and acid-fast staining. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and acid-fast staining were employed for identification of acid-fast bacilli, which were negative. Susceptibility to sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (SXT), neomycin, and bacitracin discs was used for the differentiation of α-hemolytic Streptococcus species (spp.) from other Streptococcus spp.
Lab biomarkers of blood and synovial specimens at the time of admission are presented in Table . In synovial cell counting examination, many WBC in which neutrophils accounted for 80% of whole cells were reported.
At the time of admission, since the causative agent was unknown, on the first day, empirical therapy including vancomycin (1 g every 12 hours, intravenous injection for 2 days) and meropenem (1 g every 8 hours, intravenous injection for 2 days) were initiated to target suspicious invasive agents like Staphylococcus spp. and gram-negative bacilli. On the second day, edema, warmness, and redness declined but fever remained. The results of the blood and synovial culture were revealed on the third day. Only the α-hemolytic Streptococcus spp. was isolated from the synovial specimen, which was subjected to antibiogram testing. Based on the results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing on the third day, antibiotic medication was changed to cefepime (2 g every 8 hours, intravenous injection) for 14 days. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) tests were recommended by an infectious disease (ID) specialist and were performed by an echocardiography cardiologist, who indicated that there was no sign of endocarditis. In orthopedic consultation, according to radiographic results, the exchange of removable components of the implant was not recommended; the antibiotic therapy was continued. The patient was treated with intravenous antibiotics for 14 days and was discharged after partial recovery. At the time of discharge, the patient's symptoms were entirely resolved, there was no movement disorder, and there was only slight swelling in her left knee. Oral medication with cephalexin was prescribed for her for 2 weeks. One month after discharge, the patient did not have any specific complaints and joint restrictions, and the test results of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 25 and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 8 were in normal range.