A 47-year-old man was found to have optic disc swelling by his optometrist. MRI revealed a 7.1 cm sellar mass (Additional file : Figure S1), shown to be an ACTH-positive pituitary adenoma on transsphenoidal biopsy. He had a history of obesity, hypertension, gout and renal calculi but no cyclical symptoms or blood pressure fluctuations. Body mass index was 52.1 kg/m2 but he had no supraclavicular fat pads, Cushingoid striae, facial plethora, ecchymoses or proximal weakness. He had a right-sided oculomotor nerve palsy and right-sided proptosis and conjunctival injection suggesting ophthalmic vein compression. He was eupituitary apart from fluctuating ACTH-dependent cortisol production ranging from normal to 35-fold ULN (Additional file : Figure S1). He was diagnosed with CCD due to a giant corticotrophinoma with intermittent biochemical hypercortisolism, although the precise temporal cyclicity could not be defined prior to transcranial partial tumour resection 1 week later. Histopathology confirmed a corticotrophinoma with no significant mitotic activity and a Ki67 count of < 1%. He was eucortisolaemic immediately pre- and postoperatively with ACTH lowering from 376 ng/L (ULN 60) to 169 ng/L (Additional file : Figure S1). Postoperative complications included acute kidney injury, transient hyperglycaemia, pneumonia, deep vein thrombosis and central hypothyroidism. He later noticed improved BP control, reduced appetite and improved satiety with early but transient weight loss. Serial MRI showed a stable 4.2 cm tumour remnant (Additional file : Figure S1). Despite having typical CS comorbidities and postoperative complications, he has had no cyclical symptoms to guide the timing of investigations and no further episodes of overt hypercortisolism have been detected during intermittent testing. His family history is negative for endocrine tumours.
We performed WES of germline and tumour DNA and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array of tumour DNA to identify sequencing variants and copy number variation in circadian/pituitary-associated genes. Tumour immunohistochemistry was performed to further evaluate the leading genetic variant of interest. Further details are provided in Additional file : Supplementary Methods.