The subject was a 53-year-old housewife, who consulted in December 2013 for inflammatory pain in the right hip evolving for 3 months controlled with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, with a walking distance of about 100 m. The medical history revealed that she is HIV infected and on triple ARV for 1 year, with a CD4 count of 473/ml, the viral load was not documented. Evaluation of the right hip showed flexion/extension of 80/20, abduction/adduction of 40/20, internal rotation/external rotation of 20/15, a trendelenburg gait, and a limb length discrepancy of 3 cm. The muscle power of the gluteus medius was 4/5. There was amyotrophy of the right quadriceps muscle. The Merle d’Aubigne and postel hip score was evaluated to be 9/18. The anterior-posterior view of the pelvic X-ray shows joint space narrowing, loss of head sphericity, shortened hip length, with no other signs of coxarthrosis (sclerosis, geodes, osteophytes). These findings coupled with the patient’s history of immunosuppression were suggestive of a coxitis, which could be due to tuberculosis (TB) infection. However, an MRI scan was not done because it was unavailable, and the patient could not afford to do it due to financial constraints. The full blood count revealed a hemoglobin level of 13 g/dl, however, the white cell count was 8000 with 45% lymphocytes and 50% neutrophiles. The rest of the laboratory investigation was unremarkable.
The patient was operated for implantation of a THA via the Hardinge approach. During surgery, an incident was encountered while dislocating the hip to resect the femoral head. There was a cream-white liquid that was oozing out of the hip joint . A sample was rapidly collected per-operative and sent for urgent bacteriological analysis. The gram coloration was negative, the rest of the liquid was then sent for microbiological, mycobacteriological and histological analyses. The debris from reaming and the femoral head were also sent for analysis. The surgery was continued and completed with the implantation of a hybrid THA due to the fragile acetabulum; the stem was uncemented while the acetabulum was cemented . The anatomopathological findings showed an active TB infection . At the end of the surgery, the limb length discrepancy was corrected. The wound healing was normal, and rehabilitation commenced 24 h after surgery with isometric contractions of the gluteal and quadriceps muscles in bed. She was then verticalized the second day following surgery and walking was assisted using crutches. The patient thence continued with her ARV the same day of surgery and 10 days triple antibiotics initiated. She had a fixed combination of antituberculous drugs (isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) to be taken for 12 months. 3 years after the surgery we have not noticed any relapse of the infection or any loosening.