A 6-year-old Greek boy was referred to our hospital with acute abdominal pain, fever, and vomiting that had started 30 h earlier. On presentation, he was hemodynamically stable and well-hydrated. His abdominal examination revealed right lower quadrant pain on palpation and a positive McBurney sign with signs of peritoneal irritation. His hemoglobin was 12.2 g/dl (normal range 12–15 g/dl), his hematocrit was 34.6 % (normal range 36–44 %), his mean corpuscular volume was 72.7 (normal range 77–89), his mean corpuscular hemoglobin was 24.7 (normal range 25–31), his leukocyte count was 15,110/μl (normal range 5000–13,500/μl), his platelet count was 279,000/μl (normal range 200,000–400,000/μl), and his C-reactive protein level was 3.81 mg/dl (normal range <0.51 mg/dl). His electrolyte and coagulation profiles were within normal ranges.
As the boy’s history and physical examination referred to acute appendicitis, ultrasound was performed. Ultrasonography showed a well-defined, hypoechogenic solid mass measuring 6 × 2 cm in the right iliac fossa . Other abdominal structures, including the appendix, liver, and kidneys, were normal. Because of the complex nature of the lesion, computed tomography was also performed. A computed tomographic scan showed a solid mass measuring 6 × 2.4 cm in the right abdomen. The mass was in contact at one end with the ascending colon and at the other end with the small bowel . Imaging findings excluded the presence of acute appendicitis or Meckel’s diverticulum. Emergency laparoscopic exploration was performed using a 10-mm trocar placed in the umbilicus with two accessory trocars in the left and right lower quadrants (5 mm). A pediculated solid mass attached to the antimesenteric edge of the ileum and 8 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve was found. It was covered by inflammatory omentum. It appeared ischemic due to torsion at the level of the pediculated attachment to the ileum. The inflammatory part of the omentum covering the mass was laparoscopically resected free, and the mass with the adjacent ileal loop was exteriorized through a circumbilical incision at the site of the umbilical opening and easily separated from the ileal edge . The ileal wall was normal .
The histopathologic diagnosis was made by using hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides and immunohistochemistry. The histological examination revealed a circumscribed mesenchymal myofibroblastic lesion with a focal mesothelial lining and a considerable vascular component showing excessive hemorrhage and heterogeneous ischemic necrosis. The lesion was composed of clustered and dispersed fibroblastic spindle cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and a nucleus with fine chromatin without any considerable nuclear atypia or mitotic activity. Characteristic features were the myxoid configuration of the lesion, the variable hyalinization, and the moderate inflammatory infiltrate composed mainly of plasma cells and lymphocytes.
Immunohistochemistry of the spindle cells showed focal expression of desmin (clone D33), cytokeratins 8 and 18, and pan-keratin AE1/AE3, while there was no detection of smooth muscle actin (SMA), myogenin/Myf-4, CD34, S100, c-kit/CD117, epithelial membrane antigen, β-catenin, Bcl-2 protein, melanosome-associated antigen/HMB45, or anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-1/p80. Although the described immunophenotype is not entirely diagnostic of a specific entity, it may be encountered in OMMH, which is considered a variant of IMT, though this is a subject of debate.
The patient’s laboratory values improved dramatically after surgery, and he had an uneventful postoperative course. He was discharged from the hospital on the fourth postoperative day. No evidence of recurrence was noted during 2 years of follow-up, and the patient remains under clinical surveillance.