A 12-year-old Caucasian boy was referred with a presumed diagnosis of right ON glioma to our hospital. Four years earlier, his local ophthalmologist had diagnosed a 'yellow-whitish, well-demarcated papillary cyst with central retinal vessel displacement' in his right eye (oculus dexter, or OD) and documented a visual acuity of 20/30 in both eyes. He was examined twice a year, and his vision remained stable. Four years later, his ophthalmologist documented 'visual acuity of 20/80 and concentric visual field reduction to the central 10° isopter in OD'. Fundoscopic variation of the lesion was not noted.
One month later, after a severe headache, visual loss progressed and no light perception with an absolute afferent pupillary defect was present in the OD. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed right ON thickening, and the boy was referred and admitted to our center.
At admission, the described neuro-ophthalmologic findings were confirmed, and on CT, the optic disc appeared elevated and enhanced after intravenous contrast was administered. Fundoscopy revealed a well-defined whitish mass without macroscopic calcification at the ON head, dilated and tortuous retinal vessels, and small superficial retinal hemorrhages . A complete general examination did not detect any other alterations.
After informed consent was obtained from our patient's parents, a right transfrontal exploratory orbitotomy with canalicular unroofing was performed, and a normal chiasm, prechiasmatic and canalicular ON, and grayish infiltration in the proximal intraorbital portion were revealed. A frozen intraoperative biopsy of the tumor was diagnosed as an 'unrecognized tumoral process', and 0.8 cm of distal ON was resected. Because the eye had no light perception and the tumor was potentially malignant, the remaining ON and globe were enucleated with excision of the retrobulbar orbital fat.
A gross examination of the eye revealed an ON with a width of 6 to 7 mm and a length of 6 mm. A sagittal section through the globe revealed a small, whitish, rounded tumor of 2 to 3 mm with a soft surface at the optic disc. No lesions of the cornea, iris, lens, or ciliary processes were detected. The tumor had areas composed of poorly differentiated neuroblastic cells with nuclear pleomorphism but no mesenchymal elements. Thus, the final histopathological diagnosis was malignant non-teratoid medulloepithelioma of the ON . There was dense granulation tissue with giant cells, but no tumor was present in the adipose tissue surrounding the ON .
Systemic work-up was negative for any evidence of metastatic disease. In view of the significant mortality rate of this tumor, orbital exenteration was suggested, but our patient's parents declined [-]. Fifty gray of telegammatherapy (Co60) was applied in two fields. Our patient was closely followed with annual orbital CT and half-yearly echography for six years without evidence of recurrence. At present, he is 37 years old and has a disease-free survival of 25 years.