A 24-year-old woman (height, 169.2 cm; body weight, 79.2 kg) with WD was scheduled for emergency cesarean delivery at 30 weeks of gestation.
The patient was diagnosed with WD at 3 years of age. Her liver function had deteriorated severely enough to require liver transplantation at 20 years of age. However, anti-copper therapy improved her liver function and was continued during pregnancy. She was hospitalized at 25 weeks of gestation for thrombocytopenia and fetal growth restriction (FGR) caused by placental insufficiency. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) serum levels were normalized during pregnancy, while antithrombin III (AT-III) levels were significantly lower . On hematological evaluation, performing anticoagulation therapy with AT-III concentrate was suggested to prevent thrombophilia-induced placental dysfunction.
The patient’s body weight had rapidly increased by 1 kg/day with marked ascites and severe edema. She experienced dyspnea and could not ambulate due to dramatic weight gain. She was also diagnosed with obstetric DIC presenting with oliguria, thrombocytopenia, respiratory distress, liver dysfunction, and severe coagulopathy . At 30 weeks of gestation, emergency cesarean delivery was performed under general anesthesia to improve her liver function. We performed supplementation with 10 units of platelet transfusion, 3 packs of cryoprecipitate, and 3 g fibrinogen concentrate.
In the operating room, a 16G venous catheter was inserted. We used rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM® sigma, Tem Innovations GmbH, Munich, Germany), which showed normal coagulation function . Under standard monitoring and bispectral index, we performed rapid sequence induction using 130 mg propofol, 0.05 mg remifentanil, and 70 mg rocuronium. Because her face and tongue were edematous and the Mallampati classification was III, intubation difficulties were expected. Therefore, we used a video laryngoscope (McGRATH MAC#3) for tracheal intubation. We maintained with oxygen in nitrous oxide (2:3) and 0.7% sevoflurane until delivery.
After delivery, the baby (1173 g) showed respiratory distress. Tracheal intubation and administration of intratracheal lung surfactant were performed. One- and 5-min Apgar scores were 2 and 5, respectively. The neonatologists performed mechanical ventilation management for 2 days after delivery. The infant was discharged without further complications.
After delivery, continuous intravenous administration of propofol and remifentanil was started. Intraoperatively, 0.5 mg intravenous fentanyl was administered, and continuous fentanyl injection was started at 0.04 mg/h for postoperative analgesia. Intraoperative hemorrhage was 1813 mL (including amniotic fluid), and ascites was 1000 mL. The operation time was 61 min, and anesthesia time was 179 min. Urine volume was 80 mL, and infusion volume was 1954 mL (654 mL of crystalloids and 1300 mL of colloids). The patient also received 3 units of red blood cells and 6 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP). The operation was completed without massive bleeding. However, a postoperative chest X-ray indicated pulmonary edema. We decided to continue mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit (ICU). Albumin and diuretic administration improved the patient’s oxygenation and allowed for extubation the next day. She was transferred to the obstetrics ward 3 days postoperatively.
On the 15th postpartum day, her body weight showed a decrease of 20 kg, and she was discharged from the hospital. Subsequently, coagulation status was improved to pre-pregnancy levels 40 days after delivery.