A 58-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with fever, headache for 21 days and left limb weakness for 2 days. The patient had chronic headache (30 years) and dental caries with intermittent toothache (6 years). Twenty-one days (Jun 20) before admission, the patient had fever, swelling pain on his forehead, cough and expectoration, then she was treated in a local clinic. Subsequently, the fever and headache symptoms aggravated (the maximum body temperature reached 38 °C), accompanied by nausea, vomiting, rash, night sweats and arthralgia. The patient was transferred to Beijing Shunyi hospital (Beijing, China), and treated with cefonicid (anti-infective) and amlodipine (reduced blood press), but the fever and headache continued. 2 days (Jul 9) before admission, the patient suddenly developed left-sided limb weakness (the strength grade of left-limb was IV stage) that did not affect standing or walking.
On Jul 11, the patient was transferred to our hospital. She exhibited somnolence, bilateral equal-sized round pupils (diameter 3 mm) and sensitivity to light. Her eyes movement in all directions were not limited, and there was no nystagmus, symmetric bilateral nasolabial folds, normal muscle strength in the four limbs (the strength grade of four limbs was V stage), and unstable ataxic movement. In addition, she had no obvious objective sensory disturbance (sensory plane) and the pathologic reflexes were not elicited. The sign of meningeal irritation (Kemig’ and Brudzinsk’ signs) and Brudzinski’s sign were positive. Laboratory test results revealed that the white blood cell counts (11.73 × 109/L), neutrophil counts (9.22 × 109/L) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein levels (> 5.00 mg/L) were elevated, the level of procalcitonin (PCT) was < 0.1 ng/mL, and the autoimmune encephalitis antibodies (AMPAR1-Ab, AMPAR2-Ab, CASPR2-Ab, DPPX-Ab, GABABR-Ab, IgLON5–Ab, LGI1-Ab, NMDAR-Ab), paraneoplastic antibodies (anti-Amphiphysin, anti-CV2, anti-GAD65, anti-Hu, anti-PNMA2 (Ma-2/Ta), anti-Recoverin, anti-Ri, anti-SOX1, anti-Titin, anti-Tr (DNER), anti-Yo, anti-Zic4 ) and demyelinating antibodies (AQP4-Ab, GFAP-Ab, MBP-Ab, MOG-Ab) were negative. On Jul 12, a lumbar puncture was performed and the test results were shown in Table . The mNGS (MBX52313, Tianjin Genskey Medical Technology Co., Ltd, Tianjing, China) results showed that the Eubacterium brachy, P. gingivalis, Fusobacterium nucleatum and Torque teno virus 29 were detected, but the fungi and mycobacterium tuberculosis were not detected.
The brain computerized tomography (CT) scanning indicated the new right thalamus infarct . The brain cranial-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the right lateral paraventricular and right thalamic infarct, and abnormal signal in occipital horns of bilateral lateral ventricles were increased . In addition, the brain enhanced nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) scanning suggested that meninges were thickened and enhanced at the base of the brain, and with meningitis changes . The neck CT angiography (CTA) revealed arteriosclerotic changes, slender right vertebral artery (segment V4 with obliteration), the slender intracranial arteries with uneven thickness, the M1 segment of the left middle cerebral artery with localized moderate stenosis, and the P1 and P2 segments of the left posterior cerebral artery with localized severe stenosis .
Based on these findings, the patient was finally diagnosed with suppurative meningoencephalitis caused by infection of oral anaerobes (CNS infection), acute cerebral infarction and intra oral abscess (gum and surrounding soft tissue infection). The patient was then given ceftriaxone (4 g, ivgtt, qd, 3days), vancomycin (0.50 g, ivgtt, q8h, 16 days). Subsequently, her symptoms, including headache and fever, alleviated. She was transferred to the Infectious Diseases department (Jul 19), then she was treated with ceftriaxone (2 g, ivgtt, q12h, 2 days) plus metronidazole (0.50 g, ivgtt, q8h, 13 days) to anti-anaerobes. On Aug 1, the patient’s pupils were equal in circle and size, but the abduction of both eyes was limited. Moreover, the left central was facial palsy and left limb was central hemiparesis, and the Kirschner’s sign was positive, the headache and fever was relieved, the white blood cell count in CSF was 888 × 106/L. On Aug 22, the patient’s headache and fever disappeared. During our following-up on Sep 8, the patient remained lucid and no fever or headache. Her left hemiparesis was better than before, and have currently received rehabilitation treatment in Beijing Fengtai Youanmen Hospital (Beijing, China).