Our patient is a 40-year-old P1332 who presented for prenatal care with dating ultrasound confirming viable intrauterine pregnancy at 6.5 weeks. Her medical history was notable for type 2 diabetes, chronic hypertension, severe preeclampsia, and intrauterine fetal demise in a previous pregnancy. She received routine prenatal care and was started on medication for her co-morbidities. First trimester cfDNA resulted “low risk” for fetal trisomies though was “no call,” or unable to ascertain the risk for monosomy X or sex chromosome aneuploidy. Targeted anatomy ultrasound at 22 weeks revealed a singleton fetus with normal anatomy, a normal fetal echocardiogram, and a normal appearing anterior placenta. Additional images showed a 12 cm by 7 cm area of multi-cystic placental tissue in the uterine fundus concerning for possible molar tissue versus placental mesenchymal dysplasia.
Repeat cfDNA testing, using single nucleotide polymorphism-based next-generation sequencing, reported results consistent with a possible triploid, vanishing twin, or unrecognized multiple gestation. The report also noted suspected complete uniparental disomy, which is most consistent with a molar pregnancy. She received genetic counseling and declined amniocentesis for diagnostic testing.
She was asymptomatic and had normal vital signs. Labs were notable for a significantly elevated hCG over 250,000, subclinical hyperthyroidism, and normal hepatic function. Chest x-ray was negative for metastatic disease. She was counseled by a multidisciplinary team including Maternal Fetal Medicine (MFM) and Gynecologic Oncology regarding expectant management versus uterine evacuation. Despite the serious health risks posed by continuation of her pregnancy, pregnancy termination was not available in her state as her gestational age at the time of diagnosis was greater than the gestational age ban limit of 20 weeks post conception. Counseling did include the ability to explore termination care in other states with later gestational age limits, though given the legal restrictions in place she could not be directly referred or transferred if she desired termination care . Her options were further limited by the additional barriers of out-of-pocket costs for the procedure, travel, lodging, and childcare. She elected to proceed with expectant management and was co-managed by MFM and Gynecologic Oncology. Delivery was scheduled for no later than 32 weeks after consensus conference, but she ultimately developed severe preeclampsia at 31 weeks necessitating delivery. Following counseling, the patient desired to proceed with cesarean hysterectomy given she did not desire future fertility and she was counseled about a decreased risk of post-molar conversion to GTN following hysterectomy compared to uterine evacuation. Her case was uncomplicated with total EBL 1300 cc. Other than blood pressure elevations in the setting of severe preeclampsia, her post-operative course was uncomplicated and she discharged home on post-operative day four. APGARs were 1, 6, and 8, and the neonatal course was complicated by prematurity and respiratory distress requiring a 19-day NICU stay.
Histology revealed an intact unremarkable placental disc loosely adherent to the posterior uterine wall, together with a tan-pink, spongy cystic mass densely adherent to the right uterine wall measuring 13.5 cm by 7.7 cm by 2.6 cm (A). Sections of tissue demonstrate a tan friable cut surface with focal myometrial invasion (B). Hematoxylin and eosin slides show a complete hydatidiform mole displaying intrauterine implantation with focal extension of a molar villous into the superficial myometrium, which is diagnostic of invasive hydatidiform mole (A and 2B). There was complete absence of immunohistochemical staining for p57 in the molar villi and hyperplastic trophoblast, which confirmed the diagnosis of complete hydatidiform mole (C). Additionally, there is a distinct interface identified without invasion into the normal placental disc (D). Based on her WHO score and FIGO stage 1 disease she was low risk for recurrence or progression and was followed with serial hCGs. Her hCG nadir was 8.0 before rising two months after delivery, consistent with post-molar GTN. She has since finished 4 cycles of single agent Actinomycin D, receiving 3 cycles of chemotherapy past a negative hCG. She is now 8 months from treatment with no evidence of disease by exam and serially negative hCG testing.