We report a case of a 54-year-old woman who presented with a new mass on the abdominal wall scar that had grown in the past 3 months. She had a cesarean sections 31 years ago. In 2017, she underwent laparoscopic right adnexectomy for a chocolate cyst of the right ovary.
An increased abdominal mass was reported in our hospital, and physical examination revealed a subcutaneous solid tumor with a diameter of 3 cm around the scar of laparoscopic surgery on the right lower abdomen. Transabdominal ultrasound showed a cystic tumor in the subcutaneous adipose layer of the right lower abdomen . Trans-vaginal ultrasonography showed normal findings.Routine laboratory findings and tumor markers (AFP, CA125, HE4 and CEA) were normal, but serums CA-199 were elevated at 41.48U/m U/mL. The patient was excised under general anesthesia. During the intraoperative exploration of the fat layer, a 3 × 2 cm mass with hard texture could be reached. After the fat was cut open, a cystic mass could be seen, in which coffee-colored fluid flowed out a poorly differentiated endometrioid carcinoma . PAX-8, ER, KI-67 and CD10 were positive, while STATB2, GATA3, CDX-2 and PR were negative. Combined with the patient's history of laparoscopic surgery, ultrasound and pathological findings, it was highly suspected that the tumor was a malignant transformation of laparoscopic trocar endometriosis.
Whole-body positron emission tomography and computed tomography (18-FDG PET-CT) were performed at disease stage 14 days after surgery and showed slight hypermetabolism in the incision area. Multiple swollen lymph nodes in retrodiaphragmatic, retroperitoneal, bilateral iliac vessels and right inguinal area, abnormal metabolism.
Our patient then underwent surgical staging, laparoscopy through the peritoneum. The abdominal and renal pelvis were carefully examined, intraoperative adhesions between the greater omentum, the abdominal wall and the fundus of the uterus were observed. Tumor nodules were observed on the surface of the sigmoid colon and rectum. Right total iliac, external iliac, internal iliac, obturator lymph nodes and para-aortic lymph nodes were enlarged and fused into masses. Final pathology revealed a metastatic poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma arising from a foci of endometriosis.Tumor metastasis was observed in right pelvic lymph node and right inguinal lymph node.The remainder of the specimens were negative for malignancy.
Serum CA-125 and CA-199 increased to 36 one month after operation, 48 U/mL and 77.67U/mL, respectively. Serum CA-125 and CA-199 decreased to normal 4 months after surgery. After the operation, patients received systemic chemotherapy (6 cycles of tri-weekly liposomal doxorubicin 30 mg/m2 and carboplatin AUC = 5), which is similar to adjuvant chemotherapy for epithelial ovarian cancer. CT scans showed no evidence of recurrence after 6 cycles of chemotherapy. Three months after 6 times of chemotherapy, she underwent repeat 18-FDG PET-CT examination, which revealed most of the original enlarged lymph nodes disappeared, with only a few small lymph nodes behind the peritoneum and low metabolism.Our patients showed no signs of recurrence 16 months after initial diagnosis,CA199, AFP, CA125, HE4 and CEA were all normal.