A 58-year-old man had experienced recurrent abdominal pain and melena for 3 years, but repeated gastroenteroscopy and CTA had failed to find bleeding lesions.
On June 30, 2020, the patient presented to our department with a history of recurrent abdominal pain and melena for 3 years. In June 2017, he developed recurrent localized and dark pain in the upper abdomen without obvious inducement. It was tolerable, lasted for about 1 h, occurred about 3 times a day and was accompanied by thin, textureless melena, dizziness, and fatigue. His symptoms occurred repeatedly. He had gone to major hospitals across the country many times, but there was no clear diagnosis, and conservative treatment was used for alleviation. Two months before admission, the above symptoms progressively worsened. Melena was passed 4-5 times a day, with a total volume of about 200 g, and the dizziness and fatigue were significantly worse than before. After symptomatic treatment of hemostasis in the local hospital, the symptoms were improved, but still existed.
He was diagnosed with syphilis in 2008. Multiple treatments were successful, but the disease recurred shortly afterward. Because of heart valve disease, he underwent a mitral valve replacement and tricuspid valvuloplasty at Fujian Provincial Hospital In 2010. In 2019, he was diagnosed with atrial fibrillation and chronic pancreatitis. Currently, he is taking Betaloc 23.75 mg qd orally.
The patient had a history of unprotected intercourse with multiple sexual partners, a smoking history for 40 years (20 cigarettes a day), and a drinking history for 30 years. There is no family history of infectious or heredity diseases.
On admission, his temperature was 36 ℃, pulse was 66 beats/min, respiration was 18 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. He was conscious and could cooperate in the physical examination. The skin of the whole body was slightly pale. Systemic superficial lymph nodes were not enlarged or tender, the conjunctiva was pale, the lips were slightly pale, carotid artery pulsation was normal, jugular vein was normal, liver jugular vein return sign was negative, and lung physical examination was not remarkable. There was a postoperative scar of about 20 cm in length on the chest, which had healed well. The heart rate was 80 beats/min, the heart rhythm was absolutely uneven, the first heart sound varied in intensity, a systolic murmur was heard in the mitral valve auscultation area, no obvious pathological murmur was heard in the other auscultation area, the fricative consonant was unintentionally included, the abdomen was flat and soft without tenderness or rebound pain, and the abdomen was not lumped. The liver and spleen were not touched, Murphy’s sign was negative, and there was no mobile dullness. Intestinal sounds (4/min) were normal.
The initial hemoglobin of the patient was 78.0 g/L and fecal occult blood was present (++). The syphilis toluidine red unheated serum test (TRUST) was positive; the syphilis titer was 1:2 positive. The white blood cell count, platelets, coagulation function, antinuclear antibody, antinuclear antibody profile, fecal routine, urine routine, alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, glycogen antigen 199, total iron binding capacity, serum iron, unsaturated iron binding capacity, ferritin, folic acid, vitamin B12, purified protein derivative (PPD tuberculin test, tuberculosis antibody, and tuberculosis T-cell test showed no obvious abnormalities.
The patient’s upper abdominal magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed splenomegaly, and dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts and pancreatic ducts .
An electrocardiogram indicated atrial fibrillation . Colonoscopy found multiple small ridges in the terminal ileum, and the pathology showed chronic active inflammation and erosive mucosa. Additional gastroscopy showed atrophic gastritis, and pathology of the gastric antrum indicated inflammation, and the Helicobacter pylori test was negative. Ultrasound gastroscopy showed dilatation of pancreatic duct with pancreatic duct stones, which was considered as chronic pancreatitis . A capsule endoscopy was performed to further clarify the bleeding focus of the patient, and multiple intestinal erosions and ulcers were found . The bone marrow puncture smear of the iliac spine showed normal hematopoietic tissue hyperplasia, presence of three-line hematopoietic cells, expanded islands of erythroid cells, hyperplasia of erythroid cells, a reduced granulocytosis ratio, and a scattered distribution of megakaryocytes, which was considered as hyperplastic anemia .