A 40 year old, 83Kg female with developmental dysplasia of her left hip (DDH) was referred to us for consideration of left THA having suffered increasing left hip pain over the past three years. Her diagnosis of DDH was not made until adulthood despite her left leg being shorter than her right leg by 2.5 cm. She was diagnosed with BSS at the age of 18, and her haematology reports confirm 2 prior hospital admissions related to delayed bleeding following wisdom- teeth extraction at the age of 20 and cervical cone biopsy; the latter of which required transfusion with platelets and packed red blood cells (pRBC). Prior to this, she had been taking birth control pills from the age 14 for heavy menstruation.
Pre-operative cross-match and group and screen of blood was conducted confirming blood type A+. Blood work also confirmed that she was not Factor XIII deficit as initially suspected (FXIII activity, 1.04 U/mL). Her glycoprotein 1b level was 15% with an estimated platelet count of 12 (x109/L) and INR 0.9. Her euglobulin lysis time was also well within acceptable limits (4.5 h). We consulted our Thrombosis, Haemophilia and Internal Medicine teams for pre-operative optimization. Having a Clinical Nurse Specialist coordinate the patient care path was fundamental to this process.
Tranexamic acid (TA) 1g po TID was initiated 24 hours prior to surgery and continued until 14 days post-operatively. 20 mcg of DDAVP (desmopressin) diluted into 50 mL of normal saline was given intravenously over a period of 30 minutes, 1 hour prior to surgery. Immediately following this, she received 1 adult dose (4 units/318 mL) of pooled, buffy-coat platelets which elevated her platelets to 79 (x109/L) along with 1 unit of pRBC to bring her haemoglobin (Hb) to 135 . Intravenous antibiotics (Ancef, 2g) were given within 30 minutes of surgery. Arterial lines and additional peripheral lines were avoided to limit potential bleeding.
Induction of general anaesthesia was conducted using a mixture of intravenous propofol (170 mg), sufentanil (20 mcg), versed (2 mg) and rocuronium (50 mcg). A glideScope® (Verathon Inc., Bothell, WA, USA) was used for placement of the endotracheal tube. Anaesthesia maintenance comprised isoflurane (1.8%) with 58% O2 at 1.2L/min and air at 1.3L/min.
Once sedate, our patient was positioned in a standard right lateral decubitus position, supported by a Stulberg frame (Innomed Inc., Savannah, GA, USA). A Hardinge approach was used to the left hip. Meticulous haemostasis was maintained using cautery throughout the case. Particular attention was taken to avoid undue tension through soft tissues during dislocation of the hip. Similarly, bone bleeding following transection of the femoral neck and reaming of the acetabulum and femoral canal was addressed immediately. Gauze soaked in tranexamic acid (Pfizer Inc., NY, USA, 2g in 10 mL sterile normal saline) was packed into the femoral canal and acetabulum for a period of 3-4 minutes prior to placement of implants.
The femoral component (Accolade II; Stryker Canada, Hamilton, ON, CA) was impacted into the femoral canal in the typical fashion. To optimize functional range, we used an anatomic dual mobility (ADM®), bearing hip system from Stryker . Bleeding was minimal following impaction of either the femoral or acetabular prostheses. Muscle and surrounding fascial layers were infiltrated with 0.5% Marcaine/epinephrine (1:1000; 40 mL). The incision was meticulously closed in multiple layers followed by steri- strips™ and mepore® dressings.
Systolic blood pressure was maintained below 125 mmHg throughout the surgery. Total operative time was 85 minutes. Estimated blood loss was 450 mL. Patient received a 1L bolus of normal saline intra-operatively. Her vitals remained stable throughout the surgery.
Post-operatively, daily transfusions of platelets were given up to post-operative day (POD) 14. Transfusions comprised 2 single donor (232 mL), 4 plateletpharesis (208 ±44 mL) and 8 pooled, buffy coated platelets (345 ±15mL). Minor crossmatch check was conducted daily. Platelet counts dropped by 40% post-operatively but recovered by POD 6 (see ). DDAVP (20 mcg, subcutaneous) was continued daily until POD 4. Serum sodium levels remained stable; the lowest reading was 128 mmol/L on POD 2, recovering to 136 mmol/L by POD 6. Systolic blood pressures were also stable at 103 ±14 mmHg, the lowest (98/59) occurring POD 1. Her blood work was recorded daily, a summary of which is shown in . She was weight bearing as tolerated from POD 1. Daily dressing checks confirmed no bleeding concerns at the incision site. DVT prophylaxis comprised moonboots starting POD 0. Her pain was controlled effectively with oral hydromorphone contin (6mg, BID) and Tylenol (975 mg, q4h). Patient entered into rehabilitation POD 7 and was discharged home on POD 19 following complete review by our Haematology and medicine teams.
The overall leg length discrepancy was improved from 2.5 cm to 1 cm without the need for additional soft tissue release.