A 68-year-old female with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, gout, rheumatoid arthritis, and bilateral knee replacements on clindamycin prophylaxis for past infections presented to our emergency department with 3 weeks of worsening left lower extremity pain. She was initially seen at an urgent care for erythema and swelling of the left shin. Plain radiographs were unremarkable at that time and she was treated for cellulitis with intramuscular ceftriaxone for 10 days without improvement. On arrival, she was well-appearing, afebrile, and hemodynamically stable with erythema, swelling, and tenderness of the left pretibial soft tissues . The area of erythema and swelling appeared to terminate before the knee joint and there was no appreciable joint effusion or limitation in range of motion on exam. Her pain was worse with ambulation, but she was able to bear weight on the affected leg. Repeat plain radiographs were performed and showed focal soft tissue swelling overlying the anterior aspect of the tibia . A point-of-care ultrasound was performed by sliding the linear probe over the area of erythema in orthogonal transverse and longitudinal planes. Ultrasound demonstrated a large heterogeneous fluid collection adjacent to the tibial cortex . There was a focal defect in the cortex and pulsatile fluid communicating with the medullary cavity. Alternating bidirectional flow was visualized with color flow and pulsed wave spectral Doppler . The WBC count was normal (7.7), and systemic inflammatory markers were elevated (CRP 38 mg/dL, ESR 91 mm/hr). CT was obtained and demonstrated a 5.7 × 2.4 × 7.1 cm fluid collection adjacent to the tibial cortex with sinus tracts into the medullary cavity concerning for abscess with adjacent cellulitis and osteomyelitis . She was given vancomycin and Piperacillin/Tazobactam, orthopedics was consulted, and she was admitted to the internal medicine service. An incision and drainage of the left pretibial abscess was performed. Neither wound nor blood cultures yielded any growth. Infectious Diseases was consulted and recommended treatment with vancomycin for 6 weeks.