We report a 26-year-old female and her 28-year-old healthy male partner, who experienced difficulties in becoming pregnant since 2015. Female patient had a regular menstrual cycle, but was previously diagnosed with endometriosis in 2012 following laparoscopy, for which she received treatment with goserelin acetate implant (Zoladex®). In January and October 2016, the couple experienced two first trimester miscarriages after natural conception at 5/6 weeks (gestational sac and yolk sac were visible by obstetric ultrasonography) and at 4/5 weeks (only gestational sac was visible) of gestation, respectively. The couple then turned to assisted reproduction in 2017 due to fertility issues. Because of history of endometriosis, the female patient underwent laparoscopy again in April 2017, but no endometriotic lesions were found and fallopian tubes were patent. The female patient was then followed up for multiple cycles for the presence of a dominant follicle. In addition, she was administered with alpha chorionic gonadotropin (Ovitrelle®) and dihydrogesterone (Duphaston®) but failed to conceive. In September 2017, the couple enrolled into IVF/PGT-A program at fertility clinic at West-Tallinn Central Hospital for elective embryo transfer to assist in achieving a successful pregnancy. An informed consent was also obtained, allowing to use supernumerary/affected embryos for research purposes.
Controlled ovarian stimulation was performed using recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone, followed by a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist protocol. Final oocyte maturation was triggered by human chorionic gonadotropin administration 36–38 h prior to oocyte retrieval. In total 19 oocytes have been retrieved and all of them were fertilized by conventional IVF. The presumed zygotes were then cultured in a SAGE-1 single step media (Origio, Denmark) until day 5 blastocyst stage. Subsequent embryo morphological evaluation was performed according to the criteria set by Gardner and Schoolcraft . Trophectoderm (TE) biopsy was performed on four embryos that reached the blastocyst stage using RI Saturn 5 Active™ Laser and on average 5–10 cells were aspirated per embryo. Following TE biopsy, all blastocysts were vitrified using MediCult Vitrification Cooling medias (Origio).
For PGT-A, commercially available VeriSeq PGS kit (Illumina Inc., USA) was used for next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based aneuploidy screening. Briefly, TE biopsies were whole-genome amplified (WGA) according to ligation-mediated PCR-based SurePlex protocol (Illumina Inc., USA). The quality of WGA products was controlled on 1.5% agarose gel and the amount of amplified material was quantified by Qubit dsDNA HS Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Next, successfully amplified samples were used for library preparation, according to the manufacturer’s VeriSeq PGS kit protocol, and were sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq system. Subsequent CCS was performed using Illumina BlueFuse Multi v4.3 software with an embedded aneuploidy calling algorithm. Based on TE biopsy results, embryo classification was performed according to Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis International Society (PGDIS) guidelines and recommendations for embryo prioritization (PGDIS, 2016).
For blood cell karyotyping, conventional GTG-banding technique (G-bands by trypsin using Giemsa; band level 550) was used for staining metaphase chromosomes from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Chromosome aberrations were classified according to the International System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature (ISCN2016).