A 58-year-old housewife presented to our hospital with five days' history of fever and polyarthralgia involving bilateral wrists, elbows, ankles and the right knee. She had a past history of osteoarthritis of both knees for 10 years not requiring any regular treatment. On admission, she had a blood pressure of 128/68 mm Hg, a pulse rate of 94 beats per minute, and a temperature of 37.8 oC. She appeared comfortable and not in distress, but all the affected joints were tender, swollen, with limited range of movement, especially over the left wrist and right knee. No cardiac murmurs were detected. The initial laboratory results revealed a normal peripheral leukocyte count of 7 500 cells/μL (77% neutrophils), hemoglobin level of 11.9 g/dL and platelet count of 191 000/μL. The liver and renal functions were all normal, and the urate level was 180 μmol/L. C-reactive protein was elevated to 38.3 mg/dL. X-ray of the left wrist and right knee did not show any juxta-articular erosion or loss of cartilages.
The patient was empirically treated as gouty arthritis with colchicine for four days without any clinical improvement, and the leukocyte count further increased to 13 700 cells/μL (91% neutrophils). Arthrocentesis of the right knee was performed with 20 mL turbid synovial fluid being aspirated. The total cell count of joint fluid was 14 850 cells/mL, predominantly polymorphs; no crystals were seen. Gram stain of the joint fluid showed regular Gram negative bacilli and became culture-positive after 48 hours of incubation at 37°C in 5% CO2. The organism only grew on 5% horse blood agar but not on chocolate or MacConkey agars, with characteristic pleomorphic filamentous Gram stain morphology and central bulbous swellings arranging into coils upon subculture . It was identified as Streptobacillus moniliformis with compatible biochemical reactions (negative in the oxidase and catalase tests, unable to reduce nitrate to nitrite, and failed to produce indole from tryptophan). Upon further questioning, the patient recalled being bitten by a brown rat five days before the onset of joint pain when she traveled to a village in southern China. A healed wound with hyperpigmentation was noted over the right thumb base, which indicated the site of rat bite . The patient was treated with intravenous ampicillin 1.5 g every six hourly. Her blood culture taken before starting antibiotics remained sterile after seven days of incubation. Due to persistent swelling and tenderness, an open arthrotomy of the left wrist was performed two days after starting antibiotic, which showed acute pyogenic synovitis. The patient was given 21 days of antibiotic. Upon discharge, she was afebrile, and the arthritis resolved completely without any long-term sequalae.
We searched PubMed (January 1970 to March 2006) for English-language articles that addressed streptobacillary septic arthritis. The keywords "Streptobacillus" and "septic arthritis" were used. Relevant additional cases were included from secondary references. Our reported case was also included in the review. Patient demographics, underlying diseases, types of rat exposure (if any), clinical presentation of the streptobacillary septic arthritis, site(s) of positive cultures, therapeutic interventions and outcome of treatment were recorded for all cases.
Twelve cases of S. moniliformis septic arthritis are reviewed including the present report and 11 previously published cases [-]. The clinical details of these cases are summarized in the table .
The mean patient age was 72.0 years (median 72; range 12 to 79 years), and only two cases (16.7%) were under the age of 16 years; the male-to-female ratio was 3:1. Five patients (41.7%) had underlying diseases, with three of them reported to have osteoarthritis. Other underlying illnesses included carcinoma of the breast and chronic alcoholism. Eight patients (66.7%) developed streptobacillary septic arthritis after being bitten by rats, one patient acquired the disease after a rat scratch, and three patients could not recall any exposure or contact with rats or rodents. However, these three cases might still have potential contact with rats as two of them worked in rural areas (one as pig farmer and one as warehouse fork lift operator). The other patient was a chronic alcoholic, which could have exposed to rat bites and scratches when he was drunk. The most common cause for possible rat exposure was occupation (5 cases, 41.7%), followed by keeping of pet rats (3 cases, 25.0%), One patient sustained rat bite when the patient tried to pick up a rat near trashcans bare-handedly. Our patient was bitten by rat when she traveled to village in China.
Joint pain is the most common clinical presentation of streptobacillary septic arthritis in our series (100%). It is followed by fever in seven cases (58.3%). Two patients also reported to have skin rash, and another two patients had skin pustules (16.7%). Ten out of the twelve patients (83.3%) had polyarticular involvement. The most common joints associated with streptobacillary septic arthritis were the knees in seven patients (58.3%), ankles in six (50%), wrists in five (41.7%), small joints of hands in four (33.3%), elbows in three (25.0%), shoulders in three (25.0%), hips in two (16.7%), and sternoclavicular joint in one (8.3%). All patients had the bacterium isolated from joint fluid aspirate or synovial tissue, but only one of the seven patients with blood cultures taken had simultaneous S. moniliformis bacteremia. Three patients received arthrotomy together with antibiotic treatment. Details of the antibiotic regime was lacking in one. Seven patients received intravenous penicillin G (58.3%). For the remaining four patients, one received ampicillin (our patient), one was treated with nafcillin plus gentamicin, one was given ceftriaxone, and one was treated with flucloxacillin and then vancomycin. The outcome of the disease was good: all patients were cured without any mortality or long-term complication.