A 52-year-old woman was admitted to hospital for evaluation of intermittent abdominal tenderness, dry eye, and dry mouth. The dry eye and dry mouth had been present for several years; however, she had not sought medical treatment for these symptoms. She had a history of dilated cardiomyopathy and glaucoma of the left eye. She was being treated with loop diuretics, proton pump inhibitors, and anthocyanosides for glaucoma. In the physical examination, her lower extremities were in an edematous state. Her body temperature was 36.5°C and blood pressure was normal. The results of the laboratory studies were as follows: white blood cell count, 8,600/mm3 (neutrophil 73.4%); sodium, 141 mEq/L; chloride, 108 mEq/L; blood urea nitrogen, 15.7 mg/dL; and creatinine, 0.6 mg/dL. The levels of total serum protein, serum albumin, and total cholesterol were 5.5 g/dL, 1.5 g/dL, and 257 mg/dL, respectively. Urinalysis was remarkable for proteinuria (6.3 g/day), 30–49 red blood cells per high-power field, but no other casts. Serologic investigation revealed the presence of anti-nuclear antibody (ANA; 1:80, homogeneous plus speckled pattern), rheumatoid factor (390 IU/mL), and was positive for autoantibody to the Ro (SS-A) antigen (>200 U/mL). However, serology was negative for antibodies against double-stranded DNA, La (SS-B), Sm, ribonucleoproteins, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, IgG/IgM anti-cardiolipin, and IgG β2-glycoprotein-1. The C3 levels had decreased to 38 mg/dL (normal, 90–180 mg/dL), whereas C4 and total hemolytic complement 50 levels were within normal ranges at 16 mg/dL and 33.1 U/mL, respectively (normal ranges, 10–40 and 23–46, respectively). Tests for hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C antibodies, cryoglobulins, and human immunodeficiency virus antibodies were negative.
Minor salivary gland biopsy was performed, showing diffuse lymphocytic infiltrations with a focus score of 3
. Moreover, we performed salivary scintigraphy that showed non-visualization in both salivary glands, consistent with the class 4 Schall grading system
. Therefore, she was diagnosed with Sjögren’s syndrome based on the dry eyes, dry mouth, positive ANA, anti-Ro (SS-A) antibody, salivary gland biopsy, and salivary scintigraphy, which fulfilled the 2002 American-European consensus classification criteria
.
She underwent a percutaneous renal biopsy due to nephrotic syndrome. Glomerular basement membrane thickening and mesangial matrix widening were observed by light microscopy (Figure
A). In addition, mild tubular atrophy and moderate interstitial fibrosis was noted. Weakly positive staining for IgG, IgA, IgM, and C3 on the outer surface of capillary walls was revealed by immunofluorescent staining. Diffuse subepithelial electron-dense deposit was observed by electron microscopy (Figure
B). The histopathological findings were consistent with membranous glomerulonephritis
.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) and colonoscopy were performed due to intermittent abdominal tenderness; however, we did not observe any malignancy or bowel perforation at admission except for enteritis and multiple small lymphadenopathies in the mesentery. She had sudden onset of severe abdominal pain 3 months later, and abdominal CT was performed again. Newly developed pneumoperitoneum with peritonitis accompanied by small bowel perforation was observed. An emergency operation and small bowel biopsy were performed. The specimen was 9.5 cm in axial length and had a necrotic and ulcerous (4.5 × 5 cm) lesion. On immunohistochemical examination, we found expression of CD20, CD79a, and BCL-2, but not of CD3, CD10, and BCL-6. The proliferation fraction as determined by Ki-67 was 50%–60%. The majority of tumor cells were positive for EBV by in situ hybridization. Biopsy revealed EBV-positive DLBCL (Ann Harbor classification stage III), as demonstrated in Figure
. The patient declined treatment with chemotherapy because of poor performance status, low compliance, and poverty. However, she had been receiving intermittent low-dose oral corticosteroid and hydroxychloroquine to treat her primary Sjögren’s syndrome since the diagnosis. There was improvement in proteinuria (1.79 g/day) and sicca symptoms after 1 year of follow-up. One year of follow-up positron emission tomography-CT scan showed a stable disease state for the malignant lymphoma.