We report the case of a 67-year-old woman who presented to our institute in August 2006 with a 2-month history of pain and swelling of the right hand and wrist, and a more recent onset of pain in the right shoulder. Her medical history included arterial hypertension and depression. Blood tests performed prior to hospitalization were unremarkable except for a high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 78 mm/hour. Plain radiography of the right hand showed osteoarthritis of the first carpometacarpal joint. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and acetaminophen were given without significant improvement.
On physical examination, the fingers of the right hand were flexed, the right wrist was swollen and the right shoulder was extremely painful with a limited range of motion. Routine blood tests were normal but ESR was still high (46 mm/hour). A radiograph of the right shoulder showed demineralization of the humeral head and of the scapula, and an ultrasound study of the right shoulder, wrist and hand showed a supraspinatus tendinopathy without tendon tears and swelling of radiocarpal and intercarpal joints with marked power Doppler signal. SHS was suspected and a radionuclide scintigraphy was performed . The triphasic study of the right arm revealed an increased perfusion with increased and delayed activity of bone images, suggesting RSD of the wrist.
However, the whole body study, which revealed diffuse spots of hyperfixation in the right humeral head and acromion, medial right clavicle, sternum, ribs, dorsal and lumbar spine and pelvis, was consistent with skeletal metastases. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine and pelvis confirmed the presence of multiple metastases located in the dorsal and lumbar spine, sacrum, pelvis and both femurs. The patient was treated with a single intravenous infusion of 90 mg pamidronate.
Further diagnostic studies were performed to identify the primary neoplasm. Mammography, thyroid ultrasound and lung computed tomography scan were unremarkable. Gastric endoscopy revealed an adenocarcinoma of the angular region. Despite chemotherapy, a radionuclide scan performed in November 2006 showed progression of the metastatic bone lesions. Signs and symptoms of SHS were completely resolved, but the images of the right hand were unmodified.