A 60-year-old man with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) on hemodialysis via arteriovenous (AV) fistula presented to the emergency department (ED) from home on March 18, 2020, with a chief complaint of fever, cough, shortness of breath, and diarrhea. He has a history of IgA nephropathy and a failed kidney transplant due to rejection in 2013. He lives alone at home in western Iowa and had no recent travel history or visits to any healthcare facilities except for a local dialysis center for routine dialysis.
The patient receives hemodialysis three times a week (Monday, Wednesday, and Friday) at a local dialysis center. The symptoms started on Monday, March 16, 2020, while he was at his routine dialysis when he began to feel feverish and experience chills. His temperature taken at the dialysis center was 37.8 °C. After dialysis, he developed a headache, non-productive cough, sore throat, runny nose, poor appetite with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, which progressively worsened over the next 2 days. On March 17, he started to have generalized myalgias, mild shortness of breath, and diarrhea with liquid green stool without visible blood. He missed his hemodialysis on Wednesday, March 18 and presented to the ED.
On arrival at the ED, the patient was provided a mask and placed in a private room in accordance with the ED screening protocol. He was ill-appearing with a fever of 38.6 °C. His respiratory rate was 23 per minute, and other vital signs were unremarkable. Physical examination was significant for diffuse rhonchi and bibasilar rales on auscultation. Chest X-ray showed right midlung consolidation, and patchy left lower lung opacities, concerning for multifocal pneumonia. Rapid influenza antigen test was positive for influenza A; viral subtypes were not specified. A nasopharyngeal swab specimen was sent for real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test (NEcov19 assay) at the Nebraska Medical Center Clinical Lab to rule out COVID-19 infection. He was placed on contact and airborne isolation precautions with eye protection for concerns of probable COVID-19 as per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommendations.
Lab workup was significant for elevated procalcitonin and lymphopenia . The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest demonstrated multifocal areas of consolidation and tree-in-bud opacities within multiple lobes of the lungs compatible with multifocal pneumonia, as well as small bilateral pleural effusions and extensive mediastinal and bilateral hilar adenopathy. CT abdomen and pelvis showed mildly dilated gas and fluid-filled loops of small bowel and bowel wall enhancement, reflecting possible partial distal obstruction or ileus and enteritis. Blood cultures were taken, and the patient was started on oseltamivir (30 mg, oral, once per day on Mon Wed Fri, given after hemodialysis) for influenza. He is anuric; therefore, we did not test urine streptococcal and legionella antigen. The patient was then admitted to a negative pressure room on an isolation ward while awaiting COVID-19 results.
On hospital day 2, his RT-PCR test was positive for SARS-CoV-2 E and/or N gene RNA, confirming the diagnosis of COVID-19. The local health department was notified to investigate the source of infection. The patient reported feeling extremely fatigued but was afebrile. His cough and shortness of breath improved. His primary complaint was severe liquid green diarrhea, although the Gastrointestinal (GI) pathogen panel and Clostridioides difficile (C. diff) toxin assay were negative. The repeated procalcitonin level was elevated on day 2, suggestive of potentially fivefold increased risk of severe disease of COVID-19 . The patient was continued on vancomycin and cefepime for possible superimposed bacterial pneumonia. Notably, he had multiple episodes of hypotension with systolic pressure in the high 80s (mmHg) to 90s with mean arterial pressure (MAP) in the low 60s. We administered 500 ml of lactated Ringer’s solution for volume resuscitation. However, aggressive fluid resuscitation was avoided to prevent volume overload. Oral fluids were encouraged to maintain normal volume status. For his COVID-19, as there were no proven specific therapeutic options, the treatment was mainly supportive. He was deemed not a candidate for the clinical trial with remdesivir due to his ESRD. Corticosteroids were not given at that time for concerns that they may delay viral clearance and prolong the disease course .
Hemodialysis resumed at the bedside as per the CDC guidelines on hospital day 3 . He remained afebrile, and his blood pressure improved with midodrine and albumin after the dialysis.
Since hospital day 4, the patient started to feel better with increased appetite and improvement of diarrhea, cough, and shortness of breath. Blood cultures demonstrated no bacterial growth at 5 days. With a multidisciplinary approach and optimal medical management, he continues to show clinical improvement despite his comorbidities.
To optimize the use of personal protective equipment (PPE), the patient’s dialysis schedule was changed to Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday to decrease the dialysis days during his hospitalization. His volume status was closely monitored, as inadequate oral fluid intake and diarrhea could lead to hypovolemia and delay dialysis.
The patient was discharged home on hospital day 9 based on a test-based strategy as per CDC guidelines because of his history of solid organ transplant . No outpatient dialysis precautions were recommended to the patient as he had two negative COVID-19 tests (≥24 h apart) .