An 82-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of hypertension and osteoporosis was referred to a pulmonologist for outpatient diagnostic evaluation of persistent cough and signs of atelectasis on chest X-ray. A following chest CT with intravenously administered ICM (loversol 741 mg/ml) showed atelectasis and ground-glass nodules in the upper lobe of the right lung. A pulmonary function test revealed restricted lung disease, which was deemed the cause of her pulmonary complaints. Additionally, the chest CT showed a large multinodular goitre . This warranted no further action at the time because the patient was asymptomatic and laboratory findings only showed subclinical hyperthyroidism.
Ten days after the chest CT, the patient was seen by her general practitioner. At that time she had some complaints of exertional dyspnoea, but was able to walk up to thirty minutes to do grocery shopping. Physical examination at that time revealed a heart rate of 84 bpm and blood pressure of 170/80 mmHg.
One month after chest CT the patient presented at the emergency department with complaints of fatigue, loss of appetite, dyspnoea and palpitations. She was not able to climb the stairs in her house and slept in a chair for two nights. Physical examination showed atrial fibrillation based tachycardia up to 160 bpm, a blood pressure of 160/70 mmHg, a saturation of 93 %, and no fever. Thyroid specific symptoms, such as myxoedema or tremor were not present. Blood tests revealed elevated inflammatory parameters, which in combination with a new consolidation in the right lung on chest X-ray pointed towards pneumonia. The blood tests also revealed a suppressed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and increased T4, indicating hyperthyroidism . The estimated glomerular filtration rate was 90 ml/min. Further patient history was negative for thyroid disease and additionally tested TSH-receptor antibody levels were below the limit of detection.
The patient was admitted to the geriatric ward and antibiotic treatment for pneumonia was initiated. Prior medication (enalapril, simvastatin, budesonide/formoterol inhaler and calcium carbonate/colecalciferol) was continued with exception of alendronate which was temporarily halted. An endocrinologist was consulted and thiamazole and metoprolol were administrated to treat hyperthyroidism and tachycardia. In the following days, CRP increased from 46 mg/l on admission to 207 mg/l on day three before decreasing to 27 mg/l on day five. During admission no fever was found and blood cultures were unremarkable. A cardiologist was consulted and treatment with digoxin and apixaban was started for atrial fibrillation based tachycardia. The tachycardia appeared to be therapy resistant and the patient developed peripheral oedema. Furosemide was started, the metoprolol dose was increased and eventually verapamil was started. Also non-medication interventions were applied such as fluid restriction. Despite these interventions, little to no effect was observed. The patient persistently showed oedema, tachycardia and exertional dyspnoea. Chest X-ray was performed twice after admission and showed increasing pleural effusion with signs of cardiac decompensation. Given the limited therapeutic options, echocardiography was considered as non-contributory to improved patient outcomes by the cardiologist. The patient’s condition slowly deteriorated until eventually she was found unconscious with deep hypoxemia. Resuscitation was attempted but to no avail and the patient passed away. Autopsy revealed a right lower lobe bronchopneumonia and a hypertrophic heart with recent subendocardial ischemia in the area between the left and right coronary system. Based on the area of ischemia, hypertrophy of the left ventricle and absence of coronary artery occlusions, demand ischemia was deemed the cause of death. Most likely caused by the combination of pneumonia and persistent tachycardia Fig. .