A 13-year-old female with previously diagnosed T1D, was admitted to the emergency department presenting incoercible vomiting since the previous day, oligo-anuria and deteriorating state of consciousness. The girl had been diagnosed with autoimmune T1D at the age of 9 years (no DKA at onset). Past medical history was unremarkable. Sensor-augmented pump therapy (SAP) was started, and her follow-up was characterized by suboptimal glucose control (latest HbA1c of 60 mmol/mol).
On admission, the child presented in hypovolemic shock with an altered state of consciousness (GCS 12) without evident focal neurological signs, pale skin and Kussmaul respiration. Her physical examination was unremarkable except for decreased and tachycardic distal pulses, cool extremities, prolonged capillary refill (> 2 sec). Venous blood gas analysis and lab tests showed severe DKA, hyperosmolar state, and acute kidney injury (AKI) with hyperkaliemia, confirmed at ECG analysis . Two boluses of normal saline were infused (10 mL/kg each) with improvement in vital parameters. No bicarbonates were administered. The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and DKA correction was carried out according to the most recent guidelines with progressive resolution of the DKA, hyperosmolar state, AKI, and electrolyte imbalances. A brain CT excluded cerebral edema. On arrival the patient’s pump controller showed that the patch pump had expired. Of note, the patch pump is designed to shut-off automatically after 72h, after sounding alarms to alert the user to change the pump when approaching expiration. The child later admitted to not having changed the expiring patch pump while at her grandparents’ due to her not having any replacements and in fear of her mother’s anger. When DKA resolved, the patient was transferred to the pediatrics department and her SAP was reinstated. Since admission she referred modest abdominal pain that had persisted throughout DKA treatment. No other signs or symptoms were present apart from slightly loose stools which were collected for microbiological testing. An abdominal ultrasound only showed slight thickening of the ileal wall. On day 2 since DKA resolution, Clostridium difficile toxin tested positive and oral vancomycin treatment was started. On day 4, follow-up US only confirmed signs of enterocolitis. On day 5, abdominal symptoms and signs worsened alongside onset of fever and elevation of inflammatory indices (CRP 145 mg/L, normal range <6 mg/L). Thus, abdominal ultrasound was repeated, documenting an uneven multi-chambered area of 8x3 cm with a small aerial component . Treatment with metronidazole was started and the patient was transferred to the city’s center of reference for pediatric surgery. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging revealed a large, fluid-filled pelvic abscess with air bubbles suspect for bowel perforation, with parietal contrast enhancement . Therefore, an urgent ileal resection (44 cm) was performed, and NOMI was diagnosed intraoperatively. Antibiotic treatment with piperacillin-tazobactam and gentamicin was administered for 7 days, and treatment with metronidazole and vancomycin was continued for 10 days. The patient was discharged after 3 weeks of transition from parenteral to enteral feeding. Pre-discharge abdominal ultrasound resulted normal without signs of inflammation or free abdominal fluid.