A 48-year-old female, with height of 160 cm and weight of 55 kg, was found to have a left lower lobe nodule in the lung and was scheduled for thoracoscopic wedge resection of the left lower lobe. The anesthesia was induced with 0.04 mg/kg of midazolam, 0.6 μg/kg of sufentanil, 2 mg/kg of propofol and 0.6 mg/kg of rocuronium. Then, a left 35 Fr endobronchial tube (Covidien llc, USA) was successfully intubated at a depth of 28 cm to incisors. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was used to confirm that there was no problem with the location of the tube after the posture of the patient was changed to the right lateral decubitus position. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane 1.5 vol%, oxygen 2 L/min, remifentanil 250 mcg/hr., 4 mg/kg/h of propofol. The intraoperative pathological diagnosis of the excised mass was invasive adenocarcinoma. Subsequently, the patient underwent VATS combined with left lower lobectomy. The operation time was 1.5 h and the patient was transferred to post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) for decannulation. The patient recovered consciousness from anesthesia after 30 min, exhibiting effective spontaneous ventilation and meeting extubation criteria. Unpredictably, the tracheal tube seemed to be mechanically constrained and we were unable to withdraw the endotracheal tube (ETT). We had to administer propofol and remifentanil intravenously for sedation and checked the airway with a fiberoptic bronchoscope, which revealed that the surgical suture of the bronchial membrane was inserted into the distal end of the left branch of the tracheal tube . Thereafter, we held detailed consultations with respiratory physicians and thoracic surgeons. The thoracic surgeon assured that breaking the suture will not cause adverse effects on the patient. It took only 1 s for the respiratory doctor to burn the sutures using an argon electrode (ERBE 20132–177) with the aid of fiberoptic bronchoscope. The mode of the argon electrode was strong electrocoagulation and the power was 35 W. Finally, the bronchial tube was pulled out smoothly and the patient was safely sent back to the ward after CT review, which showed no abnormalities. On the 1, 3, and 7 days after the operation, we followed-up the patient, and there were no related complications such as bronchial leak or bronchial rupture.