14-year-old female patient with CF of severe phenotype, heterozygous for the PheF508del mutation (Phe508del/1078delT, variants of classes II and I respectively), with pulmonary compromise and pancreatic insufficiency. She was diagnosed at 3 months of age, by the association of respiratory symptoms, persistent diarrhea and poor weight gain, by the electrolyte test in sweat, with a chloride of 88 meq/l (normal value < 30 meq/l). The pancreatic failure led to chronic malnutrition very early, so at 7 months of age a gastrostomy was installed that has been maintained until today.

She presented with numerous endobronchial infections requiring oral and intravenous antibiotic treatment, and was hospitalised 15 times for periods of 2 weeks to 85 days. Most of these infections were due to multi-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, which became chronic, and intermittent Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which was found twice.

At 12 years of age, a glucose tolerance test confirmed the diagnosis of CF-related diabetes mellitus as a complication of her pancreatic damage.

His respiratory treatment consisted of respiratory kinesiotherapy three times a day, preceded by nebulization of a-dornase once a day and 7% hypertonic NaCl solution twice a day. The nutritional and digestive treatment included pancreatic enzymes (Zenpep®) before each feeding, vitamins A, D, E, K, lansoprazole, hyper-caloric feeding by mouth and gastrostomy. The radiological bone density measured by densitometry was within the low normal range and diabetes was maintained with ultra-rapid insulin treatment.

Pulmonary damage was moderate to severe, manifested in pulmonary function with FEV1 at 66% of predicted, and thoracic axial tomography that showed diffuse, cylindrical and saccular bronchiectasis in all pulmonary segments, fibrosis and diffuse mucous impaction. The pulmonary impairment intensified, the patient presented persistent bronchorrhea and progressive fall of FEV1. Therefore, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed at the level of the LSD, whose culture only showed Staphylococcus aureus multisensible, endobronchial infection by other bacterial agents was discarded, as well as non-tuberculous bacilli and fungi. Despite the management with antibiotics, kinesiological support, adequate nutrition, good control of diabetes, α-dornase and hypertonic serum, pulmonary function did not improve.

The patient’s parents opted to initiate treatment with CFTR modulators. Advised by our multidisciplinary team, the parents purchased tri-associated therapy with the ETI combination (Trikafta®) from the United States, which they initiated without discontinuing their background treatment. The drug was administered in two daily doses, one morning dose of 2 fixed-dose tablets of Elexacaftor 100 milligrams, Tezacaftor 50 milligrams, and Ivacaftor 75 milligrams, and another evening dose twelve hours later of 1 tablet of Ivacaftor 150 milligrams. The tablets were administered with a high-fat diet and pancreatic enzymes to maximize their efficacy.

The response to the ETI tritherapy was decided to be monitored by measuring the quality of life, pulmonary function and nutritional status. This was done in five clinical evaluations: the day of the start of the therapy, which we called day 0 or baseline, then 45, 90, 180 and 365 days from the start of the therapy. The evaluations were performed with informed consent from the parents and the agreement of the patient.

The Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire Revised (CFQ-R 14+) was administered in Spanish in a self-administered, validated, paper version for adolescents over 14 years of age and adults.13 The survey was completed by the patient in all five assessments without problems and took approximately 15 minutes per assessment.


Pulmonary function was measured by spirometry using a Vyaire Vyntus v-176430 spirometer in accordance with international standards. In spirometry, forced vital capacity in liters and percent predicted (CVF L, CVF%), forced expiratory volume in one second in liters and percent predicted (VEF1 L, VEF1%), and flow between 25% and 75% of CVF in liters and percent predicted (FEF25-75 L, FEF 25%-75%) were measured using Quanjer's multi-ethnic predictive values. The patient was able to perform baseline spirometry without difficulty in all five assessments. The three pulmonary function parameters tested showed percent improvements from predicted values from the second visit. The evolution of CVF% was 74% (baseline), 95% (45 days), 95% (90 days), 94% (180 days) and 96% (365 days). The evolution of VEF1% was 69% (baseline), 89% (45 days), 96% (90 days), 95% (180 days) and 96% (365 days). The evolution of FEF 25%-75% was 53% (baseline), 76% (45 days), 90% (90 days), 80 (180 days) and 90% (365 days).

The patient was weighed and measured on a digital scale with a measuring rod, SECA model 769. The nutritional status was calculated by measuring the percentile of BMI (pBMI) in each evaluation, according to the WHO curves. From the initial evaluation to the completion of the 12-month follow-up, the patient gained 1.8 kg and increased her pBMI by 2.8.

During the follow-up period, the patient did not have exacerbations, nor did she require hospitalization or unscheduled medical consultations. She continued with her usual therapy plus the ETI tritherapy for 12 months. Adherence to the treatment was adequate and no adverse effects related to the tritherapy were detected. For this, the liver function was monitored periodically and remained normal and abdominal ultrasound was performed to rule out liver involvement. During the follow-up period, no dermatological manifestations or symptoms suggestive of visual alterations were found, which was also corroborated with an ophthalmological evaluation before starting the tritherapy and once the follow-up was completed.
