A 78-year-old woman with an unremarkable past medical history presented to the clinic with symptoms of progressively worsening myelopathy including gait dysfunction and impairment of upper extremity fine motor skills. Noncontrast MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated multilevel degenerative disease and a dorsal intradural extramedullary lesion extending from C3-C6.
The patient underwent an elective posterior C3-7 decompression, C3-T1 instrumented fusion, and resection of intradural tumor. Final pathology was psammomatous meningioma. The patient tolerated the procedure well and postoperatively was transferred to the neurological ICU for close monitoring.
The patient was initially discharged from the hospital to an inpatient rehabilitation facility on POD 6. At the time of discharge, she was awake, oriented, and followed commands in all extremities with some mild weakness in the right deltoid and biceps, graded 4/5; the remaining muscle groups were 5/5. On POD 10, the patient developed progressive lethargy and was readmitted to the hospital for further evaluation. Upon readmission, she opened her eyes to verbal command, had incomprehensible speech, and would move all extremities spontaneously with strength 3/5 but did not follow commands. She was afebrile with WBC = 6.9 and no metabolic abnormalities. Given her recent intradural surgery, a lumbar puncture was performed. CSF cytology demonstrated 397 WBC, 20 RBC, 291 protein, and 40 glucose. CSF PCR was positive for HSV 1. Interestingly, intracranial imaging did not demonstrate the typical findings associated with herpes encephalitis . She was initially placed on broad spectrum antibiotics in addition to antiviral therapy. She was also connected to continuous EEG monitoring, found to be in status epilepticus, and required escalating therapy to the point of intubation with midazolam infusion. Seizure control was ultimately achieved, and she was maintained on levetiracetam 1500 mg q12H for 30 days and lacosamide 200 mg q12H for 7 days. The remainder of her infectious work-up was unremarkable, allowing her to be narrowed to only a 21-day course of IV acyclovir 500 mg q12H. Due to acute respiratory failure from encephalopathy, she underwent tracheostomy and PEG placement (POD 29); she underwent repeat MRI approximately 2 weeks after HSV diagnosis which still lacked typical findings of HSV . However, she continued to improve clinically; at the time of discharge, she would open her eyes spontaneously and followed simple commands in all extremities. Approximately 3 months out from being diagnosed with HSV encephalitis, she was oriented twice and followed commands in all 4 extremities with 5/5 strength in the bilateral upper and 3/5 in the bilateral lower extremities.
At a three-month follow-up, the patient presented no new symptoms. The PEG was still in place and EEG revealed excessive theta waves during wakefulness and bilateral midtemporal delta slowing (left more prevalent than right). Though the patient had dysarthria and poor attention/processing, she followed commands in all 4 extremities consistent with her last evaluation. Vimpat 200 BID and 1500 mg of Keppra were prescribed for ongoing clonus spasticity. All other medications were continued as prescribed. In the following month, the patient had a normal LOC, very slight dysarthria, and improved situational awareness. No recent seizures had occurred. Lacosamide was reduced to 150 mg every 12 hours and Vimpat was reduced to 150 BID. Upon final examination, she followed commands in all 4 extremities with 5/5 strength in the bilateral upper and 4-/5 in the bilateral lower extremities.