A 55-year-old male presented to the Respiratory Department in our hospital because of mild morning hemoptysis for about five weeks, having undergone futile antibiotic therapy administered at his local hospital for two weeks before admission to our institution. Symptoms of hemoptysis were alleviated with venous hemostatic drugs in our Respiratory Department. He did not complain of fever or night sweats but presented occasional palpitations. Additionally, he has suffered from hypertension for 10 years and diabetes II for two years, respectively. A physical examination was undertaken at the time of admission, which revealed a blood pressure of 163/95 mmHg, a heart rate of 100 beats per minute, and his auscultation bilateral respiratory murmur are normal. No abnormal heart sound was detected. Laboratory investigations implied WBC, neutrophils count, and procalcitonin concentration were normal. Remarkably, D-dimer (18.46 mg/L) and fibrinogen degradation products (28.7 mg/L) were both elevated despite normal function of blood coagulation. An electrocardiogram presented sinus tachycardia (103 bpm) and pseudo left-axis deviation of -82° . Chest CT exhibited multiple parenchymal nodules in lungs surrounded by ground-glass opacity , and a mass (58 mm × 41 mm) located at the right atrium with a clear boundary . Echocardiography indicated that the mass arose from the free wall of the right atrium , with uneven echoes and an anechoic area inside it , suggestive of intra-neoplastic necrosis. Left ventricle systolic function was normal (66% of ejection fraction value).
Use of a fiberoptic bronchoscope indicated normal bronchial mucosa after removing the blood adhering to the bronchial mucosa, and the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid presented a normal cytology with no evidence of infection, consistent with laboratory tests. 18F-FDG PET/CT was conducted and exhibited an increase in FDG uptake within the atrial lesion, lung nodules, and pericardial nodule. Thus, a putative diagnosis was established that multiple hematogenous metastases in lung and pericardial metastases were secondary to the primary right atrial neoplasm. Thus, a pathological diagnosis is urgent.
A percutaneous biopsy from the left lung was performed and indicated mild chronic inflammation of the lung, accompanied by proliferation of fibroblastic tissues and alveolar epithelium cells, and by a few hemosiderin in the alveoli. Urgent wedge resections for biopsy were conducted from the right lung. The gross pathology examination showed many bleeding protuberances on the lung surface , with diameters of about 5 mm to 10 mm. The final pathologic diagnosis was angiosarcoma with H–E staining and immunohistochemistry based on paraffin section (CD31+ , CD34+ , ERG + , CK−, EMA−, CgA−, CAMTA-1−, TFE-3−). Thus, we confirmed the diagnosis that metastatic intrapulmonary hemorrhagic foci were secondary to a right atrial angiosarcoma. The patient died of cardiorespiratory failure at one month postoperatively before chemotherapy and radiotherapy. To support an increase in the accuracy and transparency, we reported this case according to the 2013 CARE Checklist of BMC Surgery .