A 77-year-old woman presented to the hospital with progressive swelling in the right hemiabdomen, a loss of appetite, and a weight loss of 8 kg in a period of 5 months. She was a former agricultural worker (including undocumented pesticide handling) and had no significant medical history, eight natural births, no alcohol or tobacco abuse, and no history of signs and symptoms of cholelithiasis. At the clinical examination, skin pallor and a firm, tender, slightly mobile lump in the right hypochondrium and the right iliac fossa, without signs of ascites, were detected.
The abdominal ultrasound revealed a solid mass occupying the entire right hemi-abdomen, though it could not provide details about the origin or the relationships with neighboring structures, due to the large size and the inhomogeneous character of the tumor.
MRI highlighted an abdominal tumor located in the right hypochondrium and right abdominal flank with liver invasion (segment V). At the lower pole, the tumor wall was discontinuous. Intraperitoneal tumor extension was detected over a length of approximately 25 mm, with the invasion of the small bowel and omentum at this level. The tumor had a mixed appearance: solid-wall, gadolinophilic, with a maximum thickness of 35 mm and an inhomogeneous central liquid portion. Multiple stones, some of them with a diameter of 18 mm, were visible in the lower part of the tumor, but most agglutinated in the upper part, with dimensions varying between 5 and 30 mm. There were no lymph nodes and no metastasis. The common bile duct appeared with a normal caliber, alithiasic, and pushed antero-superior by the tumor mass, with no sign of invasion. This imaging result is characteristic of primitive gallbladder cancer . A cT3N0M0 stage was established under the limitations of the imaging evaluation difficulties regarding the large volume of the tumor, which made it hard to evaluate its relationships with the neighboring structures. CEA and CA 19.9 levels were within normal ranges.
After the median laparotomy, a giant tumor (25/17 cm) occupying the entire right abdominal flank from the subhepatic region to the right iliac fossa was identified, which included the gallbladder, segment V of the liver, mesocolon, omentum, and a jejunal loop invasion, with numerous inflammatory adhesions with the neighboring structures . A cholecystectomy was performed with liver wedge resection, enterectomy, the partial resection of the mesocolon and omentum, and loco-regional lymphadenectomy. The complete resection of the tumor was performed en bloc with the abovementioned structures.
The postoperative evolution progressed without incident, with discharge on the 7th postoperative day.
The microscopic description was suggestive of biliary-type intracholecystic papillary–tubular neoplasm, with high-grade dysplasia/carcinoma in situ and without neoplastic invasion in neighboring structures, pT2aN0Mo.
The oncological (multidisciplinary) re-evaluation established an R0-type excision. Adjuvant treatment remained as a reserve (such as FOLFOX or FOLFIRI) in the case of loco-regional relapse or the appearance of metastases. Only clinical and paraclinical monitoring was decided.
The patient is still alive two and a half years later, with no signs of local recurrence or metastases.
The case depicted in exhibited a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with a poorly cohesive cell pattern (B), associated with a pancreatobiliary-type ICPN with high-grade dysplasia (C), being diffusely positive for specific lineage markers such as CK7 and MUC1 and expressing focal MUC5AC and MUC6.