45-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension and a surgical history of a video-laparoscopic cholecystectomy 6 years ago. She was admitted to our department due to a 3-month evolution of a condition characterised by digestive intolerance associated with a 10 kg weight loss. The laboratory presented a leukocytosis (GB: 25170/uL) as the only relevant data. A tumour marker assay (CEA and CA19-9) was performed, which was normal. A tomography of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was performed with intravenous contrast, where a relevant finding was observed at the gastrointestinal level, gastric distension with thickening of the mucosa with a sclerosing appearance at the level of the pyloric region. It was completed with a high-definition upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, which detected a mucous lesion that was raised, totally obstructive, friable, and indurated, from which multiple biopsies were taken. The result of the pathological anatomy reported a mucous duodenal infiltrated by carcinoma with a squamous differentiation. Techniques of immunohistochemistry (IHC) were performed, which interpreted the diagnosis as a poorly differentiated pavement carcinoma, and it was not possible to define the primary site of origin, since all pavement carcinomas have a similar immunophenotype, regardless of their anatomical origin. As a complementary method, a positron emission tomography (PET-CT) was requested, which reported a solid hypermetabolic lesion in the topography of the second portion of the duodenum, in close relationship, without a cleavage plane, with the head of the pancreas, 31 x 32 mm in diameter, and presented a SUVmax of 17.7. The lesion caused a supra-stenotic dilation of the digestive tract.  The patient was evaluated by specialists in gynaecology, head and neck surgery and thoracic surgery, seeking, in the first instance, to ensure that the pancreatic tumour was not a metastasis of another origin. Based on the findings, a surgical procedure was defined and a duodenopancreatectomy was performed. The pathological anatomy reported a poorly differentiated, infiltrating carcinoma of pancreatic origin that compromised the duodenum, with a maximum tumour size of 4 cm. A neoplastic proliferation with dyskeratic areas and central necrosis was observed in the pancreatic stroma, data compatible with neoplastic squamous cells. To confirm the cell line, an IHC of the surgical piece was requested, which reported the presence of AE1/AE3, cytokeratin 5 and P 63 positive, compatible with a primary pancreatic squamous carcinoma. The patient evolved without complications from her surgery. She was presented to an interdisciplinary oncological committee, where the performance of adjuvant treatment with CAPOX (capecitabine and oxaliplatin) was defined. Currently, 24 months after the postoperative, she is free of disease with periodic checks. The patient signed the corresponding informed consent and the ethics committee was informed for the publication of the case.
