A 60-year-old man was referred to our hospital with suspected pancreatic tail cancer based on a high carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) concentration found during a medical checkup. He was a past smoker (Brinkman Index, 800) and drinker (20 g/day of ethanol for 20 years). He had no remarkable past illnesses, including diabetes, and no familial history of pancreatic cancer. His body mass index was 20.8 kg/m2. The patient had no weight loss events. Dynamic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (dCECT) at our hospital revealed a hypovascular lesion in the pancreatic tail . Adenocarcinoma was confirmed using endoscopic ultrasonographic fine-needle aspiration. His CA19-9 concentration at our hospital was 286.8 U/mL, and his HbA1c concentration was 5.6%. dCECT revealed that the tumor was anatomically resectable. No synchronous liver metastasis was identified by gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Positron emission tomography revealed a high standardized uptake value (maximum 6.6; Fig. b). Thus, the patient underwent distal pancreatectomy and regional lymph node dissection in accordance with radical antegrade modular pancreatosplenectomy . In this surgery, the pancreatic parenchyma was cut just above the superior mesenteric vein using tri-stapler technology. The operative time was 251 min, and extra blood loss was 720 mL. Although he developed a clinically relevant postoperative pancreatic fistula, it improved without any invasive intervention, and he was discharged on postoperative day 40. Pathological examination revealed a 36 × 18 × 17-mm moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. No lymph node metastasis was identified (0/27). No microscopic lymphatic invasion was observed, but microscopic venous invasion was observed. The cancer slightly invaded the extrapancreatic connective tissue. The pancreatic cut and dissected margins were negative. Postoperative staging was stage IB (T2N0M0) according to the Union for International Cancer Control 8th edition. Adjuvant S-1 chemotherapy (120 mg/body/day) was administered for 6 months after surgery.
Two years after the initial pancreatectomy, a solitary hypovascular lesion was identified in liver segment 4 on follow-up dCECT . This was considered liver metastasis from pancreatic cancer in conjunction with the MRI results. The CA19-9 concentration was slightly elevated at 44.5 U/mL. However, the tumor did not show a significant standardized uptake value on positron emission tomography . Gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 + nab-paclitaxel 125 mg/m2 was administered on day 1, 8, and 15 every 4 weeks for the liver metastasis. Dexamethasone (6.6 mg) was administered as a premedication. After 14 cycles of gemcitabine/nab-paclitaxel, the CA19-9 level, which had fallen to the normal range, became elevated again (660.7 U/mL) and the tumor had increased in size (from 10 to 15 mm in diameter); therefore, the chemotherapy was converted to a modified FOLFIRINOX regimen (5-fluorouracil 2400 mg/m2, levoleucovorin 200 mg/m2, oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2, and irinotecan 150 mg/m2) as second-line therapy, which was administered triweekly. Steroid use as a premedication remained unchanged (6.6 mg dexamethasone). However, the CA19-9 concentration further increased to 3130.0 U/mL after nine cycles of FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy. The tumor diameter increased to 25 mm; however, no further metastases developed. The MRI findings before and after chemotherapy are summarized in Fig. e, f. The number of tumors did not change (i.e., the patient did not develop more than one tumor), the tumor was resectable, chemotherapy was minimally effective, and the patient’s general status was well maintained; therefore, we decided to perform surgical resection at this time after a multidisciplinary team conference. Left hepatectomy and cholecystectomy were also performed. Preoperative three-dimensional simulation and intraoperative photographs are shown in Fig. . The operation time was 239 min and the blood loss was 480 mL. Pathological examination revealed that the tumor was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma compatible with metastasis from pancreatic cancer . On hematoxylin and eosin staining, there was little heterogeneity between the primary and metastatic lesions. No microscopic vessel invasion (portal, venous, arterial, or bile) was found. The surgical margins were negative. Adjuvant therapy was not administered after the second surgery. The patient was alive with no recurrence 2 years after hepatectomy.
At the time of diagnosis of liver metastasis, the HbA1c level was elevated to 7.2%. Thereafter, this value increased rapidly; 6 months later, it increased to 10.0%, and insulin therapy was initiated. The serum C-peptide concentration was 3.65 ng/mL at that time. Although the HbA1c concentration decreased after insulin induction, it increased again in parallel with the increase in CA19-9 concentration. Finally, 15 units of regular insulin and 18 units of long-acting insulin were administered for preoperative glycemic control. After curative hepatectomy, the patient’s glycemic control improved immediately. The patient started oral intake and insulin injection at the same amount as before on postoperative day 2. Blood glucose levels fluctuated between 100 and 150 mg/dL. Therefore, the dose of insulin was reduced. At discharge, regular insulin was terminated. Furthermore, insulin therapy was completely terminated 2 months after the surgery. The clinical course of the patient is summarized in Fig. .