A 70-year-old patient presented in December 2007 for a positive prostate biopsy. Due to the finding of prostate adenocarcinoma with GS 2 + 3 in sextant biopsy and PSA 5 ng/mL, the initial finding was concluded as low-risk prostate cancer. Variants of the next procedure were discussed with the patient – radical prostatectomy, radiotherapy with curative intent, and active surveillance. From the options offered, the patient chose radical prostatectomy, which was performed laparoscopically in January 2008. Subsequently, the patient was followed up. Over a period of 6 months, PSA levels gradually progressed from 0.08 to 0.22 ng/mL. With regard to the findings, postoperative radiotherapy to the pelvis and prostate bed was indicated. A total dose of 60.0 Gy was applied until November 2008. Grade 2 proctitis and grade 1 cystitis developed as adverse events. After the end of radiotherapy, the PSA level dropped to 0.02 ng/mL. Subsequently, the patient was followed up by the urologist. Due to PSA progression to 0.24 ng/mL in August 2012, luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist therapy was started. Administration of LHRH was started in August 2012. Despite continuous LHRH administration and castrating testosterone levels, biochemical progression occurred in May 2017 – three subsequent PSA rises were present at least 1 week apart, while the final PSA level was above >2 ng/mL. The follow-up examination included choline PET/CT with findings of local recurrence at the site of prostatectomy and lymphadenopathy in the pelvis and left groin. The finding was concluded as mCRPC. With respect to asymptomatic findings and good condition of the patient with ECOG 1 performance status, treatment with enzalutamide was started. Already after 3 months of treatment with enzalutamide at the standard dosage of 160 mg/day, a significant decrease in PSA from 2.23 to 0.079 ng/mL was observed. The control choline PET/CT showed regression of pathological accumulation at the post-prostatectomy site and reduction of pathological nodules in the small pelvis and left groin. Due to the effect of therapy and good tolerance, the established treatment with enzalutamide was continued. PSA levels continued to decline to 0.008 ng/mL in December 2018. According to control choline PET/CT, a complete response was confirmed. Despite the patient’s advanced age, enzalutamide therapy was without adverse effects. With the help of a general practitioner, we regularly monitored risk factors for coronary heart disease and bone metabolism. Other control PSA levels showed a stationary level below 0.008 ng/mL, the last value in June 2023. Duration of complete response also repeatedly confirmed on follow-up choline PET/CT scans, the last one in November 2022. Therefore, enzalutamide therapy was continued until the present time.