A 52-year-old woman referred to our clinic with the complaint of gait disturbance and rigidity and muscle spasm of lower limbs since last year. Her muscle stiffness began from the distal lower extremity and progressed to proximal and ultimately became so severe that she had difficulty walking and climbing stairs and eventually became wheelchair bound. She said that it seemed stress and fatigue worsened her symptoms.
The patient had experienced various tests in the different clinics including rheumatology, orthopedy, and psychiatry with varied diagnosis and finally diagnosed of conversion and started taking antidepressants. Her medical history was significant for Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and hypertension. Her family history and review of systems were noncontributory. Her medications included sertraline 50mg, levothyroxine 25mcg, atenolol 100 mg once a day and pregabalin 75 twice daily.
On physical examination, there was no malaise, fever, lymphadenopathy and organomegaly. In the neurological examination of the lower limbs, movement in all direction was limited and rigidity in distal and proximal muscles was detected. Deep tendon reflexes were normal in the upper and lower extremities and plantar response was bilateral flexor.
In laboratory examinations, including creatine kinase, complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C- reactive protein and rheumatoid factor level were normal. The thyroid function tests, antithyroglobulin and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibody also were normal. Her anti-TPOAb level was 75 IU (normal value: 0–34 IU). Serum anti-GAD level was 72(normal value < 1) and the patient’s tumor markers and paraneoplastic tests were normal.
In electromyography (EMG) continuous motor unit discharge and simultaneous co-contraction were observed in lower extremities. Bilateral mammography, abdominopelvic and chest CT for occult cancer was normal. IVIG was administered (100gr, 2gr/kg/5 days) for the patient with significant improvement observed from the admission period and 2 months later in the follow-up visit.