A 54-year-old Asian male patient with a history of hypertension, pancreatic cysts, colonic tubular adenomas, and family history of colonic polyps presented for evaluation of a large peri-splenic and pancreatic mass that was discovered incidentally on endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). The patient had negative genetic testing for MUTYH-associated polyposis and familial adenomatous polyposis. The patient had experienced 30 pounds of weight loss over the past year, but he reported this was due to intentional efforts to lose weight. He was otherwise asymptomatic without abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, hematochezia, melena, or jaundice.
The patient’s abdominal physical examination was unremarkable without palpable mass. Laboratory examination revealed mild anemia with a hemoglobin of 11.7 g/dL (normal < 13.5 g/dL). Carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19–9 was 138 U/mL (normal < 35 U/mL), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 2.4 ng/mL (normal < 3.0 ng/mL). Repeat EUS completed 2 months after initial EUS revealed a 12 cm, isoechoic to hyperechoic, heterogenous, cystic splenic mass. There was no abscess, mucinous, or solid component. Fine-needle aspiration of the cyst revealed serosanguinous, non-mucinous (negative string sign), and non-purulent material. The fluid cultures including an acid-fast bacilli culture were negative. The fluid CEA level was 2.6 ng/mL (normal 0.0—3.8 ng/mL).
Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a large, heterogeneous, hypodense mass involving the pancreatic tail and spleen . Abdominal MRI showed a large mass with heterogenous intermediate T2-signal , heterogenous restricted diffusion , and heterogenous peripheral enhancement on T1 fat sat post-contrast imaging involving the pancreatic tail and spleen. Overall findings demonstrate a relatively circumscribed, large mass with solid and fluid components and peripheral solid enhancement suggestive of high cellularity and central necrosis, invading the splenic parenchyma. No lymphadenopathy was noted.
An en-bloc open distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, left nephrectomy, left adrenalectomy, partial gastrectomy, and diaphragm resection were performed to remove the mass. The mass grossly involved both the distal pancreas and spleen but not the left adrenal gland, left kidney, or stomach. Gross inspection revealed a 11.0 × 8.1 × 7.0 cm tan-yellow to red-brown tumor that extended from the pancreas to the spleen and superior aspect of the left kidney . Further sectioning revealed hemorrhagic and necrotic-appearing cut surfaces with cystic spaces. Microscopically, multinucleated OGCs were present with areas of traditional adenocarcinomatous morphology . On immunohistochemistry, the OGCs were positive for CD68 and negative for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) and CDX2 . The adenocarcinoma component was positive for AE1/AE3, CDX2, and INI-1 . The final diagnosis was UCPOGC of the pancreatic tail with direct tumor extension into the spleen.
The patient had no evidence of recurrent disease on six-week post-op CT, and he was started on six months of adjuvant modified FOLFIRINOX (mFFX) at nine weeks post-op. Unfortunately, on repeat CT scan 20 weeks post-op, a 1.2 cm right hepatic lobe liver lesion was discovered, and the biopsy was consistent with metastasis from the primary pancreatic UCPOGC. The mFFX was stopped and the patient was started on gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel. The patient completed two cycles of gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel before unfortunately expiring 11 months post-op.