A 48-years old Asian female was referred to our hospital with a recent history of weakness, myalgia and arthralgia. She also complained of anorexia with 3 kg weight loss. She had no past medical history and was free of any medication on admission. At presentation, blood pressure was 180/80 mmHg, heart rate was 91/min, temperature was normal. Heart and lung auscultation, as well as abdominal examination, were normal. She had no skin involvement nor lymphadenopathy or synovitis.
Biology showed acute kidney injury with serum creatinine at 209 μmol/L. White blood cell count (4.8 G/L) and platelet count (269 G/L) were normal, but anemia with hemoglobin at 7.8 g/dL was present. C-reactive protein was slightly increased (14 mg/dL). Urinalysis revealed glomerular proteinuria (proteinuria to creatinine ratio (P/C) 3.6 g/g) and microscopic hematuria. Kidney ultrasound examination showed normal sized kidneys and excluded obstruction. Thus, we concluded to acute glomerular syndrome and performed immunological laboratory tests. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) (1/2560), as well as anti-dsDNA (292 UI/mL), anti-SSA and anti-SSB antibodies were detected. Type 3 cryoglobulinemia and complement consumption (decreased C3, C4 and CH50) were also present. Search for lupus anticoagulant, IgG anti-cardiolipin and anti-beta-2GP1 antibodies was negative. Finally, pANCA were detected at 1/2000 titer using IIF. ELISA showed the concomitant presence of MPO, PR3 and lactoferrine ANCAs with a strong positivity for MPO and lactoferrine ANCAs and a low positivity for PR3 ANCAs. ANCA detection using multiplex technology also detected MPO ANCA at high level, and low PR3 ANCA level.
LN was first considered leading us to perform a kidney biopsy. On optical examination, extra-capillary circumferential cellular or fibro-cellular crescents were observed in 10 of 16 glomeruli. Segmental endocapillary proliferation was absent to very modest, without any lesions of capillary necrosis . Immunofluorescence analysis showed strong and diffuse mesangial and parietal C1q staining with a granular deposition pattern, while IgG, IgA, IgM, and C3 deposits were quite limited, of mesangial topography and only segmental .
Following biopsy, an immunosuppressive treatment was initiated with an association of steroids, hydoxychloroquine and pulse intravenous cyclophosphamide (CYC, 500 mg every two weeks) according to the Euro-Lupus protocol trial . Under this regimen, a progressive improvement of both her general condition and kidney function was observed. At month 3 from treatment initiation (after the 6th CYC injection), serum creatinine was 116 μmol/L and P/C ratio decreased to 0.50 g/g. Antinuclear antibodies decreased to 1/200, anti-dsDNA antibodies became undetectable, and complement returned within normal range. ANCAs were still detectable although at lower titer using IIF (1/200), with only MPO ANCAs remaining slightly positives at ELISA and multiplex assays.
At that time, we decided to perform a systematic kidney biopsy to analyze histological response to treatment. On optical examination, only fibrotic crescents were observed in 9/14 glomeruli, none of them being cellular of fibro-cellular. Global lesions of endocapillary proliferation were observed in most glomeruli, without lesions of capillary necrosis . Immunofluorescence analysis showed diffuse mesangial and parietal C1q staining at a lower intensity as compared to the diagnostic biopsy. IgG, IgA, IgM, and C3 deposits remained limited, in their pattern and intensity .
After the biopsy results, we decided to continue CYC. However, after the 8th CYC injection, the patient developed toxidermia which we attributed to CYC. At that time, we decided to start mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) at 1.5 g/day.
One year after initial admission and under MMF for 12 months, she has no clinical manifestation of SLE and did not relapse nephritis. Renal function returned to near normal values (serum creatinine of 90 μmol/L, MDRD eGFR 60 mL/min/1.73m2). ANCA detection was negative on IIF evaluation and ELISA, with anti-MPO being still detectable at very low level using multiplex assay. ANA were stable at 1/200, complement was in normal range and search for cryoglobulin was negative.