We reported a case of a 46 years old woman admitted to our hospital because of prolonged recurrent vomiting in a severe state of malnutrition. A year before she had been submitted to duodenopancreatectomy because of a stenotic duodenal adenocarcinoma. Immediately, after hospital admission she underwent to a new explorative laparotomy because of worsening symptoms. In this second abdominal surgery she underwent to gastric enteric anastomosis because of sub-occlusion.
Her ability to absorb substances was already compromised by the first operation. During the last year she did not received an adequate nutrition, moreover she had no vitamins supplement in her diet. After the second surgery she was fed by total parenteral nutrition with glucose solutions, amino-acids solutions and vitamins complex (Cernevit – Baxter@ spa, Roma, Italy) commonly administered to post-surgical patients containing 3,51 mg of thiamine.
After five days from the gastric enteric anastomosis, she developed a Pseudomonas Aeruginosa’s severe sepsis with acute renal failure; so, she was transferred to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU). At ICU admission, she was agitated but she still had a normal Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS 15/15). Brain Computed Tomography (CT) scan control was negative and altered neurological status of the patient was imputed to the severe sepsis. Her blood tests showed leucopenia (1680/ml) and thrombocytopenia (34000/μl).
We performed an electroencephalogram (EEG) control that evidenced slow diffused anomalies, without paroxysms or focal signs. During the night she was sedated with benzodiazepines and intubated because of respiratory worsening.
The following day, at the neurological examination she was drowsy, she had no response to pain stimuli, no oculocephalic reflex, limbs areflexia and negative Babinski reflex. A new EEG control pointed out a diffused cerebral suffering state. Simultaneously her renal and liver function got worse due to the evolution of the septic state. Her feeding was still composed by glucose solutions, vitamins (Cernevit – Baxter@ spa, Roma, Italy) and amino acid intravenously administered. Then, we decided to perform a new brain CT scan with contrast in order to diagnose the cause of the worsening. This CT scan was performed at day 7 after surgery. The report of the CT scan showed a faded hyperdensity of the mammillary bodies and symmetrical hemorrhagic lesions in the quadrigeminal plate . The report suggested the need of a further diagnostic study with MRI because of the suspicion of a possible metabolic encephalopathy compatible with WE complicated by petechial hemorrhages.After the CT scan, we introduced thiamine 100 mg intravenously once a day, as supplement to the usual feeding. At the following neurological examination her GCS was 7/15, she did not open her eyes, did not emit verbal responses and localized with the right arm to painful stimuli. So 2 days later, we performed a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The MRI confirmed the lesions described in the CT scan and also added some elements compatible with WE: hyperintensity lesions in T-2 weighted images in the hypothalamus, medial thalamus, periaqueductal grey matter, anatomical regions of the mammillary bodies and superior cerebellar peduncles. , Mammillary bodies and optic tracts were difficult to assess due to a sub acute blood clot occupying the lower anterior portion of the third ventricle. The study was concluded with the MRI angiography to exclude a malformation of the vessels that had been able to generate the bleeding. Anyway, MRI angiography 3D-TOF was negative for vascular malformations. All these radiological findings were consistent with the diagnosis of WE. In the meantime, patients developed septic shock due to multi-resistant drug Enterococcus Faecium with severe low platelets count needing a mean of 20 Units of platelets transfused per day to maintain a serum level greater than 30000/μl.
No neurosurgical indications were given for the hemorrhagic brain lesions. So, we increased thiamine dosage up to 250 mg intravenously three times per day. This therapy was prolonged for one week, and after 4 days of high-dose thiamine supplementation neurological status of the patient had a significant improvement despite severe septic shock, she was able to open her eyes spontaneously and she performed simple commands.
Nevertheless, septic shock worsened and thrombocytopenia became refractory to platelets transfusions, hemodynamic instability became unresponsive to vasopressors and liver hypoperfusion worsened. Despite severe efforts used to control septic shock and thrombocytopenia, she died on the 21st day after surgery because of massive cerebral bleeding and unresponsive cerebral edema. The macroscopic autopsy of the brain was not nullifying because intracerebral hemorrhage and severe cerebral edema led to colliquation the typical areas of the Wernicke’s disease.