A 67-year-old male patient was referred from the outpatient urologist for transurethral resection of the prostate (TUR-P) in September 2021 due to recurrent UTI. After treating the patient with several antibiotics, the urologist performed a cystoscopy, which revealed a bladder stone and an obstructive prostate. Finally, the patient was referred to our department for TUR-P. The initial hypothesis was, that the obstructive prostate caused the bladder stone. During the operation, parts of the stone were smashed and the prostate was resected. Furthermore, a prosthetic mesh eroding from the bladder roof was detected. The mesh was masqueraded by the stone. The pathological result ruled out any malignancy. A postoperative computed tomography scan revealed a 20 × 25 mm mesh migration into the bladder after inguinal hernia repair on the left with concomitant stone adhesion to the mesh. After revealing patient history, the inguinal hernia repair was performed 22 years ago.
The patient was admitted to robotic-assisted laparoscopic partial cystectomy with excision of the complete mesh and the stone . The procedure was performed using the “da Vinci X Surgical System” (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA). The patient was placed in Trendelenburg position. The operation was performed transperitoneal with a 12-mm camera port supraumbilical and three 8-mm trocars on a straight line. Additionally, one 8-mm port for the assistance was placed on the right. After partial resection of the bladder, the defect was closed with two-layer V-loc sutures (3.0). Lapra-Ty clips were attached at each suture for safety issues. Next a transurethral catheter was placed. No drainage was necessary due to the treating surgeon’s decision. The patient recovered well. After a normal cystography on postoperative day 7, the foley catheter was removed. The final pathological results revealed chronic fibrosis and mucosa inflammation of the bladder. After almost one year of follow-up the patient has no symptoms regarding hernia or voiding.