This was a 29-year-old mother of five who presented to the Kampala International University Teaching Hospital accident and emergency department with history of difficulty swallowing, trismus and painful neck swelling for over a week. The condition had begun shortly after a tooth extraction performed by a traditional healer in the community. She had reportedly experienced progressive symptoms including fever, sharp pain, submandibular swelling, and difficulty swallowing. For which she had received two ampoules of penicillin from a nearby clinic with no improvement. She had no known chronic diseases or drug allergies.

Physical Examination
The patient appeared ill but not in respiratory distress. Her vital signs were: temperature: 38°C, heart rate: 85 beats/minute, blood pressure: 120/70 mmHg, respiratory rate: 15 breaths/minute and oxygen saturation at 94% on room air.

Head and neck examination revealed redness and tender swelling involving the sublingual, submental, and submandibular spaces bilaterally. She exhibited trismus and could only open her mouth up to about 1.5 cm. The floor of the mouth was inflamed and elevated, and the tongue was also inflamed and swollen but did not push back far enough to obstruct the airway.

Diagnostic Intervention
Diagnostic tests revealed critical findings indicative of systemic infection. A pus culture isolated Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecalis, with antibiotic sensitivity testing showing resistance to ceftriaxone, cefoxitin, rifampicin, amoxiclav, chloramphenicol, and azithromycin. The isolates were sensitive to ciprofloxacin, imipenem, and amikacin. Laboratory results highlighted elevated white blood cell and granulocyte counts, anemia, and thrombocytosis, reflecting the body’s response to severe infection. A contrasted CT scan was recommended, but was not done due to the patient’s financial limitations. A chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and features of a secondary lung infection (Pneumonia).

Therapeutic Intervention
Initial management included:

Antibiotics:
- IV Ceftriaxone 2g twice daily
- IV Metronidazole 500mg three times daily
- IV Gentamicin 80mg twice daily
Rehydration - Intravenous Normal Saline and Dextrose every 6 hours

Intravenous paracetamol 1g three times daily for pain management

Steroid Therapy – Intravenous dexamethasone 4mg TDS for 3 days.

Adjusted Antibiotic regimen (post-culture sensitivity results)

- IV Ciprofloxacin 400mg three times daily.

- IV Metronidazole 500mg three times daily.

- IV Amikacin 500mg once daily.

- Imipenem was indicated as sensitive but could not be administered due to its prohibitive cost.

Surgical Intervention
Multiple incisions for drainage were performed under sedation to manage the extensive abscesses. Specifically; two incisions were made in both submandibular spaces. One incision was made in the submental area. Another incision was made in the left zygomatic area, as the swelling had extended to the left temporal area. The final incision was placed between the suitable submandibular and submental spaces. A sublingual incision was not required.

The following day, the patient reported to be feeling better, with her tongue returning to its normal position. However, we observed necrosis on her left cheek upon removing the dressing. We immediately took the patient to the operating theater and performed debridement, which revealed that the necrosis had extended to the floor of mouth, buccal mucosa, and parotid area near the division of the facial nerve. Additionally, there was a discharge from the left temporal region. Throughout these days, the patient’s vital signs remained stable, and she did not experience any respiratory distress until her final day.

Necrosis Management
The patient developed necrosis on the left facial side, involving the submandibular space, anteromedial floor of the mouth, buccal mucosa, and posterior angle of the mandible near the facial nerve division. Debridement was performed until the necrotic tissue was cleaned. The infection seemed to extend to other deep neck spaces, evidenced by foul-smelling pus and trismus, preventing oropharynx visualization.

Outcome
The patient’s condition deteriorated despite these interventions. On the morning of her death, there was significant bleeding from the injury site, mouth, and nose. We administered tranexamic acid (1g) in response to the bleeding, and a sample was taken to confirm DIC. She also subsequently developed respiratory distress, necessitating oxygen therapy, and a cross-matched blood transfusion was started. Preparations were made for an urgent tracheostomy in the operating theater for the possibility of difficult intubation because of the trismus. However, the patient experienced cardiorespiratory arrest on the table, and despite extensive resuscitation efforts, she succumbed to her condition.