This was a 67-year-old female patient with a history of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in remission for 3 years who presented to her oncologist for worsening night sweats and 2 weeks of progressive shortness of breath with exertion. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan and a computed tomography scan (CT) scan were ordered 6 months prior, but the patient was lost to follow-up, and she did not complete the study at that time. The non-Hodgkin lymphoma the patient was previously diagnosed with was a stage IV double-hit DLBCL, the tumor was c-Myc and B-cell lymphoma 6-positive and was treated with 6 cycles of rituximab, etoposide phosphate, prednisone, vincristine sulfate, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride (R-EPOCH), completed in October 2019. Since that time, she was in remission, based on the results of a follow-up confirmed on PET/CT scan in March 2021 that showed no evidence of malignancy.

On further questioning, the patient was found to have had a concomitant 4.5-kg weight gain over 2 weeks, along with bilateral leg swelling. The patient used to walk 90 min daily but over the prior 2 weeks was unable to complete even half of her usual exercise route. The patient had no cardiac history, such as heart failure, prior to this presentation. Nuclear medicine PET/CT, was obtained and completed 1 week later, revealing hypermetabolic activity localizing to a large, ill-defined right lower anterior mediastinal mass that appeared to extend into the right ventricular myocardium as well as the entire cardiac base, most consistent with malignancy. Additionally, it revealed cardiophrenic adenopathy and mildly active bilateral distal retroperitoneal lymph nodes that were highly worrisome for additional low volume disease. The patient was urged to present to the Emergency Department. Her blood pressure was 106/65 mmHg and heart rate was regular and bradycardic, at 56 bpm. Her vital signs were otherwise unremarkable. On physical examination, the patient’s cardiac and pulmonary examination was unremarkable, but the patient was found to have 2+ pitting edema in the bilateral lower extremities, without skin changes consistent with chronic edema or venous stasis. A complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel values were within normal limits. Troponins were trended, and all were negative. Brain natriuretic peptide was found to be elevated at 710 pq/mL (≤100 pq/mL). Lactate dehydrogenase was elevated at 458 u/L (140–271 u/L). Electrocardiogram (EKG) on admission was notable for a complete heart block, with a normal heart rate maintained by a junctional escape rhythm. Chest X-ray on admission was notable only for moderate right pleural effusion. Bedside transthoracic echocardiogram was attempted in the Emergency Department but was not able to visualize the right ventricle well.

Oncology and cardiac electrophysiology teams were consulted for management. The patient was determined to have International Prognostic Index of 4. Transcutaneous pacing was discussed but was not indicated, due to the stability of the patient’s junctional escape rhythm. Intravenous furosemide 40 mg twice daily was started. Coronary CT angiogram was obtained and redemonstrated the large mass in the anterior mediastinum, extending along the entire right ventricular free wall and invading the right ventricular myocardium, with impingement into the cavity as well as extension in to the right atrium, interatrial septum, and interventricular groove.

Biopsies of the anterior mediastinal mass and the patient’s bone marrow were obtained. Biopsy results showed double-hit high-grade B-cell lymphoma. Epstein-Barr encoding region in situ hybridization was negative. The patient was started on rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide (RICE) chemotherapy after the pathology was confirmed. The patient was observed inpatient during the first cycle to monitor hemodynamic stability during lymphoma retreat and was discharged with improvement in her heart failure symptoms and close cardiology and oncology follow-up. Abnormal EKG findings resolved following her chemotherapy treatment, and atrioventricular block did not recur. Follow-up PET/CT obtained 7 months later revealed complete resolution of the mediastinal mass and adenopathy, with no remaining evidence of malignancy.