A 17-year-old Caucasian male presented at our outpatient clinic with a one-week history of painless gradual visual loss in both eyes. Two months prior to the visual symptoms, the patient had a SARS CoV-2 infection (B.1.1.7 subtype), confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. He had mild symptoms and was otherwise healthy and reported no other concurrent infections or any other extraocular/systemic symptoms.
On first presentation, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers on the right eye and 0.1 Snellen on the left eye. Slit lamp biomicroscopy revealed 0.5+ cells in the vitreous in both eyes. Dilated fundus examination revealed creamy confluent yellow-white lesions in the macula in both eyes . Fundus autofluorescence imaging (FAF) revealed slightly hypoautofluorescent spots and patches with faint hyperautofluorescent halos around them . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed areas with hyperreflectivity of the outer retinal layers with absence of the ellipsoid zone and the impression of a flat serous retinal detachment. The scans in the choroid under the lesions showed hyperreflectivity and the disorganization of the regular vessel structure, suggesting chorio-retinal infiltrates . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed early hypofluorescence in the affected areas with hyperfluorescence in late phases , indocyanine-green angiography (ICGA) showed both early and late hypocyanescence . There were no neurological symptoms or signs. The clinical findings were consistent with acute posterior placoid pigment epitheliopathy (APMPPE). A full diagnostic workup (hematology, serum biochemistry, renal and liver function tests, serum angiotensin convertase enzyme, hemoglobin A1c) was initiated including blood tests for additional potential relevant infectious causes (tuberculosis, treponema), all of which came back negative. Chest x-ray showed no pathologies.
Due to the severely affected vision in both eyes, the patient was started on 50 mg oral prednisolone daily, after which vision began to improve rapidly. At the next follow-up, one week after the initial presentation, BCVA was 0.5 on the right and 0.15 on the left eye. One week later, we began gradual tapering of the prednisolone dose. Over the course of the next few weeks, vision improved to 0.6 on both eyes and the lesions began to appear more demarcated and pigmented with paracentral atrophy. Two months after symptom onset, when prednisolone had been tapered to 12.5 mg per day, the impression of continued inflammatory activity and new lesions in the retinal periphery of both eyes suggested relentless placoid chorioretinitis (RPC) . This prompted a rheumatologic consultation with the aim of switching the patient to steroid-sparing therapy. Simultaneously, an MRI scan was performed, that showed no pathologies and hepatitis B and C tests were negative. Based on the rheumatological consultation and a discussion with the patient, adalimumab treatment with 40 mg every other week was initiated with a continued dose of 12.5 mg prednisolone daily followed by slow tapering of the steroid. Over the course of the next few months, vision improved to 0.9 on both eyes. At month 7 after baseline, the patient had a second PCR-confirmed SARS CoV-2 infection (subtype unknown), that had no further impact on the ocular course. Five months after the start of the adalimumab treatment (at month 9 after onset), the steroid was discontinued and there were no signs of active inflammation. The patient has been followed for a total of 21 months since presentation, at the last visit, 12 months after the discontinuation of the systemic steroid, there was no visible activity suggesting inflammation and vision was 0.9 on the right and 1.0 on the left eye with no subjective visual complaints and with good tolerance of the immunosuppressive treatment. Once the patient has demonstrated no relapses on adalimumab monotherapy for 18–24 months, we plan to increase the dosing interval, thus tapering the immunosuppressive treatment under close clinical observation.