A 58-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital with a three-month history of a painless swollen mass in his right sub-mandibular region. Physical examination revealed an elastic hard mass in his right sub-mandibular gland. The gland was not fixed to adjacent tissue. Several enlarged elastic hard movable lymph nodes were palpable in the region. Salivary flow from his right sub-mandibular gland was poor. Our patient had a history of a recurrent gastric ulcer from 21 years of age. His laboratory data were in the normal range except for lactate dehydrogenase (214 U/L; normal range: 105-210 U/L), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (88 U/L; normal range: 11-80 U/L), triglyceride (199 mg/dL; normal range: 42-168 mg/dL), leucine aminopeptidase (83 U/L; normal range: 19-69 U/L), and serum immunoglobulin (IgG, 924 mg/dL; normal range: 870-1700 mg/dL). Regarding the measurement of the serum IgG subclass, only his IgG4 level (16.9 mg/dL; normal range: 4.8-105 mg/dL) was evaluated with the consent of our patient. Other serological data regarding the Ig levels and auto-antibodies were not evaluated.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the neck revealed a 2.8 × 2.8 cm homogeneously hyper-dense enhanced mass in the right side of his neck which invasively extended to the tissue of his sub-mandibular gland. Several enlarged lymph nodes were enhanced. In the sub-mandibular region, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 3.0 × 3.0 × 4.0 cm mass with hypointensity on fat-saturated T1-weighted images, and heterogeneous hyperintensity and mid-hyperintensity on gadolinium-enhanced and fat-saturated T2-weighted images, respectively . Positron emission tomography showed an area of high uptake in the same region. No other uptake lesions were detected. The clinical and radiological appearance suggested a diagnosis of malignant neoplasms of the sub-mandibular gland and metastatic spread from a malignant tumor. Reactive follicular hyperplasia was found on an excisional lymph node biopsy at level II. CD45 gating for routine flow cytometric analysis revealed 40.1% and 27.1% of kappa and lambda light chain expressing cells, respectively.
His right sub-mandibular gland was completely excised along with lymph nodes in the sub-mandibular region. Our patient has been well and there have been no marked changes in his condition at 16 months post-operatively.
Pathological and immunohistological findings The sub-mandibular gland: The cut surface of the surgical specimen showed a solid, yellowish tumor occupying the sub-mandibular gland space . At low magnification, marked parenchymal loss with severe fibrocollagenous changes and numerous inflammatory cells were noted . At higher magnification, scattered lymphocytes, eosinophils and plasma cells were observed in the peri-ductal fibrosis area . A few foreign body cells were noted in necrotic tissue . No EBER-positive cells were seen, and no acid-fast bacilli were detected by Ziehl-Neelsen staining. No lympho-epithelial lesions were detected. In the fibrosis area, small and large-sized lymphoid follicle-like nodular lymphocytic proliferations were observed . Paraffin-embedded tissue sections, fixed in formalin, were stained with the antibodies listed in Table . An lmmunohistochemical study revealed that the lymphoid follicle-like nodular lesions were occupied by small round to oval shaped lymphocytes. These cells tested positive for CD20 and Bcl-2 , and negative for CD3, CD5, CD10 and cyclinD1. IgG4-positive plasma cells infiltration was observed. On a highly magnified slide checked at five points, 30% of IgG positive plasma cells expressed IgG4 .
The lymph nodes: The lymph node architecture was replaced by prominent fibrocollagenous tissue with scattered lymphocytes and plasma cells. Except for lymphoid follicles with a reactive germinal center, small and large-sized lymphoid follicle-like lymphocytic proliferations were observed. These nodular lesions lacked a definitive germinal center and mantle zone , and were occupied by small round to oval cell lymphocytes . These cells were positive for CD20 and Bcl-2, and negative for CD3, CD5, CD10 and cyclinD1.