A 53-year-old woman, who had undergone bilateral toric ICL implantation for treatment of high myopic astigmatism in both eyes three years earlier, visited our hospital complaining of blurred vision in her left eye. In that eye, the manifest refraction was 0, -0.5 × 15, with an uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) of 0.7 and a best spectacle-corrected visual acuity (BSCVA) of 0.8. The ICL vault (the distance between the posterior surface of the ICL and the anterior surface of the crystalline lens) was 0.16 mm; the keratometry, 42.8/45.2D × 95; the endothelial cell density, 2924 cells/mm2; and the central corneal thickness, 529 μm .
Slit-lamp examination showed a marked anterior subcapsular cataract reaching into the visual axis . The remainder of the examination was unremarkable.
After informed consent was obtained, we performed simultaneous toric ICL removal and phacoemulsification with toric IOL implantation. IOL spherical power calculations were performed by the SRK-T formula using the axial length measured by A-scan ultrasonography (US-800, Nidek, Aichi, Japan), and keratometric readings measured with an autorefractometer (RK-5, Canon, Tokyo, Japan). IOL cylinder power and the alignment axis were calculated using a Web-based toric IOL calculator program , along with the default surgically induced astigmatism, which the software considered as 0.5D. To control for potential cyclotorsion, the horizontal axis was marked preoperatively using a slit-lamp in a supine position. For ICL removal and phacoemulsification with toric IOL implantation, a 3.0 mm temporal clear corneal incision at a site identical to the original incision was created after topical anesthesia. After the introduction of viscoelastic material (Opegan; Santen, Osaka, Japan) into the anterior chamber, the proximal haptics of the ICL were dislocated, grasped with forceps, and extracted from the anterior chamber through the incision. Then, standard phacoemulsification was performed by capsulorrhexis, nuclear and cortex extraction, and toric IOL (SA60AT5, power +9.5D; Alcon Laboratories Inc., Fort Worth, Texas, USA) implantation using the same 3.0 mm incision. After surgery, our patient received steroidal (0.1% betamethasone; Rinderon, Shionogi, Tokyo, Japan), antibiotic (0.5% levofloxacin; Cravit, Santen) and non-steroidal diclofenac sodium 0.1% (Diclod, Wakamoto, Tokyo, Japan) medications, which were topically administered four times daily for one month and then the dose steadily reduced.
On day 1, our patient's UCVA was 1.2. One month after surgery, the mean refraction was 0, -0.5 × 180, and she had a UCVA of 1.2 and a BSCVA of 1.5, and the keratometry was 42.8/45.5D × 100. The surgically induced corneal astigmatism was 0.54D × 126. Her endothelial cell density was 2801 cells/mm2 , and our patient was very satisfied with the postoperative visual outcomes. No vision-threatening complications occurred, including rotation of the IOL, and the manifest refraction and her visual acuity remained stable throughout the six-month follow-up period.