A 49-year-old man was referred to our hospital with a diagnosis of advanced right kidney cancer. He had visited the former doctor because of asymptomatic gross hematuria. Urine cytology was negative. Enhanced CT revealed a large right kidney tumor exceeding 20 cm in diameter, which was surrounded by abnormal neovascularization, and was pushing the liver and intestines to the left . On chest CT, multiple lung nodules were observed , which the diagnostic radiology team at our hospital diagnosed as multiple metastases. Therefore, a clinical diagnosis of cT3aN0M1 mRCC was made. A percutaneous needle biopsy provided us the pathological diagnosis of clear cell RCC . Among six International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium (IMDC) risk factors, time from diagnosis to treatment was applicable while other five factors were not; Karnofsky performance status was 90% and hemoglobin, neutrophils, platelets, and corrected calcium level were within the normal range. We considered systemic therapy as suitable for this patient, because immediate CN for this huge primary tumor and total metastasectomy for multiple lung tumors seemed too invasive. In addition, since IO-TKI combination was thought to be better suited for achieving remarkable tumor reduction than IO-IO, lenvatinib plus pembrolizumab combination therapy was administered as the first line of treatment. Starting dose of lenvatinib and pembrolizumab was 14 and 400 mg, respectively. During systemic therapy, the starting dose was maintained and no severe adverse event was observed, although the patient had grade 2 hypertension, grade 2 hand–foot syndrome, grade 1 diarrhea and grade 1 elevated transaminase levels. Nine weeks after administration of the combination therapy, the lung metastases disappeared, and the primary tumor and surrounding neovascularization shrank remarkably as revealed by the CT scan. An additional 10 weeks of treatment maintained the complete remission of the lung metastases and resulted in further shrinkage of the primary tumor to 13 cm in diameter , leading to a decision to perform DCN by a robot-assisted laparoscopic procedure. Twenty-three weeks after the treatment initiation (final administration of pembrolizumab in 19th week, and cessation of lenvatinib on pre-operative day 8), robot-assisted radical nephrectomy was successfully performed . The operative time was 219 min, and the console time was 146 min. The estimated blood loss was 330 mL without blood transfusion. No major surgical complication was observed. Histopathological analysis revealed ypT3a grade 2 clear cell RCC without sarcomatoid feature, and the surgical margin was negative. More than half of the specimen demonstrated coagulative necrosis, and viable cancer cells were observed in approximately 30% of the specimen. Dense lymphocyte infiltration was observed in juxtaposed necrosis and viable tumor tissue, suggesting an immune response activated by IO therapy . Immunohistochemistry confirmed CD4 and CD8 staining of these infiltrated lymphocytes . Surgical CR was achieved in this patient, and he is now in a treatment-free state.