A 41-year-old primigravid woman, at 18 weeks gestation, with acute liver failure was referred to our transplant center for a trans-jugular liver biopsy and assessment for a potential liver transplant. Past medical history was unremarkable. The patient exhibited a ten-day history of persistent fever, headache, and acute hepatitis. Despite outpatient treatment with amoxicillin, cefixime, and acetaminophen, up to 1 gr three times per day for seven days, her symptoms did not improve. At admission (day zero), she was febrile (T 38.7 °C), alert, oriented, and hemodynamically stable. Physical examination revealed severe asthenia, pallor, sub-icteric sclera, and abdominal pain. Laboratory findings showed anemia (hemoglobin 8.3 g/dL), lymphopenia (1.4 × 103/μL), elevated transaminases (AST 7864 units/L, ALT 3012 units/L), hypoalbuminemia (1.5 g/dL), INR 1.4, increase in total bilirubin (1.6 mg/dL), and creatinine was 0.57 mg/dl. Inflammatory markers were elevated, with C-reactive protein (CRP) at 136 mg/L, (normal value 0–5 mg/L) procalcitonin (PCT) at 10.3 ng/mL, and ferritin at 36,185 ng/mL. Minimal peri-hepatic ascites was observed on abdominal ultrasound. Empiric antibiotic treatment with meropenem was initiated. The pathologist, at first evaluation of urgent liver biopsy, observed cytolytic liver damage with extensive centrilobular necrosis (acinar zone 3), suggestive of drug-induced damage. On day one after admission, the peripheral blood smear showed activated reactive and apoptotic lymphocytes. Serological tests for hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), toxoplasmosis, and hepatitis E virus (HEV) were negative for acute infection. The plasma viral load of HSV-1 and 2, CMV, adenovirus, and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) was negative. Fecal samples tested negative for adenovirus, and molecular testing for respiratory viruses was also negative.
Despite a negative HSV-1 and -2 viral load, serological analysis demonstrated positive HSV-1/2 IgM and borderline IgG antibodies. Consequently, a histological review of the liver biopsy was requested, revealing numerous cells with viral nuclear inclusions and a highly suggestive morphology for herpes virus cytopathic effects. Immuno-histochemical staining and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for HSV-2 were positive in the hepatic tissue , confirming the diagnosis. This was a primary HSV infection rather than a reactivation, as confirmed by the fourfold rise in IgG title observed four weeks after the first serological evaluation.
Acyclovir treatment was initiated, leading to a progressive reduction in transaminases and inflammatory markers . However, on the fourth day, the patient’s clinical condition deteriorated, concomitantly with the development of anasarca attributed to severe hypoalbuminemia (1.8 g/dL) and an elevation in total bilirubin level (5.25 mg/dL). On the following day, the HSV-2 viral load became detectable, quantified at 28.750.000 copies/mL. The observed increase in inflammatory markers and high serum ferritin, despite optimized HSV-2 treatment, raised concerns of unregulated hyper-inflammation suggestive of a cytokine storm. Probability of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) using H score was 25–40% on day 4 and 80–88% on day 5 [, ]. By considering that steroids are usually not recommended in acute HSV infections and that cyclosporin may be unsafe during pregnancy .
We decided to administer human polyvalent immunoglobulin at a dose of 400 mg/kg/day for five days . The patient started to recover with a reduction in H score (with probability of HLH 25–40% on day 7, 8, 10, and 16–25% on day 12), inflammatory markers and in HSV-2 viral load to 1.361.205 copies/mL within one week. The patient became afebrile while HSV-1/2 DNA on the vaginal swab remained detectable. Thus, we recommended a cesarean delivery.
After a total hospital stay of 20 days, including 19 days of acyclovir treatment, the patient was discharged with normalized inflammatory markers and recovery of liver function. On the follow-up visit, a month after discharge, she was asymptomatic with a viral load of HSV-2 of 120 copies/mL and a detectable HSV-1/2 vaginal swab. Obstetric examination revealed no discernible abnormalities in the fetus. The patient underwent a cesarean delivery at 33+s3 weeks of pregnancy. The newborn was a healthy girl with a birth weight of 1800 gr. HSV-1/2 DNA in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of the newborn was undetectable. Both mother and baby are alive and well at the 6-month follow-up.
Using Luminex technology and the R software tool (version 4.1.2), we retrospectively analyzed plasma cytokine levels (stored at − 80 °C until their use) at five designated time points (day: 0–3–4–18–62) and correlated them with the clinical data after a z-score transformation. The heatmap generated in Fig. E revealed three discernible temporal biomarker clusters. The first cluster, represented by the acute phase (day 0 and day 3 after admission) in the absence of viremia, revealed an impaired specific antiviral immune response and, conversely, the production of cytokines and chemokines, including monokine induced by interferon-gamma (MIG), interferon-gamma (IFNγ), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), interferon-gamma induced protein-10 (IP-10), C–C motif chemokine ligand 11 (CCL-11), and interleukin-8 (IL-8), IL-6, IL-1RA, IL-2R, and IL-10, all involved in inflammation. This profile was accompanied by increased hepatic (AST, ALT, bilirubin, gamma-GT, alkaline phosphatase, INR) and inflammatory (CRP, PCT, LDH, ferritin) biomarkers. In the second cluster, the viremic phase (day 4–18), we observed a reduction in the aforementioned inflammatory profile and an increase in total bilirubin, WBC, and neutrophils. Finally, in the third cluster (day 62, follow-up), we observed a complete recovery of hepatic markers and an increase in different cytokines involved in antiviral immunity, suggesting the onset of T cell responses involved in viral clearance and recovery from the infection. In Fig. F, we show the pairwise Pearson correlation analysis, which associates cytokine expression levels and laboratory values across the five-time points.