We report the case of a 34-year-old man who presented with a one-month history of lethargy, generalised upper and lower limb weakness and significant weight gain. He had been recently diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus and initiated on pre-mixed insulin injections 30 units twice daily (HbA1c 85 mmol/mol).
He had been diagnosed with a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour (pNET) two years previously, having presented with jaundice and abdominal pain. An abdominal CT had demonstrated tumour in the head of the pancreas with loco-regional metastases (peripancreatic lymph nodes and nine hepatic metastatic lesions varying in size from 7–18 mm) for which he underwent a Whipple’s procedure with resection of lymph nodes and an intra-operative liver biopsy. Measurement of a full fasting gut hormone profile showed elevated chromogranin A but was otherwise normal, consistent with a non-functional tumour. Immunohistochemistry of the pancreatic specimen was positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin with a Ki-67 index of 2% confirming the diagnosis of a Grade 2 pNET (ACTH staining not performed); the liver biopsy appearances were similar morphologically. A careful family history of endocrine tumours or endocrine disorders had been unremarkable.
On follow up imaging he had developed further liver metastases, so was commenced on a long-acting somatostatin analogue (Lanreotide), for its anti-proliferative potential, and a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (Sunitinib) was thereafter added upon evidence of further radiological progression.
Two years subsequently, he presented with cushingoid features with a moon face, easy bruising, abdominal striae, centripetal fat distribution and marked proximal myopathy. Blood pressure was normal. Biochemical investigations revealed serum potassium concentration of 2.5 mmol/l, glucose 17 mmol/l and significantly elevated random serum cortisol of 2003 nmol/L and serum ACTH concentration 50 pmol/L (normal range 2–11 pmol/L). Basal pituitary biochemistry and gadolinium enhanced MRI imaging was otherwise unremarkable. MRI scan of the liver revealed solid and cystic metastatic deposits ranging between 7.8-9.2 cm in segments 6, 7 and 8 indicating further progression despite sunitinib.111In-labeled octreotide scanning demonstrated somatostatin receptor positive disease in five of his liver metastatic deposits but not in any other sites (Figure ).
A diagnosis of a rapidly progressive, functional, metastatic pNET with ectopic ACTH production causing Cushing’s syndrome was made, with an assumption that the tumour had evolved in its functionality from its previous non-functional status. Treatment options discussed at the supra-regional multidisciplinary team meeting (ENETS Centre of Excellence) considered metyrapone, bilateral adrenalectomy, peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) or cytotoxic chemotherapy. Mutational analysis of the gene for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) was negative.A repeat liver biopsy was performed to provide an accurate histological grade of the liver metastases, on the premise that primary NETs, and their synchronous/metachronous metastases, frequently differ in grade and proliferative index (Ki-67). Immunohistochemistry was strongly positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin with a Ki-67 index of 20% (ACTH staining not performed) (Figure ). The treatment decision based on this result was to administer conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy with streptozocin, 5-fluorouracil and doxorubicin, with metyrapone given pre-chemotherapy to control the hypercortisolaemic state. Incremental doses of metyrapone (up to 1 g qds) effected a dramatic clinical response (with resolution of his symptoms and reduction of his insulin dosage) and an equally dramatic biochemical response (normalisation of serum potassium and lowering of mean cortisol concentrations on cortisol day curves) prior to his chemotherapy.Three months after starting his chemotherapy, he had managed to completely discontinue his metyrapone with excellent mean cortisol concentrations on his cortisol day curve of 315 nmol/L (Figure graph), with serum ACTH concentration of 11pmol/l. He discontinued all insulin injections with excellent glycaemic control (HbA1c 53 mmol/mol) and cross-sectional imaging (abdominal CT) showing a dramatic reduction in the size of the hepatic metastases with more necrotic/cystic contents than previously. He remains clinically stable three months later.