Presentation, history, and physical examination on hospital admission
In March 2014, a 33-year-old Javanese woman presented with dyspnea and palpitations at rest and during the night. The patient denied any recent weight gain, peripheral edema, headache, chest pain, fever, or any other constitutional symptoms. She had suffered from hypertension since the age of 20 years, which had been treated intermittently.

On physical examination, she had dyspnea at rest, was alert, but anxious, and her blood pressure was 170/115 mmHg, with a heart rate of 112 beats per minute, and labored respiration at 32 breaths per minute. During her latest hospitalization, peaks of systolic blood pressure were noted of up to 210 mmHg, with elevated jugular venous pressure. Cardiac examination showed both LV and RV enlargement. Cardiac auscultation detected a fixed split S2 with a loud component and a grade 3/6 ejection systolic murmur which was audible at the upper left sternal border and a diastolic gallop that could be heard at the cardiac apex. The patient had bilateral fine crepitation in the lower zones of the lungs. Abdominal examination showed no organomegaly, no palpable mass, and no abdominal bruits. Neurological examination of the lower limbs showed muscular weakness in both legs with a reduced motor power of 3–4/5. The lower limbs showed symmetric palpable pulses, no pedal edema, and no muscular atrophy.

Past medical history and previous investigations
In 2002, she had been diagnosed by echocardiography as having an ostium secundum ASD. Hypokalemia was first documented at a regional hospital in 2007 when she suffered from pre-eclampsia during pregnancy. She had been treated with potassium supplements and several antihypertension medications. However, neither satisfactory blood pressure control nor normal serum potassium levels were achieved during follow-up, and the patient began to complain of increasing weakness. The patient reported that among members of her family, only her mother had suffered from hypertension.

In 2008, the patient had initially sought a specialist endocrine consultation at our hospital when her hypokalemia resulted in disabling generalized muscle weakness and intense muscle cramps. On her admission in 2008, the following studies were performed, which confirmed a diagnosis of primary aldosteronism. The supine morning plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) and plasma renin activity (PRA) were 56 ng/mL (N≤15 ng/mL) and 0.13 ng/mL/hour (N=0.5–3.3 ng/mL/hour), respectively. The PAC to PRA ratio was calculated as 430.7 ng/dL per ng/mL/hour (N≤30 ng/dL per ng/mL/hour). Ultrasound of the abdomen showed a mass (3.4×2.3×2.1 cm) in the right suprarenal area that was confirmed with computed tomography (CT) to be an adrenal tumor. The patient had been referred for adrenalectomy, but she initially declined surgery and preferred to remain on medication. She was discharged home with a blood pressure of 145/90 mmHg and a serum potassium level of 3.2 mmol/L with the medications that included spironolactone, captopril, amlodipine, bisoprolol, and potassium chloride tablets. The patient became lost to follow-up for six years, until March 2014. During the period between 2008 to 2014, she was admitted twice to two separate hospitals for episodes of heart failure.

Investigations on current hospital admission
On admission of the patient to our hospital in March 2014, preliminary laboratory investigations showed severe hypokalemia (2.2 mmol/L) which was refractory (range, 1.9–2.6 mmol/L) even with repeated potassium supplementation. Urinary potassium excretion was 43 mmol/24 h indicating a renal loss of potassium. The serum magnesium level was normal, while the sodium concentrations were in the high normal limit (143 mmol/L). Serum creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was elevated at 1,257 IU/L, and creatine kinase isoenzyme myocardial band (CKMB) was 221 IU/L. Arterial blood gas analysis showed metabolic alkalosis and ventilation-perfusion mismatch secondary to pulmonary edema. Renal function tests showed normal serum urea and creatinine. Urinalysis showed no proteinuria or myoglobinuria.

Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly, with a cardiothoracic ratio of 74.3%, and right atrial (RA) and RV enlargement with pulmonary edema. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with a ventricular rate of 112 beats per minute, left axis deviation, LV hypertrophy with strain, and alteration in ventricular repolarization consistent with hypokalemia with nonspecific ST-T segment depression, and flattened T wave with a prominent U wave. Serum potassium level was 2.1 mmol/L.

Based on initial findings, a diagnosis of acutely decompensated heart failure (ADHF) with hypokalemic myopathy was made, and the patient was immediately treated with oxygen therapy, intravenous isosorbide dinitrate, furosemide, and potassium replacement. Then, a conventional heart failure regimen was begun that included a non-selective β-receptor antagonist and α1-receptor antagonist (carvedilol), an angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (ramipril), a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist (amlodipine), and an aldosterone receptor antagonist (spironolactone). A serum potassium level was maintained of at least >3 mmol/L with parenteral potassium infusion and tablets.

Transthoracic echocardiography was performed and showed concentric hypertrophy of the LV, with an interventricular septal (IVS) thickness of 14 mm (N=6–9 mm); LV posterior wall thickness in end diastole of 17 mm (N=6–11 mm); LV mass of 473.6 g (N=66–150 g); LV mass index of 284.4 g/m2 (N=43–95 g/m2)); and RV wall thickness of 8 mm in diastole (N≤5 mm). There was four-chamber cardiac dilatation, global ventricular hypokinetic and LV systolic dysfunction, with an ejection fraction of 17% (Teichholz method). A large interatrial septum gap was present with a defect size of 2.4×2.7 cm, with a left-to-right shunt confirming the diagnosis of ostium secundum ASD. The RA and the RV were dilated, and the right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 60 mmHg indicated moderately severe pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).

An abdominal CT scan was performed and compared with the previous scans, and showed an enlarged adrenal mass, from 3.4 cm in diameter in 2008 to approximately 4 cm in diameter in 2014. The tumor was minimally enhanced after contrast injection with low attenuation (+5 Hounsfield units). The absolute washout was calculated as 68%, and the mass was considered as a lipid-poor adenoma.

The investigations of endocrine function showed that her PAC failed to be suppressed after 120 minutes of captopril 50 mg, and the PAC-to-PRA ratio was still elevated further, which confirmed the diagnosis of primary aldosteronism. Other adrenal hormone levels were within normal limits. The diagnoses made at this time were of a right adrenal adenoma and biochemical diagnosis of primary aldosteronism, with acute heart failure, decreased LV systolic dysfunction, hypertensive heart disease, severe hypokalemia, rhabdomyolysis, left-to-right cardiac shunt due to a secundum ASD with moderate pulmonary hypertension (WHO functional class II). On this hospital admission, adrenalectomy was performed as the patient was willing to undergo surgery, and the blood pressure was adequately controlled before surgery.

Surgical management on current hospital admission
After sufficient pre-operative preparation, the patient underwent open adrenalectomy and exploration of the right adrenal mass via a posterior approach. The resected adrenal gland was a single, well defined and encapsulated yellowish nodule which weighed 27.9 g and measured 4.1×2.6×1.5 cm. Histopathology examination confirmed a diagnosis of a benign adrenocortical adenoma.

Patient follow-up and outpatient management
The patient made an uncomplicated recovery post-operatively. Immediately after the removal of the tumor, the PAC was found to be reduced to 8 ng/mL, and the PAC-to-PRA ratio dropped to nearly normal levels. Her serum potassium concentration was normalized without any supplementation. Approximately three days after surgery, the patient remained clinically stable and had adequate blood pressure control with ramipril 5 mg qd. Her postoperative biochemistry showed a serum potassium of 4.1 mmol/L and normal CPK and CKMB. The patient was discharged home and showed stable biochemical findings on follow-up outpatient visits.

Repeated echocardiography in September 2015 demonstrated improvement in the LV and RV size. Her LVEF had improved from 17% at presentation to 56% at 18 months after adrenalectomy. Right cardiac catheterization showed a mean right atrial pressure (RAP) of 10 mm Hg, a pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) of 54/29 mmHg (mean 42 mmHg), pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 597 dyn s/cm5, and a mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 11 mmHg. The pulmonary artery blood flow (Qp) relative to systemic blood flow (Qs) was 3.8 (Qp/Qs >1.5). Given the significant ASD, particularly with a high PAP and PVR, she was referred for an open surgical closure of her ASD. However, she refused to undergo cardiac surgery because of financial constraints. At her last visit to the clinic in December 2015, the patient was still on ramipril 5 mg qd and remained symptom-free with a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg and normal potassium level. Currently, her degree of heart failure is stable. At the time of writing this case report, surgical closure of the ASD remains to be undertaken.