A 75-year-old expatriate female who had recently returned from her home country of El Salvador presented to our Canadian Tertiary Centre with progressive shortness of breath, orthopnoea, and syncopal episodes over the preceding month. She had no chest pain, gastrointestinal, or neurological symptoms. She first emigrated from El Salvador to Canada 30 years ago. Her medical history was significant for hypertension, Type 2 diabetes, and chronic kidney disease (baseline eGFR 30 mL/min/1.73 m2). Her home medications included nifedipine 60 mg once daily, metformin 1 g twice daily, gliclazide 30 mg once daily, and linagliptin 2.5 mg twice daily. She was afebrile (36.2°C) with a blood pressure of 103/73 mmHg, a heart rate of 138 beats per min (b.p.m.), and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated new onset atrial flutter/fibrillation, with left anterior fascicular block, prolonged QTc of 512 ms. Additional investigations supported congestive heart failure with NT pro-BNP measuring 15 600 ng/L (normal range ≤125 ng/L), high-sensitivity troponin T 21 ng/L (normal range <14 ng/L), and an enlarged cardiac silhouette on chest X-ray. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed an LVEF of 15–20% with severe global hypokinesis, left-ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD) of 50 mm, mild tricuspid and mitral regurgitation, and a mild-to-moderate-sized pericardial effusion . Transoesophageal echocardiogram confirmed no thrombus, and the patient underwent direct-current cardioversion. Restoration of sinus rhythm provided substantial symptom improvement and return of her ejection fraction to previous baseline of 35%. Unfortunately, she later developed cardiogenic shock due to ongoing volume overload and required IV furosemide 40 mg twice daily with IV infusion of milrinone upwards of 0.375 μg/kg/min for 3 days. Myocardial perfusion imaging showed no reversible ischaemia and sustained LVEF of 30–35%. She was stabilized off inotropic support and discharged on metoprolol 25 mg twice daily, amiodarone 200 mg once daily, nitroglycerin 0.2 mg/h patch, hydralazine 100 mg three times a day, furosemide 20 mg once daily, and apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for a CHADS2 score of 4. Further left-ventricular (LV) enhancement therapy with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs) was not initiated due to acute on chronic kidney impairment. Workup for non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy revealed a normal thyroid-stimulating hormone, normal ferritin, and unremarkable serum and urine protein electrophoresis. However, serology was positive for T. cruzi IgG antibody by ELISA IgG and confirmed by an immunoblot assay. Both tests were done at the National Reference Centre for Parasitology in Montreal, Canada, and reviewed by clinical microbiologists.
She represented to hospital 3 weeks later with a new congestive heart failure symptomatology and suspected pneumonia. Initial ECG revealed atrial flutter. However, she self-converted to sinus rhythm and clinically improved with diuresis and antibiotics. She was discharged but returned to the emergency department the same day after witnessed syncope at home. She was bradycardic on arrival (heart rate 37 b.p.m.) and then developed conscious polymorphic VT . Her potassium was low at 2.4 mmoL/L (normal range 3.5–5.0 mmoL/L) with a magnesium of 0.8 mmoL/L (normal range 0.7–1.2 mmoL/L) and a prolonged QTc of 663 ms. She required 3 shocks for recurrent VT and was stabilized with a temporary pacemaker, potassium, and magnesium supplementation. She did not require cardiopulmonary resuscitation. TTE revealed LVEF 25–30% with a moderate-sized circumferential pericardial effusion without tamponade that was not amenable to pericardiocentesis. She received cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator (CRT-D) implantation prior to discharge due to multiple indications including recurrent VT, reduced LVEF, and widened QRS concerning for need for biventricular pacing. She was not a favourable candidate for cardiac ablation due to her age. At this time, she was initially thought to have end-stage cardiomyopathy given her symptoms and reduced LVEF. However, on multidisciplinary discussion between the infectious diseases and cardiology teams, it was concluded that the acute reduction in LVEF was due to atrial flutter/fibrillation and once the dysrhythmia was abolished, the improved LVEF and global hypokinesia with upper limit of normal LVEDD would be more in keeping with early Chagas cardiomyopathy. The constellation of clinical findings, the patient demographic origin, and positive serology with confirmatory immunoblot assay strongly pointed to this sequalae being most probably due to Chagas disease. While a cardiac MRI would have been valuable, it was not feasible given her renal function and the prolonged wait time for this modality during the current COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, the plan was to initiate treatment with benznidazole, the primary anti-trypanosomal agent approved by Health Canada. Benznidazole was requested from South America via the Health Canada Special Access Programme and arrived at our hospital ∼8 weeks later.
The patient remained stable with NYHA Class II symptoms when seen a month later in outpatient follow up. Device interrogation showed 97% biventricular pacing with underlying sinus bradycardia. Repeat TTE revealed stable LVEF 25–30% and moderate-to-severe global hypokinesis. She received benznidazole 150 mg orally twice daily for 60 days (equivalent to 5 mg/kg/day for a 60-day course). The patient tolerated this medication well with no adverse effects, which commonly include abdominal pain, dermatitis, leukopenia, weight loss, or peripheral neuropathy. One month after completing benznidazole therapy, she reported significant symptom improvement with baseline NYHA Class I symptoms and no further syncopal episodes or CRT-D shocks. She did not develop other complications of Chagas disease such as gastrointestinal symptoms, thromboembolism, or syncopal episodes. She remained on metoprolol 150 mg twice daily, hydralazine 100 mg three times a day, furosemide 20 mg once daily, and apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily. Repeat TTE several weeks after completing benznidazole showed improved LVEF of 45–50% with regression towards mild hypokinesia. She has ongoing follow up with cardiology and infectious diseases services, demonstrating sustained cardiac functional improvement even 12 months later with an LVEF of 60% and reversal of hypokinesis to normal global function.