A 68-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a rapidly progressive severe sensorimotor paraparesis a few days after having received the first mRNA COVID-19 vaccination (BNT162b2) in May 2021. The patient’s history showed the suspected diagnosis of a secondary progressive MS for over 40 years with unknown date of transition. After having suffered a severe relapse in the early 1980s the patient had lived with a residual mild paraparesis. The patient had never received a disease-modifying therapy (DMT). Relapses had been treated with intravenous corticosteroids. Regarding her vaccination history, the patient had regularly received the vaccines recommended by the German Standing Committee on Vaccination without any relevant side effects prior to the following events.
In April 2021, the patient first suffered a deterioration of the paraparesis shortly after having been vaccinated against tetanus and pneumococci. She was admitted to an external hospital. Spinal cord MRI showed signs of atrophy of the cervical and thoracic spinal cord without Gadolinium (GD)-enhancement. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis did not show any abnormalities. Due to a suspected MS relapse the patient was treated with intravenous corticosteroids. Subsequently the symptoms receded and the patient reached prior level of disability.
On the 5th of May 2021 the patient received the first mRNA COVID-19 vaccination and 23 days later developed a severe exacerbation of the paraparesis with sensory level of T8 and inability to walk as well as loss of bladder and bowel control (EDSS 7.0). A new spinal cord MRI now showed T2-signal alteration ranging from C4 to T10 with GD-enhancement from C3 to C5 as sign of an acute LETM . CSF analysis displayed pleocytosis of 340 cells/μl (51% lymphocytes, 49% granulocytes) and disturbance of the blood-brain-barrier with elevated protein levels of 2590 mg/L. There was no evidence of oligoclonal bands. Also, there was no evidence of bacterial or viral infection. Cell-based assay showed positive AQP4-antibodies in serum and CSF. The patient fulfilled diagnostic criteria for AQP4-antibody positive NMOSD.
Initial therapy with intravenous corticosteroids for five days was followed by seven cycles of plasmapheresis which led to a mild improvement of sensorimotor function (EDSS remaining at 7.0). Considering the highly active disease progression, DMT with eculizumab was initiated promptly. Since the patient showed deterioration of symptoms both times she was immunized, required meningococcal vaccination was not applied for safety reasons and prophylactic antibiotic therapy was initiated in the induction phase of eculizumab. The patient later decided not to receive the vaccination at all, hence therapy was changed to satralizumab. In the follow-up period of six months no new relapses have occurred. The patient also declined the second COVID-19 vaccination.