A 38-year-old woman developed numbness in the right limb and weakness and limited movement in the left limb following a fall from hitting her head on a door beam. She was unconscious on the spot. After treatment, her whole body was numb and limb activity was limited. Half an hour later, she felt numb and weak in the right limb and weak in the left limb. She had no previous hypertension, diabetes, or coronary heart disease. 13 years ago, she developed numbness in her right hand after pregnancy and was diagnosed with congenital fusion of cervical C2-5, which was not treated at that time . Her symptoms had improved and had not interfered with her normal life. There was no diplopia, slurred speech, hiccups, nausea and vomiting, dysphagia, urinary incontinence, and no corresponding symptoms such as facial sensory abnormalities. Physical examination revealed a short neck, limited cervical mobility, and low occipital hairline. Below the C3 level of spinal cord, bounded by the anterior median line, there were different sensory and motor abnormalities from left to right. The patient had decreased pinprick and temperature sensation on the right side and normal pinprick sensation on the left side. Her sense of spatial position was normal. There was increased muscle tone in the right upper and lower limbs and decreased muscle tone in the left upper and lower limbs. The muscle strength of the left upper and lower limbs was 0 out of 5 and the strength of the right upper and lower limbs was 4 out of 5. After conservative treatment, her muscle strength gradually recovered. 10 days later, some of the muscle strength showed changes, and the muscle strength of the key muscle groups was as follows: shrugging shoulder muscle strength (left 2, right4), elbow flexion muscle strength (left 2, right 4), elbow extension muscle strength (left 2, right 4), wrist flexion muscle strength (left 1, right 4). finger flexion muscle strength (left 1, right 4), finger extension muscle strength (left 1, right 3), hip flexion (left 2, right 4), knee extension (left 2, right 4), dorsalis pedis (left 3, right 4), plantarflexion (left 3, right 4), and hyperreflexia of the biceps and triceps tendons bilaterally. Abdominal wall reflexes were present, knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were hyperactive, patellar clonus was positive on the right, patellar clonus was positive on the left, ankle clonus was positive on the right and ankle clonus was positive on the left. The dorsalis pedis artery was palpable bilaterally. The bilateral Hoffman's sign was positive. Babinski's sign was positive and Kernig's sign was positive. The findings of Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the neck revealed that small C2-5 vertebral body with partial fusion of the vertebral body; increased anterior atlantoaxial space, posterior superior displacement of the cardinal vertebrae, the narrowing of the spinal canal at the corresponding level and marked compression and thinning of the spinal cord (C1-2 joint instability, discontinuity of the odontoid process, congenital fusion of cervical C2-5). posterior protrusion of the C7-T1 intervertebral disc, with compression of the corresponding dural sac. No significant abnormal signs were seen in the cervical medulla. We considered that the woman sustained BBS because she had previously suffered from KFS, which according to ASIA(American Spinal Injury Association) Impairment Scale was a grade B: incomplete injury. After admission, the woman was given methylcobalamin for neurotropism and tizanidine to reduce muscle tone and received acupuncture and hyperbaric oxygen therapy. After conservative treatment, her spinal cord oedema decreased and the numbness on the right side gradually subsided, but the results were still unsatisfactory so the doctor recommended surgery. She then underwent posterior decompression of the spinal canal, and lateral mass fixation between atlas and axis with screw-plate system . After surgery, her numbness subsided and she continued to receive adenosine cobalamin for neurotropic treatment. She came to our hospital for a check 5 months later after the operation. The numbness of the right limb significantly decreased and the dysfunction of the limbs was slightly better than before. She could sit independently and stand with assistance, but she was still unable to take care of himself. She then underwent regular rehabilitation treatment in our hospital. 18 months later, the numbness of her limbs had disappeared and she was able to take care of herself with assistance, and her condition improved from grade B to grade D according to the ASIA classification.