A 68-year-old male presented to the outpatient clinic complaining of drowsiness and fatigue for 2 weeks. He had a history of left-sided cerebral infarction 5 months ago and no hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease or atrial fibrillation. Since then, dual antiplatelet and statin therapy was taken and there was no transient ischemic attack. Neurological examination showed right limb dyskinesia along with aphasia. The admission low-density lipoprotein cholesterol was 1.64 mmol/L, preoperative coagulation was normal with prothrombin time (PT) of 11.9 s, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 27.3 s, international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.04, thromboelastography arachidonic acid (AA) inhibition rate of 96 % and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) inhibition rate of 90 %. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Because of claustrophobia, only computed tomography (CT) images could be provided. After admission, one-stop computed tomography angiography (CTA)/computed tomography perfusion (CTP) was performed. CTA showed that the Willis circle was well developed . CTP showed that cerebral blood volume (CBV) and cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the left hemisphere were lower than those in the right hemisphere, while time to peak (TTP) was significantly higher .
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed occlusion at the beginning of the left ICA and 75 % stenosis in the right ICA according to the North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial criteria . The right ICA stent (XACT 6–8*40 mm, Abbott) implantation was performed after DSA . During the procedure, there was no significant decrease in blood pressure or heart rate, nor any neurological deterioration. Unfortunately, 8 h after CAS, the patient developed restlessness, accompanied by a marked increase in blood pressure (170/100 mmHg). After the exclusion of intracranial hemorrhage by CT, sedation and antihypertensive treatment were used, and the blood pressure was controlled below 120/80 mmHg. However, the patient developed left limb hemiplegia 24 h after the procedure. Then one-stop CTA/CTP was performed again. Intracranial vessels were comparable to that before CAS . CTP showed CBV and CBF in the left hemisphere were improved and TTP was reduced significantly. But CBV and CBF in the right hemisphere were not only lower than pre-operation, but also lower than that in the left hemisphere . Dynamic Transcranial Doppler (TCD) was also performed. Flow velocity of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) decreased 24 h after CAS, while that of the right anterior cerebral artery (ACA) increased significantly . We supposed that hypoperfusion in the right hemisphere might be caused by left-to-right blood theft. Then hypervolemic treatment (intravenous infusion of saline 3000 ml per day) was accepted and the blood pressure was maintained above 140/90 mmHg. After 3 days, the patient’s restlessness and left limb hemiplegia were completely relieved. No recurrence of cerebral ischemia occurred during 3 months of telephone follow-up.