A 20-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital (Imam Reza Hospital, Mashhad, Iran) with neck pain, fever, cough, and dyspnea. She had been diagnosed with dematomyositis 21 months prior. Her symptoms began in March 2014 with polyarthralgia and skin rash. Examination at that time showed presence of heliotrope rash, malar rash, and Gottron’s papules. Muscle forces were intact. Laboratory tests showed a hemoglobin level of 11.9 g/dL (12-16 g/dL), a white blood cell count of 6800/mm3 (4000-10000/mm3), a platelet count of 261×103/mm3 (150-450×103/mm3). Blood chemistry showed a glutamate-oxaloacetate transaminase level of 118 IU/L (5-40 IU/L), a glutamate-pyruvate transaminase level of 78 IU/L (5-40 IU/L), a creatine kinase level of 293 IU/L (50-190 IU/L), and an aldolase level of 5.1 IU/ml (＜7.6 IU/ml).
Urine analysis was normal. Antinuclear antibodies, anti-double stranded DNA, and anti-Jo-1 were all negative. Electromyography was normal. Biopsy of the quadriceps femoris muscle showed no abnormal findings. She was diagnosed with possible DM based on cutaneous manifestations and elevated muscle enzymes. She was treated with prednisolone 50 mg daily and azathioprine 100 mg daily. Two months later, her arthralgia improved, but cutaneous manifestations had not changed. Laboratory tests showed the serum CK level had increased to 727 IU/L. Hydroxychloroquine was added to the previous regime.
Two months later she was asymptomatic and the serum CK level was normal. Thus, prednisolone was tapered. She felt well until July 2015 when she complained of dyspnea. During chest examination, bilateral fine crackles were heard. Chest x-ray showed bilateral opacities and computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral ground glass opacities. Prednisolone dose was increased to 50 mg/day and a cyclophosphamide regimen of 1000 mg per month was initiated. After 2 months, she did not feel better and chest x-ray showed progression of fibrosis. An intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) regimen of 400 mg/kg/day for 5 days was prescribed. One month later, she was admitted for neck pain and increased dyspnea. She reported chills and fever for 10 days. Upon physical examination, she was febrile (T=38.2 °C) and her blood pressure was 120/90mmHg. A subcutaneous crepitus around her neck was detected. Muscle power was normal in all four limbs.
Laboratory examination only revealed leukocytosis (23000, PMN 85%) and other laboratory tests (including CK and aldolase) were normal. Chest radiograph and CT scan of the thorax showed a progression lung involvement with subcutaneous emphysema, pneumomediastinum, thickening of interlobular septa, and a reticulonodular pattern (,).
CT scan of paranasal sinuses also showed emphysema in parietal, temporal and occipital soft tissue. Furthermore, emphysema was seen in retropharyngeal space .
The smear and culture of sputum were negative for infectious agents. Flexible bronchoscopy showed severe erythema in bronchial tree, but there was no apparent fistula or rupture. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was negative for infectious agents. Echocardiography and esophagoscopy were normal. Intravenous cefteriaxon (1g twice daily) and oral aziothromycin were initiated. On the third day of admission, her shortness of breath worsened. The blood O2 saturation was 82%. High-dose steroid pulse therapy (1g IV methylprednisolone for 3 days) and rituximab 500 mg per week for 4 weeks were initiated. Oxygen therapy and complete bed rest were prescribed.
On the 5th day of admission, she transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to severe hypoxemia. She developed bilateral severe pneumothrox. A chest tube was inserted into both pleural spaces. The patient was intubated andmechanical ventilation was initiated. After one week, percutaneous tracheostomy was done.
Ix weeks after immunosuppressive therapy, emphysema and pneumomediastinum were restricted and the chest tube was disconnected (first right, then left). However, the patient died because of severe hypoxemia despite intensive immunosuppressive therapy and mechanical ventilation.