A 68-year-old Japanese male with sudden onset of abdominal pain was transferred to Nomura-Kaihin Hospital. He did not have any special past medical history and had never received colonoscopy. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a locally dilated sigmoid colon with fecaloma and perforation. Findings of feculent peritonitis (stage IV by Hinchey Classification) and free air in the peritoneal cavity were also detected, but no apparent tumor was pointed out. He was clinically diagnosed with perforation of the sigmoid colon, and an emergency operation was performed. During surgery, a diverticulum with wide frontage and rupture was found in the sigmoid colon, but no apparent tumor was observed. Fecaloma was present near the rupture site. The sigmoid colon measuring 16 cm in length including the perforated area was resected. The diverticulum with rupture was present at the contramesenteric side and was 55 × 35 mm in size .
Microscopically, bland spindle cells were present replacing the whole layer of the muscularis propria without forming an apparent mass at the true diverticulum . Necrosis was absent, and mitotic figure was difficult to detect at the lesion (0/50 high-power fields). The non-diverticulum-like portion at the mesenteric side showed normal structure of the colonic wall . Basically, the lamina propria, submucosa, and serosa even at the diverticulum-like portion did not show any specific changes , although the whole layer at the perforation site was necrotic. The perforation was observed near the boundary between the normal colonic wall and the lesional wall .
Immunohistochemical examination revealed that the spindle cells were diffusely positive for KIT , DOG1 , and CD34 . Alpha-smooth muscle actin was partially positive, but S-100P was negative (data not shown). Since the muscularis propria layer was almost entirely replaced by the KIT-positive spindle cells , desmin was almost completely negative at the lesion. The Ki-67 labeling index was less than 1% (data not shown).
Mutational analysis of the c-kit gene at exons 9, 11, 13, and 17 where most mutations are detected in GISTs using macrodissected paraffin-embedded sections showed that the spindle cell lesion had a heterozygous deletion of 2 amino acids at codons 557 and 558 of exon 11 . There was no mutation at exons 9, 13, and 17. The surrounding normal mucosal tissue had a wild-type sequence for the c-kit gene . The PDGFRA mutation was detected neither in the lesion nor in the normal tissue (data not shown).
The patient had mild postoperative paralytic ileus and surgical wound infection but was discharged from the hospital approximately 3 weeks later. He received colonoscopy 6 months after the surgery without special abnormalities and has had no diagnostic imaging thereafter. He has been regularly followed once a month by his family doctor for hypertension and was free from apparent recurrence for 41 months after the surgery.