A 45-year-old Hispanic man with a 2-year history of progressive proptosis of the left eye attended to our center complaining of diplopia and hemicranial migraine. He was previously diagnosed with hyperthyroidism receiving thyrostatic treatment with thiamazole for 6 months without clinical improvement. His past medical history was not relevant, and he denied previous ocular trauma. At his arrival, physical examination revealed ptosis, palpebral edema, and exophthalmos of the left eye, as well as the abolishment of the ipsilateral photomotor and consensual responses, but conserving the corneal reflex. Furthermore, the patient presented an evident limitation for the abduction and supraduction of the affected eye, whereas fundoscopy showed mild optic atrophy. The exploration of the right eye did not reveal any abnormality, whereas the neurological examination showed normal cognitive function with no focal neurologic deficits. A T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head showed a hyperintense mass arising at the superotemporal wall of the left orbit that was displacing the eyeball, invading the frontal bone, and causing inflammation of the adjacent dura mater .
Due to the extension of the tumor, we decided on its surgical resection using a pterional approach. The skin incision and dissection of the temporalis muscle fascia were performed as described before [, ], in order to expose the temporal fossa and the orbital roof . To get access to the orbit, we performed the osteoplastic removal of the superolateral orbital wall (formed by the greater sphenoidal wing) using a surgical drill, with no need for opening the dura mater . This technical modification allowed us to completely resect a well-defined mass of hematic brown color, invading the frontal bone to the level of the frontozygomatic joint and the orbital floor, with minimal risk of lesioning intradural and orbital structures . The histopathological analysis of the resected tumor indicated the presence of abundant fibrous tissue, cholesterol crystals, coagulated hematic content, and a mixed inflammatory infiltrate with a predominance of lymphocytes and foamy histiocytes , compatible with the diagnosis of cholesteatoma. The patient recovered the functionality of the left eye with no deficits in the visual acuity nor diplopy , although he remained with a low degree of ptosis. Finally, a second MRI was performed, which showed no residual tumor 1-year after the surgery.