The one-day-old Hispanic female baby was referred to the surgical team after an asymptomatic LUQ mass was detected. The baby was born at 39 weeks and two days via repeat C/S (two) to a 39-year-old G5P3 F with negative prenatals. The mother and father denied any alcohol, tobacco, or drug use. The mother, father, and siblings had no known past medical history. Her birth weight was 3.3 kg (7 lb 4 oz), and her length was 49 cm (1 ft 7 in). Apgar at 1 min and 5 min were 8 and 9, respectively.
A prenatal scan revealed that the left kidney appeared enlarged, measuring 56 × 32 × 43 mm and with a heterogeneous texture. The baby was breastfeeding well, with no reports of hematuria or vomiting—normal bowel movements. Since birth, the baby has experienced multiple hypertensive episodes and was placed on Isradipine 0.15 mg every 8 h when systolic blood pressure was over 105. BMP, electrolytes, and blood pressure were monitored until a radical nephrectomy was performed. BUN and creatine levels were within normal limits. Calcium levels were noted to be elevated at 10.7.
Ultrasound findings revealed that the left kidney measured 6.8 cm with a large heterogeneous solid mass infiltrating the hilum of the left kidney, demonstrating intrinsic flow and causing some dilatation of the renal collecting system. The tumor measures 5.8 × 3.6 × 5.3 cm. There is a normal-appearing adrenal gland superior to the left kidney. The MRI of the abdomen and pelvis w/ & w/o contrast in , revealed a large heterogeneously enhancing mass centered in the upper to the mid pole of the left kidney measuring 5.3 × 5 cm. There is a sparing of the lower pole of the left kidney.
After a discussion with the patient's parents, a left radical nephrectomy was planned. The procedure was performed in the operating room under general anesthesia and lasted 68 min. Complete exposure to the lesion's anterior, lateral, and posterior surfaces was performed. The lesion was well-circumscribed without extending into the adjacent adrenal or retroperitoneal structures. The capsule appeared to be completely intact. The lesion was excised without any leakage or disruption of the tumor capsule. The lesion was mobilized upwards, and careful blunt cautery and sharp dissection on all lesion surfaces allowed it to be fully mobilized out of the retroperitoneum. The vascular pedicle was readily identified, as was the ureter. The artery and vein were carefully divided between clamps and tied off with #0 silk ties. The ureter was traced down to its entry into the bladder and excised, suture ligating the ureter at its entry into the bladder with 3-0 Vicryl suture.
The lesion was submitted to Pathology as a fresh specimen. After a discussion with the pathologist, the frozen section diagnosis was confirmed to be mesoblastic nephroma. Further attention to the retroperitoneum for the presence of grossly abnormal lymph nodes revealed none. There were very few lymph nodes in the paraaortic region. These were all normal. The retroperitoneum was irrigated copiously with warm irrigation fluid. There was no bleeding of the tumor bed. The incision was then closed in several layers.
Final pathology, seen in , , was consistent with congenital mesoblastic nephroma, classic type, although focal areas of hypercellularity were noted; the patient was diagnosed with stage I mesoblastic nephroma as it was utterly resected with an intact capsule and no renal vessel involvement. Therefore, no adjuvant chemotherapy was required for this patient. The patient will be followed-up with nephrology to monitor for the development of compensatory hypertrophy of the remaining kidney. In addition, the patient will undergo an ultrasound of the abdomen every three months for the first year of life and every six months during the second year of life.