A 68-year-old female presented to the emergency department with melena.
The melena started a day before she consulted us. She had no past history of chronic abdominal symptoms suggesting the presence of celiac disease.
The patient had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
She had no significant personal and family history.
Her body temperature was 36.4 ºC, blood pressure was 128/85 mmHg, and heart rate was 98 bpm with sinus rhythm. She had mild abdominal tenderness, but there was no obvious hepatosplenomegaly or lymphadenopathy. Digital rectal examination revealed melena.
Laboratory tests indicated a hemoglobin level of 11.3 g/dL, blood urea nitrogen level of 26.0 mg/dL, and creatinine level of 1.64 mg/dL. Her serum lactate dehydrogenase level was 232 U/L (106- 211 U/L) and soluble interleukin-2 receptor level was 213 U/mL (145- 519 U/mL) .
Urgent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed an ulcerative lesion with fresh blood clots in the transverse part of the duodenum . Based on the location and shape of the lesion, we suspected not only a peptic ulcer, but also an ulcer caused by vascular malformation or malignancy. Therefore, we decided to interrupt the endoscopy and perform contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed slight localized contrast enhancement on the wall of the transverse part of the duodenum in the early phase of contrast injection . No vascular lesions were observed, and there was no extravasation of contrast agent in the delayed phase. EGD was immediately resumed again for further observation of the lesion. When we removed the blood clots, a protruding vessel was seen at the base of the ulcer, which was coagulated using hemostatic forceps (Coagrasper; Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan) .
Following this hemostatic treatment, the patient was discharged from the hospital without re-bleeding. The lesion that caused the bleeding was suspected to be a malignant tumor of the duodenum based on its location. EGDs, including forceps biopsies from the ulcerative lesion, were performed three times after the initial hemostatic treatment. While the first and second biopsies revealed no malignancy, the third biopsy showed findings suggestive of malignant lymphoma. On pathological evaluation, diffuse proliferation of atypical medium-sized lymphoid cells was seen in the entire mucosa, along with a few intraepithelial lesions . No necrosis was observed. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the cells were positive for CD3 and CD56, and negative for CD4, CD5, CD8, CD20 and EBER .
At this point, MEITL was suspected, and examinations for systemic lesions were subsequently performed. No abnormal lymphocytes were found on iliac bone marrow examination. 18Fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) positron emission tomography/CT (18FDG-PET/CT) showed nodular FDG accumulation in the wall of the transverse part of the duodenum, consistent with the findings of contrast-enhanced CT . There was no abnormal FDG accumulation in the systemic lymph nodes or other parts of the gastrointestinal tract. The results of total colonoscopy and random biopsies of the gastrointestinal tract were unremarkable.