A 62-year-old Caucasian man presented with symptoms of cough, fever, myalgia and chills. Symptoms had begun 6 days prior to admission. He had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by Xpert Xpress SaRS-CoV-2 (Cepheid, Dx System Version 4.8) three days after symptom onset. His past medical history was unremarkable except for hyperlipidemia treated with atorvastatin 40 mg daily. No allergies were reported, the patient did not smoke, drink alcohol or use illicit substances. Kidney function was normal on admission.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis excluded pulmonary emboli and showed diffuse bilateral ground-glass infiltrates of the lungs with associated lymphadenopathy, moderate pleural effusions, normal-sized and -shaped kidneys with adequate perfusion and without cortical defects.
Two days after admission the patient required intubation due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). He was managed with prone positioning and was initiated on hydroxychloroquine after exclusion of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin-clavulanate was given empirically assuming bacterial superinfection of viral pneumonia. His clinical condition worsened with the development of atrial fibrillation, AKI, paralytic ileus, hemolytic anemia and a maculopapular rash on the trunk and lower extremities.
The chronologic sequence of medications and clinical events are highlighted in Fig. . Laboratory results are shown in Table . Details of affected organ systems, diagnostics and therapies are listed in Table .
A maculo-papular skin rash developed on day 7 after admission. Severe AKI with oliguria (AKIN 3), consecutive fluid overload and metabolic acidosis necessitated initiation of continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) on day 9. Peak creatinine was 519 umol/L, urinalysis showed minimal proteinuria and microscopic hematuria. Proteinuria subsequently increased significantly and microscopic hematuria persisted, urine leucocytes were persistently within the normal range. .
Several days after initiation of CVVHDF (on day 24) the patient developed severe microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, Coombs negative, which was transfusion dependent. Serologic screening was negative for HIV, hepatitis B and C virus infection; anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-DNA antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies and complement levels were normal. Eosinophils were initially not significantly elevated. There was no evidence of urinary obstruction or rhabdomyolysis. Echocardiogram showed preserved cardiac function.
Differential diagnosis of the AKI included acute tubular injury (ATI) due to hemodynamic instability; sepsis-associated AKI; ATI with pigmented tubular casts as a consequence of hemolysis; thrombotic microangiopathy - given the ongoing severe hemolysis with schistocytes on peripheral smear (despite lack of overt thrombocytopenia); collapsing glomerulopathy - given the large rise in proteinuria,; and acute interstitial nephritis associated with antibiotics - given concurrent skin rash, although peripheral eosinophilia and leucocyturia were not marked. In the absence of improvement of kidney function a transcutaneous renal biopsy was performed while the patient was proned in ICU, 32 days after admission.
Light microscopy revealed 34 mostly normal glomeruli. Few glomeruli were mildly congested, without thrombi. There was diffuse interstitial edema and focal infiltrates with lymphocytes, histiocytes, rare plasma cells, neutrophils and eosinophils. Multiple non-caseating granulomas mostly consisting of lymphocytes and epithelioid histiocytes were present. There was very mild tubulitis with rare lymphocytes in the tubular epithelium. Many tubules had a dilated lumen, flattened epithelium and loss of brush border. Some had fine, isometric vacuolization of the cytoplasm. Rare lumina contained finely granular, mostly eosinophilic and very rare brownish casts only partially positive for hemoglobin in a few tubules. Some peritubular capillaries contained mononuclear cells, but no erythrocyte aggregation. There was mild arteriolar hyalinosis and arteriosclerosis, but no thrombi or vasculitis. Immunhistochemistry showed only trace IgM, Kappa and Lambda in the mesangium. IgG, IgA, C3 and C1q were negative in the glomeruli. Electron microscopy revealed myelin figures in the cytoplasm of a few parietal epithelia. No definite viral particles were detected.
The biopsy was consistent with granulomatous tubulointerstitial nephritis, acute tubular injury and regeneration. There was no evidence of renal thrombotic microangiopathy, collapsing glomerulopathy or vasculitis.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection as excluded and confirmed by negative cultures of urine and tracheal secretions. Serology for Sjogren’s Syndrome was negative. Sarcoidosis was considered clinically unlikely, despite thoracic lymphadenopathy which was interpreted as consistent with severe SARS Cov2 pneumonia. The ionized calcium levels were normal or low during the ICU stay. Angiotensin converting enzyme and Interleukin-2 levels were however not measured. The biopsy findings could not explain the proteinuria, which was interpreted as a consequence of kidney injury and profound inflammation associated with SARS Cov2 infection.
Given that a medication reaction was a potential cause for kidney biopsy findings as well as for the rash and the hemolysis, a multidisciplinary decision was taken to stop ß-lactams, amiodarone and pantoprazole and to begin methylprednisolone 60 mg daily on day 37 . 47 days after admission urine output began to improve and CVVHDF was discontinued. The hemolysis resolved, the skin rash improved.
On transfer to neurorehabilitation 48 days after admission, the patient was tetraparetic due to critical illness polyneuropathy but alert and able to follow simple commands, he had tracheostomy in place and was breathing spontaneously with little support. The course of rehabilitation showed progressive improvement of kidney function . The estimated GFR two months post-discharge was 43 ml/min/1,73 m2 suggesting a likely transition to chronic kidney disease.