A 53-year-old man reported to the emergency room with a 2-day history of sudden-onset left chest pain radiating to his left back. The pain was intermittent over the 48 h and felt similar to the pain he experienced in a prior episode of pleurisy. It did not localize to any specific region of the chest and did not involve the left arm. It was partially relieved with NSAID use and resting on his left side. The patient had a 30 pack year smoking history as well as a history of illicit drug use. He had history of hypertension that was controlled with lifestyle changes and did not show any signs of end organ damage. The previous clinic visits showed his blood pressure to be under control and on admission it was 100/78. A review of systems and physical examination did not show any signs of paresthesias, numbness, weakness, or ataxia. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurologic physical exams were normal. The patient was given nitroglycerin and fentanyl, which eased the pain. Because of both his history of smoking and hypertension as well as his clinical presentation, a chest X-ray, EKG, and blood work-up including troponin I and D-dimer were performed which returned normal results.
Due to high suspicion for coronary ischemia and other cardiac etiologies related to his history of smoking, hypertension, and illicit drug use, the patient was admitted to further investigate his chest pain. At this point, his pain was completely resolved with fentanyl. As part of expanding the differential diagnosis for chest pain, to rule out pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection, a CT angiogram of the chest was performed and revealed a 4.4 × 2 × 2.1 cm soft-tissue mass compressing the spinal cord at the level of T8-T9. To further characterize the spinal lesion, MRI imaging was obtained and confirmed the presence of a heterogeneous mass at the left T8 that was hyperintense on T2-weighted and hypointense on T1-weighted images . Axial scans showed an intradural extramedullary dumbbell-shaped tumor, characteristic of a spinal schwannoma, at the level of spinal nerve T8.
Given the significant mass effect of the mid-thoracic spinal cord and pain symptoms, the patient underwent an open laminectomy and partial facetectomy of T8 and T9. A dark, dumbbell-shaped mass could be seen extending from the left spinal column grossly . There also appeared to be a hemorrhage within the dural sac near the T8 nerve root. GTR of the lesion was accomplished with sparing of the nerve root. Post-operative histological examination showed fascicles and nests of plump spindle cells, consistent with schwannoma . Variable amounts of melanin were also seen within tumor cells , leading to further immunohistochemical staining. Tumor sections showed positive expression of S100, SOX10, HMB-45, and MART-1 , compatible with a diagnosis of MS.
A complete history and review of systems did not reveal any family history or clinical signs of Carney complex in this patient. He was discharged 1 day after surgery. We followed up with the patient 2 months after surgery. He was doing well other than some persisting incisional pain. Imaging did not show any local recurrence of the tumor . He was counseled on his options regarding radiation and referred to another institution for a second opinion due to the rarity of this diagnosis. He has subsequently been lost to follow-up 6 months after surgery.