The patient was a 49-year-old man from Shanxi province who was born to non-consanguineous parents. He presented with a history of progressive shortness of breath and edema of both lower limbs for 7 days. One week before admission, the patient developed shortness of breath in a supine position at night, which improved after 3-5 minutes of rest in the sitting position. The shortness of breath recurred 3–4 times per night, accompanied by progressive edema of both lower extremities. The patient denied any history of hypertension, diabetes, or smoking. Starting from the age of 8 years, the patient showed signs of bilateral upper and lower limb weakness during exercise and his sports tests never met the standard. At the age of 35 years, he started to complain of difficulty in swallowing solid food. Mild bilateral ptosis was noticed from the age of 45 years. He had a family history of MM. His eldest sister was diagnosed with MM based on histochemical analysis of skeletal muscle biopsy. However, no records of the exact site of mutation in the eldest sister were available. She developed respiratory failure at the age of 52 years and died of respiratory failure several years ago. The second sister showed progressive ptosis and bilateral limb weakness; however, she has not yet undergone skeletal muscle biopsy. The parents and the little sister of the patient appear in good health at present. The pedigree map of three generations of the family is shown in Fig. . The patient in our report is the family member, II-3.
The patient had acute symptoms, but had normal sensorium at the time of hospitalization. He looked very thin and his height was 1.83 meters and weight was 49 kg. His vital signs were: body temperature, 36.6°C; pulse rate, 89 beats/min; respiratory rate, 25 beats/min; blood pressure, 124/85 mmHg. There was ptosis and facial weakness. Chest percussion showed dullness on the right chest wall and no significant enlargement of the heart; no cardiac murmur was heard on auscultation. Neurological examination showed no cranial nerve deficit. His cognitive abilities were normal. Ptosis was mild on the right and moderate on the left side. At rest, muscle strength and tone were normal in all 4 limbs. Serum creatine kinase (CK) level was 2280 IU/L (normal value < 200) while liver enzyme levels were slightly increased, including aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (120 IU/L; normal value <40 IU/L) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (57 IU/L; normal value <40 IU/L). Serum antinuclear autoantibodies/extractable nuclear antigens (ANA/ENA) levels were normal. Electrocardiogram and D-dimer level were normal. The B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was 606 pg/mL and the level of soluble growth stimulating gene protein (sST2) was 97.64 ng/mL (normal value <35 ng/ml). Findings of arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis were: pH 7.286; PaCO2 73.6 mmHg; PaO2 62.7 mmHg; lactate 2.82 mmol/L (normal value <2.2 mmol/L); hemoglobin 177g/L. Although the PaO2 level was within the normal range on low-flow oxygen inhalation, the diagnosis of type II respiratory failure was considered because of hypercapnia. Pulmonary function test suggested severe restrictive ventilatory impairment. Chest high resolution CT showed bilateral pleural effusion (more on the right side) and increased thickness of pulmonary artery trunk and branches. The patient showed none of emboli, mosaic perfusion, disparity in segmental vessel size, parenchymal densities and thickening of bilateral pulmonary arteries in Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA). Echocardiography revealed right heart overload characterized by dilated right ventricle (RV diastolic dimension: 44 mm) and right atrium (RA dimension: 45 mm) . Color Doppler ultrasound revealed mild tricuspid regurgitation and mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension; the systolic pulmonary arterial pressure was 56 mmHg. The tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) level was 22 mm. Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular chamber volume with normal systolic function (estimated ejection fraction 71%) and normal filling pressures. Left ventricle short-axial view showed symmetric slight thickening of the left ventricle (LV) and the LV mass indexed for BSA was 118.07g/m2. At the end diastolic phase of the left ventricle, the thickness of both the ventricular septum and the posterior left ventricular wall is 13 mm.
Needle electromyography (EMG) examination showed rapid recruitment of short-duration, low-amplitude motor unit potentials (MUPs) in bilateral deltoid muscles. He underwent muscle biopsy of left lateral thigh, which revealed variable size and shape of muscle fibers, with coexistence of oblong or small round fibers, occasional necrosis or regeneration of muscle fibers, hypertrophic fibers and split fibers in addition to typical features of mitochondrial dysfunction, including 8% ragged red fibers (RRF) and 42% COX-negative fibers.
Gene sequencing analysis conducted by BGI Clinical Laboratory Center (Shenzhen, China) revealed a novel TK2 mutation at c.584T>C. The predicted amino acid change was p. Leu195 Pro. Whole exon gene results of the proband and family members showed that the mother had wild-type and the father, sister, and the patient had heterozygote TK2 variant (NM_001172644: c.584T>C, p.Leu195Pro). In-depth analysis revealed a heterozygous variant in an intron of TK2 (NM_004614.4:c.156+958G>A; rs1965661603) in the mother of the proband, the sister, and the proband. Based on the findings of muscle biopsy and DNA sequencing, the patient was diagnosed as a case of MM .
He was administered intravenous diuretic and recombinant human brain natriuretic peptide. Round-the-clock non-invasive ventilation was provided during the first 10 days of hospitalization; subsequently, artificial ventilation was provided only at night. The shortness of breath was significantly alleviated with complete resolution of bilateral lower limb edema. ABG analysis results prior to discharge were: pH 7.388; PaCO2 52.7 mmHg; PaO2 123.5 mmHg; and hemoglobin 155 g/L. The patient was prescribed with the nocturnal non-invasive ventilation and coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) at discharge. CoQ10 can promote oxidative phosphorylation and protect the integrity of biological cell membrane, it increases adenosine triphosphate (ATP) generation and cellular energy by mediating electron transfer in the electron transport chain. CoQ10 can be used as an adjunctive therapy for mitochondrial myopathy or heart failure. Echocardiography performed after one month showed no obvious abnormalities in cardiac structure or function. Echocardiography findings also showed improvement after treatment . No abnormalities were observed in BNP and sST2 levels. CK was reduced to 1250 IU/L and liver enzyme levels were restored to normal. ABG parameters were within the normal range (pH 7.411; PaCO2 42.9 mmHg; PaO2 86.5 mmHg; lactate 2.0 mmol/L; hemoglobin 151 g/L). A one-year follow-up, the patient was found to have well tolerated non-invasive ventilation support. He was able to perform his routine activities with no restrictions. Echocardiography showed normal cardiac structure and function. Currently, nocturnal bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) therapy via a basal mask had been well-tolerated and ABG analysis was performed every 1 month, the ventilation pattern had not been changed after discharge. The patient is regularly receiving CoQ10.