A 21-year-old female presented with 3 months of severe, left L5 radicular pain accompanied by L5 hypoesthesia to light touch and decreased pin-perception, without weakness. MR showed a dumbbell-shaped, heterogenously enhancing lesion centered in the left L5/S1 foramen, measuring 4.5 cm × 4 cm . The tumor displaced the thecal sac anterolaterally to the right and also involved the posterolateral L5 vertebral body/left L5 pedicle/lamina along with superior extension (i.e., toward L4/5 into the retroperitoneal space above the sacral alar). Multiple tortuous vessels extended along the cauda equina .
Through a L4 and L5 hemilaminectomy with a left L5/S1 facetectomy, a gross total excision was accomplished. On opening of the dura, a black, hemorrhagic tumor was visualized. Postoperatively, the patient’s radicular pain resolved, she retained full motor and regained normal sensory function in the left L5 distribution.
Within 4 postoperative months and despite a negative PETCT obtained 3 months after surgery, the lesion recurred. The patient presented with sudden onset lower back pain with recurrent radiculopathy. Within days, she also developed a severe bifrontal headache, vomiting, photophobia, visual loss (i.e., only able to differentiate between light and dark), and a generalized seizure. The patient also developed distal lower limb weakness, bilateral abducens nerve palsies, facial diplegia, bilateral trigeminal nerve palsies, and dysarthria. The fundus exam showed florid papilledema. The emergent holo-spinal and brain MRI showed diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement along the full length of the spinal cord extending to the brainstem and cerebrum. There was also a focal recurrent epidural soft-tissue lesion within the left posterolateral aspect at L4/5 measuring 12 mm × 10 mm .
A CT-guided lumbar puncture revealed only gelatinous material and core biopsy samples were taken. CSF studies showed high protein, low glucose, but no organisms. A frontal external ventricular drain was placed, and later converted to a ventriculoperitoneal shunt Craniospinal irradiation was administered after EVD insertion. Notably, the patient was discharged wheelchair-bound 3 months later.
Tumor sections from both treatment periods showed a pigmented epithelioid to spindled cell tumor composed of cellular nodules, trabeculae and fascicles characterized by moderate nuclear pleomorphism, variably prominent nucleoli, and a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm . The initial specimen had scattered nuclear grooves and intra-nuclear pseudo-inclusions, with only rare mitoses observed. No psammoma bodies were seen. The pigment was demonstrated to be melanin (Schmorl’s positive, Perl’s negative). The tumor cells were strongly positive for S100, HMB45, melanin-A and SOX10 and negative for EMA, AE1/3, CAM5.2, and GFAP. The proliferative rate was 6% (Ki67). These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of a MMNST. The secondary tumor showed MMNST, identical in morphology to that seen from the primary excision and included increased areas of tumor necrosis with a high mitotic count of up to 14 per high power field (×400). Further, the Ki67 had increased significantly and was estimated at 40% .