8-year-old boy with no personal or family history of interest, who presented to the paediatric emergency department with abnormal ocular movements of a year's duration. The family reported that the boy had about 5-6 episodes a day of about 5-10 seconds duration consisting of horizontal conjugate ocular movements with rapid jerks and slight associated miosis, without associated head or limb movements. They did not associate it with fixation of the gaze, position or movements of the head. The patient could not self-provoke the episodes, but could identify their onset. They were of sudden onset and cessation, some of them gave the impression of disconnection from the environment or loss of consciousness, they did not refer to a postictal period or headache. They always occurred in the waking state and never during sleep. The parents had observed a higher frequency of episodes on days of greater stress and physical fatigue, without being able to identify other triggers. They also did not associate ataxia, tinnitus, autonomic symptoms or hearing loss. They denied a history of head trauma and consumption of drugs or other toxic substances. The symptoms had not changed or progressed since their onset to the day of the consultation and the neurological examination between episodes was normal.

Ophthalmologic evaluation ruled out visual pathology, and the otolaryngologic evaluation ruled out pathology in that area and described a high intensity, low amplitude jerk nystagmus episode. He was hospitalized for further evaluation, with general laboratory tests (including thyroid hormones, liver function, autoimmunity profile, and vitamin D) that showed no pathological findings. Videotaping of the episodes by the family was of great help in the diagnostic orientation, and the video-electroencephalogram (VEEG) demonstrated an electro-clinical correlate of the episodes. The VEEG was performed in the waking state, recording two separate events of about 8-10 seconds duration during a total recording of 25 minutes. The background tracing was normal for his age, and coinciding with the two clinical episodes of nystagmus, epileptiform activity was recorded in the left temporal and occipital region that later generalized. After having demonstrated focal onset epileptic activity in relation to the patient's symptomatology, treatment with carbamazepine was initiated orally at an ascending dose.

A brain magnetic resonance study with contrast was completed, without evidence of structural alterations or cortical development anomalies, with the final diagnosis of ictal nystagmus. He was discharged to home with a dose of carbamazepine of 13 mg/kg/day, which was then increased to 17 mg/kg/day. In outpatient follow-up in Neuropediatric consultations, 2 years after the start of treatment, good adherence and absence of side effects to treatment were noted, without new episodes.
