A 71-year-old Caucasian woman presented with acid reflux symptoms of substernal burning and significant dysphagia. A barium swallow and endoscopy showed distal esophageal narrowing and a hiatal hernia. A repeat upper gastrointestinal (GI) series revealed a type III complex hiatal hernia with a significant paraesophageal component . The paraesophageal component was causing the distal esophageal narrowing, which was confirmed by a computed tomography scan. Surgery was recommended because her symptoms were caused by both gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and the external compression of the distal esophagus from the paraesophageal component.
The patient underwent laparoscopic reduction and repair of the complex type III hiatal hernia with a Nissen fundoplication to treat GERD. She had a large hiatal defect (6cm) with what appeared to be a complex hernia with both paraesophageal and sliding components. The posterior esophageal dissection cleared the hiatus , but the diaphragm and both crura were extremely thinned out. Primary repair was carried out using O Ethibond sutures (ETHICON, Somerville, NJ, USA); however, owing to the condition of the hiatus it was reinforced with an 8 × 8cm piece of Strattice™ xenograft . The graft was cut into a modified U shape with very short arms in the U portion . The O Ethibond suture was used at the apex of the crural repair inferiorly up at the superior portion of the crural repair , and then on the left upper side. The area on the right side was insufficient to suture the overlay patch; therefore ARTISS fibrin glue (Baxter, Deerfield, IL, USA) was used underneath the graft to stick it to the underlying fascia . A posterior stitch was placed in the posterior fundus for marking. The fundus was brought around the retroesophageal space and the fundoplication was carried out. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was transferred to the recovery room in a stable condition.
The patient was discharged on a soft diet and she did well over the ensuing months. Approximately 11 months after the initial surgery she was admitted to my hospital with severe nausea and vomiting. An upper GI series and subsequent endoscopy revealed a slipped Nissen, with the wrap around the proximal stomach and not at the esophagogastric junction.
She underwent laparoscopic revision of the wrap. The previously placed PADM was well incorporated overlying the hiatus and it actually looked like normal fascia. It was still intact and well vascularized with minimal adhesions . The few adhesions were taken down with a suction device. The hiatus did dilate anterior to the graft, which was closed with three interrupted 0 Ethibond sutures to make the hiatus secure. At this point the slipped Nissen was repaired. Postoperative upper GI was normal and the patient has continued to progress over the ensuing nine months.