A 69-year-old female patient presented with a 3-cm-diameter firm mass that had gradually increased over the prior 6 years on the left thigh, with local pain.
Lumpectomy was performed at The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University. Postoperative pathology results confirmed the mass to be a spindle cell soft tissue sarcoma. Postoperative immunohistochemistry results indicated CK(-), EMA(-), Vim(+), S100(-), SMA(±), Act(-), CD34(+), BCL-2(-), CD9(±), Ki-67(+), 50% AB(+), MBP(-), NF(-), and CD68(+), confirming the diagnosis of spindle cell soft tissue sarcoma . The patient was treated with an expanded resection.
However, after 2 years, a firmer mass with some tenderness was found at the surgical site. Therefore, the patient underwent another expanded resection, followed by radioactive particle implantation. Postoperative immunohistochemistry results indicated CK(-), EMA(±), DES(-), S100(-), SMA(-), CD34(+), SDX-10(-), CDK4(-), MDM2(-), CD68(-), CD99(±), BCL-2(+), Vim(+), and Ki-67(+) > 50%.
Nevertheless, after 16 mo, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the patient had relapsed. Subsequently, the patient underwent three lumpectomies and radioactive particle implantation.
Despite this, after 5 mo, the follow-up pathology results revealed another relapse. A new treatment plan was designed: five sessions of HIFU (which occurred on March 5, June 11, August 20, October 13, and November 24, 2021), using an integrated circuit -type HIFU tumor treatment system (Chongqing Haifu Medical Technology Co., Ltd., China), which mainly consists of an ultrasonic generator, a focused ultrasonic transducer, a motion system, a control system, and a B-ultra real-time guidance system. The vertical scanning mode with a slice thickness of 2 mm was used. The ultrasonic transmitter worked at frequencies of 0.85 and 1.5 MHz. The ultrasonic power was 150–238W. The duration of each treatment was 275–1325s. The focal length was 135 mm and the lesion had a diameter > 5 cm.
The ablation effect was assessed by MRI. After the first HIFU session, MRI indicated grayscale changes for the whole mass at the lesion site, mild skin edema, and orange peel-like changes, without induration. MRI indicated coagulative necrosis in the treated region, with homogeneous enhancement at the edge of the tumor . Residual tumor cells were not found in repeated biopsies at 2 and 4 wk after 5 HIFU .
During the course of the disease (April 26, 2017 to April 2, 2022), the patient underwent seven chest computed tomography (CT) scans, all of which were free of lung metastases, four whole-body bone scans (whole-body scans before and after HIFU are shown in Figure and ), all of which were free of bone metastases but showed localized bone damage, and ten MRI scans (MRI scans before and after HIFU are shown in Figure and ). HIFU completely ablated the tumor without complications except for localized bone damage. No further chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or biological therapy was required for tumor control.