A 65-year-old white male was referred to our Vitreo-Retinal Surgery Service for a retinal detachment (RD) in his right eye. On examination, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/63 in the right eye (RE) and 20/20 in the left eye (LE), with a small refractive error. Intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg OU. Slitlamp examination revealed quiet anterior chambers and slight nuclear sclerosis in both eyes. Dilated fundus examination of the right eye showed an inferior bullous RD involving the macula with no evidence of retinal breaks, while a large RPE tear was detected in the temporal quadrant . There was no sign of uveitis or vitreitis. Fundus examination of the LE was unremarkable, except for slight RPE distrophic alterations at the posterior pole with RPE mottling. Enhanced depth imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) revealed a pachychoroid pattern in both eyes . Moreover, OCT scans of the right eye showed sub-retinal fluid (SRF) reaching the macular area from the inferior quadrants. No SRF was detected in the LE. Ocular ultrasound showed no mass lesion . Upon questioning his medical history, the patient referred a history of central serous chorioretinopathy (CSC) in the RE and the recent use of intravenous corticosteroids for bronchitis. Fluorescein angiography (FA) and Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) were performed, revealing hyperpermeable and dilated choroidal vessels and multifocal and diffuse leakage in the late angiograms of the RE . No disc leak or vasculitis were detected. Swept-Source OCT angiography (SS-OCT-A) confirmed the pachychoroid pattern and clearly demonstrated the mid-pheripheral RPE tear in the inferotemporal quadrant . Axial lengths were 23.63 mm (RE) and 23.35 mm (LE).
Based on the clinical features, a diagnosis of bullous variant of CSC with RPE tear was made. Oral therapy with eplerenone at a dose of 50 mg/day was initiated. However, no improvement was detected. In fact, two months later, the exudative RD increased with a worsening of the BCVA to 20/80 , despite the continuing therapy with eplerenone. To prevent irreversible photoreceptor damage, management with observation or eplerenone treatment continuation were excluded, and alternative therapeutic procedures were discussed. Laser therapy was deemed inappropriate because the leakage was multifocal and diffuse, with multiple “ink blot” focal areas of leakage at the superior margin of the detached retina and other poorly defined leakage areas in the attached retina. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) was not applicable because of the extension and elevation of the RD. Therefore, the opportunity for surgical treatment was considered.
Written informed consent was given by the patient, after a comprehensive explanation of the procedures. Under general anesthesia, the patient’s eye was prepared with povidone-iodine and draped. After 180° inferior conjunctival peritomy, bridle suture was passed under the inferior, medial and lateral rectus muscles with 3–0 ticron, and the sclera was exposed. Two 4 × 4 mm almost full scleral thickness sclerectomies were done in the inferior quadrants, taking care to avoid the areas close to exit sites of the vortex veins. Finally, the conjunctiva was approximated with 8–0 Vicryl suture. The treatment resulted in complete RD resolution as of the first day after surgery. Upon follow-up six months after surgery- complete SRF resolution was confirmed and BCVA was stable at 20/80 .