A 69-year-old woman was diagnosed with immunoglobulin (Ig) A lambda-type MM and was treated with 8 cycles of chemotherapy bortezomib-dexamethasone (VD) and lenalidomide-bortezomib-dexamethasone (RVD lite) as well as autologous peripheral stem cell transplantation. She underwent complete remission (CR). After 15 months, she presented with neck pain and paralysis in her left arm. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed extramedullary infiltration in the left C4 and C5 spinous processes and multiple lytic lesions in the upper thoracic vertebra, indicating a recurrence of MM. Systemic treatment was started with daratumumab, bortezomib, and dexamethasone (D-Vd) and focal irradiation (30 Gy/10 Fr) for spinal lesions. During this time, brain MRI was used to screen for intracranial lesions.
Brain MRI with contrast medium revealed a thickened dura mater in the left middle fossa. No abnormal findings were observed in the adjacent skull base. Since the lesion was small and asymptomatic, 3 months of chemotherapy were administered and a follow-up imaging was performed. On MRI , the lesion of the left middle fossa showed remarkable expansion, arising from the dura mater. Since the mass was expanding rapidly, tumor resection with the histopathological examination was planned.
However, a week after MRI, she developed an acute onset of headache followed by disturbance of consciousness and right-sided hemiparesis. She was brought to the emergency room by ambulance. On arrival, she was unable to follow commands and exhibited aphasia and right-handed hemiparesis. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large intracerebral hemorrhage with a significant mass effect in the left temporal region. CT scan revealed an enhancing region that extended intraparenchymally, a slight enlargement of the tumor itself was also observed. At this time, no apparent abnormal findings were observed in the adjacent skull base of the middle fossa.
An urgent operation for both the hematoma evacuation and tumor resection was performed. After a temporal craniotomy and dural incision, the intraparenchymal hematoma was promptly evacuated. A reddish rather soft mass was observed directly connected to the hematoma, which arose from the dura mater of the middle fossa. The tumor was detached from the dura mater of the middle fossa followed by gross total removal of the tumor. Since there were no tumor invasion and no connection between the outer layer of the dura mater and adjacent sphenoid bone in the middle fossa, these structures were intentionally preserved. Finally, duroplasty was performed, the bone flap was returned, and the skin was normally closed. The resected tumor was sent for a histological examination. Hematoxylin-eosin staining showed diffuse proliferation of the plasmacytoid cells with clumped nuclear chromatin and eccentric eosinophilic cytoplasm . Additional immunohistological studies revealed proliferating CD138-positive cells, which are markers of the plasma cells, and a positive immunoreactivity to IgA lambda . These intraoperative and pathological findings indicated that the dura mater originated from the intracranial MM.
The postoperative course was uneventful and her hemiparesis and aphasia resolved immediately. Postoperative MRI confirmed a thorough tumor and hematoma evacuation. Two weeks after the surgery, the patient was referred for further oncological treatment. Multimodality treatment was initiated consisting of proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib and dexamethasone (Kd), intrathecal chemotherapy (15 mg methotrexate, 40 mg cytarabine, and 4 mg dexamethasone), and radiation with 30 Gy/10 Fr for the tumor bed. The patient was discharged from the hospital without any observable neurological deficit. She remained in a CR state for 6 months after surgery.