A 41-year-old Malay gentleman who works as a hospital porter presented with a long-standing history of left plantar heel pain.
His gastrocnemius was also noted to be tight with positive Silfverskiöld test. He was treated for plantar fasciitis and tight gastrocnemius and underwent extensive physiotherapy sessions targeted at gastrocnemius stretching. He was started on anti-inflammatory and analgesic medications. However, his symptoms persisted, and he underwent left gastrocnemius release and endoscopic plantar fascia release. This provided temporal relief of his symptoms, and he was able to return to work.
Two and half years later, he presented with similar symptoms of left heel pain. His gastrocnemius was once again assessed to be tight demonstrating limited dorsiflexion in the absence of ankle osteoarthritis. A repeated minimally invasive gastrocnemius release was performed. He underwent a prolonged recovery with enforced rest and time off work, which improved his symptoms. However, his symptoms quickly reoccurred upon return to work.
He is obese (BMI: 31 kg/m2), has hyperlipidaemia but reports no history of diabetes or gout.
Patient ambulated with an antalgic gait. On physical assessment, his gastrocnemius remained tight with a positive Silfverskiöld test. Tenderness around the plantar aspect of the calcaneum was non-specific and found along the distribution of the plantar fascia insertion.
Foot and calcaneal radiographs showed normal bony relationships of the foot with no features of arthritis . No fractures or obvious lesions were noted. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left foot was performed. It reported the absence of plantar fascia thickening as well as no signal alteration in the adjacent soft tissue or bone marrow. MRI did reveal a pedunculated bony protrusion arising from the posterolateral plantar aspect of the calcaneus measuring 1.1 cm × 0.9 cm, which was consistent with an osteochondroma . Computed tomography scan was organised to better evaluate this lesion .