A 50-year-old Caucasian male collapsed unexpectedly whilst playing football. He was brought to hospital following successful resuscitation for an out-of-hospital ventricular tachycardia (VT) arrest. He had no significant past medical or family history of cardiac disease and was a keen recreational athlete, playing 5-a-side football regularly and cycling 60–100 miles per week. In the months leading up to his cardiac arrest, he recalled three brief episodes of exertional pre-syncope whilst playing sports. On admission, coronary angiography showed unobstructed epicardial vessels and echocardiography revealed mild LV impairment with normal heart valves. An FDG PET–computed tomography scan was negative for active myocardial inflammation. However, cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) demonstrated a mildly dilated and moderately impaired LV [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 41%] with epicardial late gadolinium enhancement of the lateral wall and subendocardial enhancement of the septum. The RV was non-dilated with no regional wall motion abnormalities (Videos 1–3).
A diagnosis of ACM was suspected, and he received an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) for secondary prevention. Post-implantation, his 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an atrial paced rhythm with normal ventricular conduction . The limb lead complexes were of low voltage and demonstrated fractionated QRS complexes. There were flattened inferolateral T waves and his signal-averaged ECG was negative for late potentials. He was discharged on Bisoprolol 5 mg daily, lifestyle advice to limit his exercise intensity, and referred for genetic testing along with a recommendation for clinical screening of his family members. He was asymptomatic for a significant period, but at 26 months follow-up device interrogation demonstrated three runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT) and he received one shock for sustained fast VT. He was then trialled on Nadolol therapy. Genetic testing for pathogenic Lamin A variants and subsequent testing against a panel of 77 cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia-related genes were negative.
At 41 months, an echocardiogram demonstrated a mildly dilated LV with mild-moderate systolic impairment (LVEF 45%). Interrogation of his ICD revealed two episodes of NSVT and one fast sustained VT treated by antitachycardia pacing. He was switched to Sotalol for its Class III antiarrhythmic properties and started Ramipril 1.25 mg once daily. Given his electrical and structural phenotype, genetic testing was extended to include FLNC. Subsequently, he tested positive for a likely pathogenic FLNC frameshift variant [c.8107del; p.(Asp2703ThrfsTer69)], thus confirming the diagnosis of ALVC. Predictive testing also uncovered the variant in his three children, all of whom had variable clinical expression of the disease.
At 52 months he was climbing a ski slope and experienced an episode of fast VT requiring an ICD shock . Following urgent electrophysiology outpatient review, he was referred for VT ablation utilizing a combined endocardial and epicardial approach. During the procedure, two types of VT arising from the LV were readily induced and radiofrequency ablation was targeted to abnormal local potentials and the region surrounding epicardial and endocardial scar. At 6 months post-ablation, he was asymptomatic and arrhythmia free on Sotalol 80 mg twice daily, and echocardiography showed some improvement in LV systolic function (LVEF 50–54%).