The proband was a 1-year and 11-month old boy at the time of admission. He is the third child with two healthy elder brothers of a non-consanguineous marriage, born after full-term by normal delivery, with a birth weight of 3000 g and allergy history of cephalosporin. No other members in the family have seizures. Nothing abnormal was observed in the perinatal period. Motor development and language development were mildly delayed before the onset of seizures, with an unbalanced gait and dual tone. The first two seizure episodes occurred within half a day when the temperature reached 39 °C at 1-year and 10-month old, which presented with generalized tonic-clonic, lasting for about 2 min per episode. Subsequently, the convulsion occurred twice during the following week without fever or other inducements. Twenty days later, the convulsion occurred again and presented as tonic of four limbs. Then the convulsion occurred more frequently (10–20/day) with varied epileptic seizure types such as myoclonic, atypical absence, atonic seizures a week before admission into our clinical center.
His height, body weight, and head circumference were 85.0 cm, 11.8 kg, and 48.0 cm respectively at the admission. He had no obvious craniofacial dysmorphisms with fontanel closure. No other positive signs were found upon physical examination except slight gait instability. Results from routine examination including urine/blood/cerebrospinal fluid, blood/cerebrospinal fluid biochemistry, blood electrolytes examination, blood glucose, cerebrospinal fluid pathogens, metabolic screening and brain magnetic resonance imagery were normal. Video-EEG monitoring was performed for 3 h which showed slow background activity accompanied by a 2 ~ 3 Hz slow activity major in anterior area , interictal EEG showed a large number of generalized high amplitude 2 ~ 2.5 Hz slow spike-and–wave complexes . Two atypical absence seizures with generalized high amplitude 2.5 ~ 3 Hz spike-and–wave complexes lasting 7 s ; two atonic seizures with 1-2 Hz polyspikes-and-wave complexes and electromyography flat ; and several myoclonic seizures with 1-2 Hz polyspikes-and-wave complexes and electromyography burst were recorded . The myoclonic seizures disappeared and atypical absence and atonic seizures improved with combined treatment of sodium valproate and nitrazepam. Then focal and general tonic-clonic seizures were seen during sleep occasionally. Follow-up EEG showed a large number of generalized high amplitude 1.5 ~ 2.5 Hz slow spike-and–wave complexes in the slow background . Lamotrigine then was added as the third drug for combination therapy, and after which the focal and general tonic-clonic seizures were well controlled and atypical absence, atonic seizures reduced. However, subsequently epileptic spasms emerged more than 10 times a day especially when he was quiet or shortly after waking up. During the two-month follow-up, the child exhibited gait instability and cognition regression, the Gesell scale scored 55, including gross motor 54, fine motor 47, language 70, cognition 50, social development 54. Based on the aforementioned clinical manifestations, the patient was diagnosed with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS). He was seizure-free with ketogenic diet combined with antiepileptic drugs forementioned finally. The blood Ketogen level was maintained at about 3 mmol/L.
To identify the potential pathogenic mutations, the proband and the parents’ genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes using the QIAamp® Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and subjected to whole-exome sequencing (WES) on Illumina NovaSeq6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The read mapping, variant calling, genome annotation, and variant prioritization were performed as described previously , the variant was classified according to standards and guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) . The results were also confirmed by Sanger sequencing. WES showed only one de novo heterozygous mutation c.4321C > T (p.Gln1441Ter) in TANC2 gene (NM_025185.4) in the proband . No other rare variants in any other genes associated with LGS reported previously were found in the patient. This nonsense mutation would lead to premature translation termination and has no allele frequency in several commonly used databases (i.e., dbSNP, gnomAD, ClinVar, HGMD). The in silico prediction score of GERP (Genomic Evolutionary Rate Profiling), LRT (Likelihood ratio test) and Mutation Taster is 5.29, 0 and 1 respectively which indicate pathogenicity. According to the ACMG clinical variant interpretation guidelines, the pathogenic evaluation of this variant was “PVS1 + PS2 + PM2”, which classified as “Pathogenic”. The genetic characteristics and pathogenetic analysis of the variant in TANC2 were displayed in Table .