A 23-year-old Sri Lankan man, who had been working as a motor mechanic for approximately 5 years, presented to our hospital with a 2-month history of progressive, yellowish discoloration of the eyes; bilateral ankle swelling; and abdominal distention not associated with right hypochondrial pain, pruritus, or fever. His past medical history was unremarkable except for being prescribed furosemide by a general practitioner for edema. He denied intake of any other drugs, health supplements, or herbs. He had no history of smoking and only occasionally consumed alcohol in safe amounts (within Asian standard <14 U/week). His last alcohol consumption had been several months prior to the onset of symptoms. He had no family history of chronic liver disease. He had worked in a garage as a motor mechanic and used to remove gasoline from carburetors by sucking using his mouth when suction pumps were not available. He did not practice proper mouth washing and used to swallow petroleum compounds in substantial amounts during most of his working days. He had continued this malpractice for nearly 5 years until he developed symptoms.
His clinical examination revealed icterus and ankle edema with nontender hepatomegaly and moderate ascites. The results of the rest of his clinical examination were normal. His laboratory data were as follows: hemoglobin 12.2 g/dl, white blood cell count 8920/mm3, platelet count 204,000/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 16 mm at the end of the first hour, aspartate aminotransferase 190 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 45 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 465 U/L, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 72 U/L, total bilirubin 26.4 mg/dl (direct bilirubin 12.8 mg/dl), total protein 58.4 g/L (albumin 23.2 g/L, globulin 35.2 g/L), prothrombin time 19.8 seconds (international normalized ratio 1.67), and serum creatinine 0.9 mg/dl. His laboratory results were negative for anti-hepatitis A virus (HAV) immunoglobulin M antibody, anti-HAV immunoglobulin G antibody, hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-hepatitis C virus antibody, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody and antigen, antinuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, and antimitochondrial antibodies. His levels of serum ferritin, serum copper, and serum ceruloplasmin were within normal ranges. The result of slit-lamp biomicroscopy was normal. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed hepatomegaly with a coarse hepatic echotexture suggestive of cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and moderate ascites without focal liver lesions. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed small esophageal varices with portal hypertensive gastropathy. His liver biopsy revealed evidence of cirrhosis with regenerating hepatocytes, but with no clue to the underlying etiology of his liver disease .
The patient was managed conservatively with symptomatic treatment. His regular medications included ursodeoxycholic acid, spironolactone, furosemide, lactulose, and carvedilol. His symptoms and laboratory parameters gradually improved during his hospital stay and stabilized over several weeks . He was able continue his regular occupation with cautious handling of petroleum compounds. Given his advanced Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) class C (CTP score 10/15) and high Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score (25), he is currently being worked up for a live-donor liver transplant.