An 8 year old girl with tufting enteropathy on long-term parenteral nutrition presented on 3 occasions with central venous catheter infection due to Bacillus species. On each occasion, she had fever after flushing of the central venous catheter. She had initially presented in the first few months of life with chronic watery diarrhoea and impaired growth, and was found to have tufting enteropathy (intestinal epithelial dysplasia) . This is a rare congenital enteropathy, which requires indefinite dependence on parenteral nutrition from early infancy. The child is on regular parenteral nutrition and has had no previous history of significant infections, except for central venous catheter infections with coagulase negative staphylococci. Immunoglobulins, neutrophil and lymphocyte counts were within the normal range. There was no history of significant trauma, injuries or skin infections prior to this episode, except a small cut on her finger which healed very well and was generally well in herself. She lives with her parents and is well cared for. There is no history of contact with plant growth products or animal probiotics at any time.
The child presented with fever and rigors to her local hospital. Bacillus species was isolated from blood taken from the central venous catheter, which was reported sensitive to flucloxacillin. She was treated with 4 weeks of intravenous flucloxacillin because bacteraemia had persisted despite 14 days of treatment.
The child was transferred to our hospital with recurrence of fever and rigors, 10 days after stopping the antibiotics. Empirical treatment was started with intravenous cefotaxime and flucloxacillin. Bacillus species was isolated from central venous catheter cultures both before and whilst on cefotaxime and flucloxacillin. This was later identified as Bacillus pumilus at the National Reference Laboratory (Health Protection Agency, Centre For Infection, London). The methods used to identify the organism were gram stain to determine whether spores are produced, short biochemical profile based on ammonia salt sugars, Lecithinase and mannitol (B. pumilus is lecithinase negative and mannitol positive) and DNA sequencing. B pumilus was reported to be sensitive to vancomycin and erythromycin. There were concerns that the patient had previously reacted to systemic vancomycin, so antibiotics were changed to intravenous clindamycin with vancomycin line locks given for 2 weeks. Blood cultures, taken both during and after this treatment, were negative. Echocardiography showed no evidence of vegetations at the tip of the catheter or in the heart.
Ten days after stopping the intravenous antibiotics the child presented for the third time with fever and rigors. A Bacillus species was again grown from blood taken from the central venous catheter. The central venous catheter was removed after 5 days treatment with intravenous vancomycin and a new central venous catheter was inserted. Subsequent blood cultures were negative and there has been no recurrence of further fever or infections over a 9-month period, suggesting the infection has been eradicated.