An 84-year-old man was admitted to our hospital complaining of muscular weakness while rising up from a chair that led to a fall. He was admitted for further studying, but his head CT and MRI did not report any abnormal structural findings. He reported a significant 10% weight loss in the past 6 months associated with decreased appetite and diminished mobility associated with progressive muscular weakness and difficulty rising from chair, with preservation of activities as combing his hair, or lifting small objects.
The physical examination was remarkable for muscular weakness with 3/5 muscle strength in the lower extremities and 4/5 of the upper extremities, confined to the proximal muscles. Tendon reflexes were diminished and the tone examination revealed mild bilateral quadriceps hypotonia and atrophy. There were no other clinical findings on the physical examination.
The patient reported a medical history of stage G4 chronic kidney disease, erythroid and megakaryocyte-predominant myelodysplastic syndrome, and high blood pressure, receiving medication with azacytidine, diltiazem, and darbepoetin. The patient did not smoke, consume alcohol, or use illicit drugs, and his family history was negative for neuromuscular diseases.
During the present admission, laboratory investigation showed an elevated creatine kinase level of up to 78,924 U/L (more than 50 times the normal reference range) and an aldolase value of 181 U/L (more than 20 times the normal reference range). Elevated serum creatinine was found (4.4 mg/dl; steady-state level 3 mg/dl), with mild hypocalcemia (7.2 mg/dl) and mild hyponatremia (130 mg/dl) with normal albumin (4 mg/dl). Thyroid hormones were normal, and cardiac enzymes were also in normal range. Coprologic examination revealed positive testing for rotavirus. Antibody testing reported negative results for antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), anti-Jo1, anti-3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), anti-Mi-2, and also for antiganglioside antibodies.
The electromyography (EMG) of the upper and lower limbs showed myopathic changes in proximal muscle, with lower limb predominance, with short duration, low-amplitude polyphasic potential with no positive sharp waves, and spontaneous electrical activity.
An FDG-PET/CT scan was performed searching for neoplasia due to the patient's past history and revealed increased FDG uptake in bilateral quadriceps, without posterior compartment muscle uptake or increased metabolism in any other region of the body . No other location of FDG uptake was found.
We performed an open biopsy of the left vastus lateralis muscle, which on light microscopy showed 50% myonecrosis, mild fiber atrophy, and lymphocytic infiltrate with CD8+ predominance and perivascular involvement. There were no immune deposits in the skin microscopic examination .
The diagnosis of PM was made and then the patient started on intravenous hydration with medium saline solution/bicarbonate for rhabdomyolysis and prednisone 0.5 mg/kg/day and intravenous immunoglobulin with a total dose of 2 g/kg distributed in 5 days, along with calcium supplementation and azacytidine. For the myelodysplastic syndrome diagnosis, steroid-sparing drugs such as azathioprine or methotrexate were not considered. The renal function of the patient improved within 5 days, with partial recovery of lower limb strength, and the patient was discharged for external consultation follow-up. After 2 months from discharge, the patient had increased muscle strength and diminished CPK levels, with low-dose prednisone as maintenance therapy.