A 31-year old man was admitted with symptoms of acute joint pain of three weeks' duration in both hips. The patient had no specific past history of disease and his laboratory findings were normal. Plain radiographs and MR examination revealed Ficat II osteonecrosis of both femoral heads. The left femoral head was treated by allograft immediately after core decompression, while the right side was treated by injection of autologous cultured osteoblasts for four weeks after the core decompression .
Follow-up CT obtained one year following treatment, demonstrated that the right femoral head had bone reformation in multiple necrotic areas, that the femoral head was still in optimal condition, and that the left head showed absorption of the grafted bone as well as disease progression.
Radiographs obtained five years following surgery showed evidence of remodeling as well as maintenance of the right femoral head, but the left femoral head showed slight irregularity, sclerotic changes, and osteophyte formation . On both the MRI and the CT images obtained five years following surgery, the right femoral head showed nearly complete healing of the necrotic lesions, while the necrotic lesions and subchondral bone breakage were still demonstrated in the left femoral head. At the time of five-year follow-up, the patient did not complain of right hip joint pain and had considerable restoration of a full range of joint motion, however, he still complained of intermittent pain and slight limitation of motion in the left hip.
Approximately 3 ml of bone marrow aspirated from the patient's posterior iliac crest, were added to a container filled with 30 ml of 10% FBS -α MEM (Sigma Chemical Company, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 350 units of heparin; the mixture was then taken to a laboratory. The mixture was centrifuged at 4°C, 472 g for 10 minutes after which the supernatant was discarded and 20 ml of culture medium was added to the remaining pellets. The mixture was filtered (Falcon, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), 10 ml of the medium were added per T-75 culture flask (Corning Science Products, Corning, NY, USA) and culture was initiated. The incubator (Automatic CO2 Incubator, Forma Scientific Inc, Marietta, OH, USA) was maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2. The next day, 50 μg L-ascorbic acid (Sigma)/10 ml and dexamethasone 10-7M were added to facilitate cell differentiation into osteoblasts. The cell culture condition was evaluated by a light microscope, and the culture medium was changed on the fifth day of culture, after which the culture medium was changed every three days with the subsequent addition of L-ascorbic acid. On the fourteenth day of culture, NBT-BCIP (nitro blue tetrazolium chloride – 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate) staining was performed to confirm activation of the alkaline phosphatase. Twenty-four days after beginning the culture, Alizarin red staining was performed to detect newly produced calcium, and it was thus confirmed that most of the cultured cells were osteoblasts. Approximately four weeks after beginning the culture, the medium was removed and the cells were washed with 5 ml 0.02% trypsin-ETDA (Gibco BRL, Gettysburg, PA, USA). 3 ml of 0.02% trypsin-ETDA was again added and the cells were incubated for five minutes. The trypsin-ETDA activity was stopped by adding 3 ml of culture medium, and all contents were collected in a conical tube and were centrifuged at 4°C, 265 g, for 6 minutes. The supernatant was removed, and the precipitate was collected. After adjusting the cell count to 1.2 × 107/ml, the cells were used in the transplant.
Under local anesthesia, the patient was placed on a fracture table in a lateral position with the affected hip upside. A 19-G spinal needle was attached to a 2-ml-syringe which contained the cultured osteoblasts which were then inserted into the deepest portion of the core decompression site with the guidance of a C-arm fluoroscopic image intensifier. Two ml of cell mixture were slowly injected with progressive withdrawal of the spinal needle into the junction of the femoral head and neck. After completing the injection, a slight compression force was applied to the injection site for hemostasis and the lateral position was maintained for 10 minutes. After core decompression surgery, the patient did not put weight on both hips for six weeks, after which he gradually advanced during the next eight weeks to full weight-bearing.