A 2-month-old Japanese boy (KS025) was brought to our hospital due to irritability, drowsiness, and lethargy. He had a cough for approximately 1 week and a fever for 3 days before admission. He was admitted because he was very pale, and the results of an examination showed the possibility of septic meningitis.
He was born at 39 weeks, and his birth weight was 3788 g. At birth, he was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for 6 days due to transient tachypnea of the newborn. He had received one immunization each against Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib), pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV), Rotavirus (Rota), and hepatitis B virus (HBV) before admission. His brother and father also had a cough for 2 weeks. He had no relevant family history.
His vital signs at admission were as follows: body temperature, 37.5 °C; pulse rate, 156 beats per minute (bpm); respiratory rate, 30 breaths/minute; and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2), 98%. His body height was 65.0 cm and body weight was 5992 g. On physical examination, he appeared irritable and pale. His anterior fontanelle was not bulging, and there were no murmurs, rales, abdominal abnormal features, or exanthemas. The capillary refilling time was within 2 seconds.
A blood examination revealed a slightly elevated level of C-reactive protein (CRP) and increased white blood cell (WBC) count. However, urine WBC levels were normal, and a chest radiograph showed no evidence of pneumonia. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was remarkable for neutrophilic pleocytosis, although protein and glucose levels were within normal ranges . A brain computed tomogram revealed no abnormalities.
Because he was suspected of having septic meningitis because of above observations, he was given ampicillin (300 mg/kg per day), cefotaxime (300 mg/kg per day), and dexamethasone (0.15 mg four times a day). He became afebrile on the third day of hospitalization, and his general status improved. The antibiotic and steroid therapies were discontinued on the fourth day and, since his condition was stable, he was discharged on the sixth day. Bacterial culture tests were negative from two samples each of blood, urine, and CSF.
After discharge using a sample of our patient’s CSF which was collected at admission, we performed metagenomic RNA(ribonucleic acid)-Seq pathogen detection by next generation sequencing (NGS) . Out of a total of 1,708,516 reads, three short reads homologous to those seen in TTV were detected. Next, we used our patient’s TTV-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers (5′–GGTTTCAGGTAGGTAGACA–3′ and 5′–GCCGAAGGTGAGTGAAA–3′) for quantitative PCR (qPCR) using TaKaRa SYBR® Fast qPCR Mix. We found that he was positive when compared with TTV-negative CSF samples from 13 control cases . Whole genome sequence of TTV has been determined to be of 2810 nt by PCR amplification followed by NGS and has been deposited in the DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ; Acc. no: LC381845).
We prepared a His-tagged recombinant GP2 (270–663 aa region, GenBank ID: BBD88555) antigen from TTV using WEPRO7240H wheat germ extract and the Protemist® DT II robotic protein synthesizer (CellFree Sciences Co., Matsuyama, Japan). We tested our patient’s immune response to the specific GP2 antigen using the automatic Western blot detection system Wes (ProteinSimple, San Jose, CA, USA) . Neither IgM (immunoglobulin M) nor IgG (immunoglobulin G) was detected in the CSF, although serum was positive for both. Basically, serum IgG is received from the mother, thus we could not conclude the immune response to the TTV infection; however, the serum IgM response observed in this patient provided supportive evidence for TTV infection.
We followed up our patient for 1 year after discharge. He has had no developmental problems, can now stand by himself, and has started talking. He can also climb steps and pick up small items with his fingers. His mental and motor development are both progressing well.