A 53-year-old Japanese woman with no significant medical history other than chronic gastritis, diagnosed by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy 6 years previously, presented to our hospital with a mass in the larynx that appeared to be malignant. She had a 1-year history of a dull feeling in her throat and cough. Three months earlier, she had been diagnosed with anisakiasis at a local clinic and had been incidentally found to have mass lesion of approximately 7-mm in diameter at the left tongue base, by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. One month earlier, follow-up nasopharyngoscopy had revealed no changes in the mass lesion, and an endoscopic biopsy had been performed. Squamous cell carcinoma was suspected pathologically, and the patient was referred to the department of otorhinolaryngology at our hospital for further evaluation.
An endoscopic biopsy was also performed in our outpatient clinic , but the biopsy specimens only showed atypical epithelium, and the scrape culture was negative. Intravenous contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the neck and thorax was unremarkable, except for bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy.
For further evaluation, an excision biopsy under general anesthesia was performed . Histopathological examination of a hematoxylin and eosin-stained biopsy specimen showed granulomatous tissue consisting mainly of histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells . Some histiocytes had phagocytized the encapsulated yeast-like organisms that were invading the epithelium. There were also scant neutrophils, but no micro-abscesses were found. The walls of the mass were positive on staining with Grocott’s methenamine silver . These findings suggested cryptococcosis; therefore, she was referred to the Department of Infectious Disease for the treatment of the residual mass lesion.
On physical examination, the patient was afebrile, and her vital signs were normal. Head and neck examination revealed no enlarged lymph nodes, and no meningeal signs. Examination of the pharynx revealed no pharyngeal edema or exudate. She had no skin lesions. The blood test results were unremarkable. An HIV antibody/antigen combination test result was negative. A neutrophil function test was not performed because she did not have a history of recurrent or severe bacterial infection, suggesting that her neutrophil function was normal. Chest CT revealed no pulmonary findings of note. A serum Cryptococcus antigen test (Bio-Medical Laboratories, Inc.), using a latex agglutination method was negative. Serum beta D glucan was not measured. Based on these findings and the histopathology, she was provisionally diagnosed with possible non-meningeal, non-pulmonary cryptococcosis. The scrape culture of the residual lesion at the base of the tongue was repeated, and then fosfluconazole treatment (6 mg/kg bodyweight/day) was initiated as treatment for localized cryptococcosis.
After 3 days of incubation of the separation culture that targeted Cryptococcus from the scrape specimen, white to pale purple-colored small colonies grew on the XM-Candida agar plate (Nissui Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) cultured at 35 °C in aerobic conditions . The VITEK® 2 COMPACT Microbial Detection System (version 8.01 database: SYSMEX bioMérieux Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) based on the biochemical reaction method with yeast identification card identified the colonies as P. wickerhamii. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS, using the MALDI Biotyper version 4.0.0.1 database; Bruker Daltonik, Germany) did not identify the colonies initially, but in the re-examination, it identified the colonies as P. wickerhamii with low probability (score 1.451). Lactophenol cotton blue staining of the colony revealed tightly packed endospores within the sporangia distinctive of P. wickerhamii .
DNA was extracted and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method was performed using primers to amplify the internal transcribed spacer region and the D1/D2 domain of the large subunit ribosomal DNA gene. Sequence analysis of the amplicons showed no significant results, suggesting genetic polymorphism. Cloning was performed, and base sequences showing high homology with P. wickerhamii genes were detected.
Therefore, a diagnosis of laryngeal protothecosis was established. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) results using the Frozen Plate for Antifungal Susceptibility Testing of Yeasts, Eiken (Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo) were as follows: amphotericin B, 1 µg/mL; fluconazole, > 64 µg/mL; itraconazole, 4 µg/mL; voriconazole, 1 µg/mL; miconazole, > 16 µg/mL; flucytosine, > 64 µg/mL; and micafungin, > 16 µg/mL. Empiric fosfluconazole treatment was discontinued after 10 weeks because the size of the residual mass lesion did not change. Amphotericin B syrup (1 mL, 4 times a day) was initiated and continued for 6 weeks instead of intravenous amphotericin B treatment because the patient was asymptomatic and could not take time off from work to be admitted to hospital for intravenous amphotericin B treatment. Although we considered additional and definitive resection after the patient was diagnosed with Prototheca infection, we decided against it because we anticipated that it would be difficult to remove the lesion with safety margins because the vertical margin was not clearly determined on macroscopic examination, and resection carried a risk of causing difficulties with speech and swallowing. The residual mass lesion did not deteriorate during the antifungal treatment or the post-treatment one-year follow-up period.