A 42 year-old, right hand dominant male presented with 10 years of atraumatic right shoulder pain, exacerbated by overhead activity and weightlifting. He denied any history of trauma or instability. Physical examination revealed no gross deformities and no tenderness at the acromioclavicular joint or along the bicipital tunnel. Internal rotation was slightly limited compared to his contralateral side. The rotator cuff (RC) demonstrated mild weakness and was easily fatigued. Neer and Hawkins impingement tests were markedly positive. The active compression test (O’Brien Sign) was also positive as indicated by reproduction of the patient’s symptoms - pain deep within the glenohumeral joint - during phase one (thumb down) that were alleviated in phase two (thumb up). Cross-body adduction, speeds, and Yergason tests were all negative, and there was no evidence of shoulder instability. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a partial-thickness articular-sided tearing of the supraspinatus (SS) and degenerative labrum tearing The biceps tendon was noted to have an accessory slip originating from the anterior aspect of the SS. Conservative efforts including oral anti-inflammatories, activity modification, corticosteroid injection, and physical therapy failed to provide longstanding relief. The patient elected to undergo definitive surgical intervention to include labral debridement, subacromial decompression, and biceps tenodesis. During diagnostic arthroscopy, the origin of the LHBT was found to be trifurcate, with origins arising from the SS tendon, superior labrum, and rotator interval (RI). At the articular margin, the LHBT was bifurcate . The more anterior of these two structures (2.8 cm) attached to the RI with its fibers blending such that the tendon was grossly indistinguishable from the interval tissue itself and separate from the leading edge of the SS. The more posterior bifurcate portion of the LHBT (3.8 cm) itself bifurcated with one portion attaching directly to the undersurface of the SS, while the remaining band attached to the superior labrum/supraglenoid tubercle . No fraying or gross inflammatory changes of the LHBT were appreciated . Tenotomy of all three origins was carried out using a radiofrequency ablation wand with care to avoid damaging either the SS or the RI tissue. Subpectoral biceps tenodesis was selected for definitive management to enable fixation of a single tendon. Postoperatively, the patient was started on early range of motion with limitations of active elbow flexion to less than 1 pound for the first 6 weeks followed by progressive strengthening. By 3 months postoperatively, the patient maintained normal biceps contour, regained full shoulder motion, and was progressing his activities without limitation.