The patient was a 51-year-old, female sex, blood group O, with advanced decompensated primary biliary cirrhosis presenting with refractory ascites, sarcopenia, portal hypertension and significant jaundice. The United Kingdom Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (UKELD) score was 61 [, , ] and she was listed for LT. This patient received a DCD liver from a 74-year-old, male sex, donor. Further donor details are presented in . Recipient laboratorial data on the index admission for transplantation were summarised in .
The graft had normal hepatic artery anatomy, but an extensive atheromatous plaque up to the GDA. During implantation, the graft GDA was divided obliquely along the main hepatic artery stem and an endarterectomy was done. A plaque free portion of the hepatic artery above the GDA was obtained for direct anastomosis to the native CHA at the GDA junction; thereafter, a short, straight and non-redundant arterial reconstruction was performed. The anastomosis width was just over 6 mm, there were good pulse waves and the resistance index was confirmed by doppler ultrasound intra-operatively.
Surgical times are presented in . In terms of postoperative complications, this patient developed renal dysfunction and fluid overload in the immediate post-operative period, requiring temporary renal support. Additionally, further respiratory infection required the intensive care unit (ICU) up to post-operative day (POD) 9. Patient also developed delayed graft function with prolonged cholestasis. The bilirubin level was 266 mmol/L on POD 29 and it improved gradually down to 69 mmol/L by POD 49 when the patient was discharged. It was within the normal range (18 mmol/L) after 3 months of the transplant. During hospitalisation 4500 units of low molecular heparin and 75 mg of aspirin were given daily from POD 1 onward, as per unit protocol. The haemoglobin level was maintained around 80 g/L and platelets on an average of 80,000 counts until POD 5. Immunosuppression was standard, and the biochemistry was within the normal range at 4 months follow up. An ultrasound scan at 4 months post-transplant showed patent graft vessels and a non-dilated biliary system without evidence of HAT or hepatic artery stenosis (, ).