A 28-year-old man complained of an abdominal mass and continuously increasing pain over the previous 2 months. Physical examination revealed a midabdominal mass on abdominal palpation, atrophy and minimal induration in the right testis on scrotal palpation. The left testis was found to be normal. No abnormal finding was noted on digital rectal examination. Examination of the other systems, including the endocrine system, was normal.
His white blood cell count and urine microscopy were normal. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 56 mg/dl (normally 1 to 40), alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 42 mg/dl (normally 1 to 38), alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 768 mg/dl (normally 80 to 306), gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT): 160 mg/dl (normally 6 to 50) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 6302 mg/dl (normally 266 to 501) were found in the blood biochemistry. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was high (110 mm/hour). Values for alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) (5.9 ng/ml (normally 0 to 10.0)) and beta human chorionic gonadotrophin hormone (β-hCG) (0.773 mIU/ml (normally <4)) were within normal limits. Chest X-ray was normal. Scrotal ultrasonogram revealed minimal hypoechogeneity and non-homogeneity in the right testis. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a very large retroperitoneal mass (13×8 cm), extending across the midline . Thorax CT was normal.
Needle aspiration biopsy was performed for the retroperitoneal mass and malignant tumour infiltration was reported. After the immunohistochemical studies, cytokeratin (CK) (-), vimentin (-), leukocyte common antigen (LCA) (-), β-hCG (-) and placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) (+) immunoreactivity were noted, indicating a germ cell tumour.
Scrotal ultrasonogram revealed hypoechogeneity and non-homogeneity in the right testicle. Evidence of a tumour was not found. The left testicle and epididymis were normal. After pre-operative evaluation, right inguinal orchiectomy was performed to determine the primary site of the tumour. Histological examination of the biopsy specimen revealed a large area of hyalinization, tubular hyalinization, interstitial fibrosis and focal Leydig cell hyperplasia. There were no pathological findings in the epididymis and spermatic cord. The final pathological diagnosis was 'burned-out' testicular tumour .
Because of the large retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis, primary chemotherapeutic treatment was performed. Combination chemotherapy, consisting of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin, was given in three weekly cycles of four courses. After the four courses of chemotherapy treatment, the abdominal mass had regressed from 13×8 cm to 3×2 cm .
After the chemotherapy, a control CT scan was obtained revealing regression in the para-aortic and para-caval lymph nodes (3×2 cm and multiple lymph nodes). After 6 months, tumour markers had increased (AFP: 3.59 ng/ml (normally 0 to 10.0) and β-hCG: 20.95 mIU/ml (normally <4)). Because only the β-hCG level had increased, the histology of the primary tumour seemed to indicate a seminoma. For this reason, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection was planned. Exploratory laparotomy revealed a retroperitoneal mass which extended both sides of the midline and involved the major vessels and extended to the eosophogastric junction, indicating an unresectable mass. A biopsy was performed from the unresectable mass and histological examination of the biopsy specimen showed only necrotic tissue and no tumour cells.
Salvage chemotherapy consisting of paclitaxel, ifosfamide and cisplatin (TIP) was given in monthly cycles of four courses. After this chemotherapy, an abdominal CT scan revealed regression in the para-aortic and para-caval lymph nodes (milimetrical). AFP and β-hCG levels were normal (AFP: 1 ng/ml (normally 0 to 10.0) and β-HCG: 0.180 mIU/ml (normally <4)).
The patient has been disease and recurrence free for 5 years since the primary surgical and medical treatment.