A 32-year-old woman with a gestational age of 32 wk + 4 d experienced epigastric pain. She was asymptomatic for COVID-19.
She first experienced pain in the epigastrium 2 h before the initial examination, with a gradual worsening of her condition.
The patient had no comorbidities and was not taking any chronic medication.
There was no significant personal or family history.
Physical examination revealed epigastric pain, with a body temperature of 36.5 °C, blood pressure of 17, 6/11 kPa, and oxygen saturation of 97%. Electrocardiogram (ECG) and cardiotocographic findings were normal. We initially suspected her to have hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count syndrome (HELLP) and performed fetal lung maturity induction while administering 12 mg betamethasone intravenously for 24 h.
Blood tests results revealed elevated liver enzymes [alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 272.4 IU/L, aspartate transaminase (AST): 159.6 IU/L, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 172.8 IU/L], without any findings of viral hepatitis (the samples were negative for hepatitis A virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, hepatitis E virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). Her coagulation parameters were normal; hence other pregnancy-related liver pathologies were excluded. The hepatologist suggested that her condition was most likely related to hepatopathy of unknown etiology. SARS-CoV-2 positivity on reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was confirmed, although the patient was asymptomatic.
The initial ultrasound examination revealed a live fetus without any abnormal findings.
Over a week, the liver enzymes and platelet count returned to normal levels. On the fourth day of hospitalization, pain developed in the right subcostal region and physical examination revealed a positive Murphy’s sign, while her ECG was normal, D-dimers concentration was above 10000 µg/L, and liver enzymes were slightly elevated (ALT: 372 IU/L; AST: 258 IU/L). Therefore, we ruled out acute coronary syndrome. Abdominal ultrasound examination confirmed no abnormalities in the abdominal organs, a viable fetus, and no free fluid in the abdominal cavity. We administered anticoagulant therapy (0.3 mL low molecular weight heparin every 12 h). The correlation between the laboratory findings and clinical findings was unclear. Within 2 h, the patient developed a collapsed state without trauma and her blood test showed a marked increase in ALT (1789.8 IU/L) and AST (1747.2 IU/L). In addition, lactate dehydrogenase (LD) levels (1671 IU/L) and platelets (88 × 109/L) were highly elevated. Therefore, an emergency cesarean section was planned.