A 67-year-old man with permanent AF and haemophilia was referred for further evaluation to our cardiology clinic by his primary haematologist. His past medical history included hypertension and heart failure. Recombinant factor VIII infusion was prescribed regularly and his baseline factor VIII activity level was kept around 10% by his primary haematologist. The CHA2DS2-VASc score was estimated to be 3 and the HAS-BLED score was 3. Due to the high risk of bleeding, we decided to perform percutaneous LAA closure. Pre-procedural cardiac computerized tomography angiography and TOE were performed for measurements of LAA dimensions and exclude LAA thrombus . The procedure was performed under mild anaesthesia, with the aid of TOE and fluoroscopy guidance. Additional recombinant factor VIII was administered according to the recommendations of haematologist before catheterization. Based on measurements, a 28-mm AmplatzerTM AmuletTM device was chosen for occlusion. Initially, trans-septal puncture was performed at the posteroinferior interatrial septum using the right femoral vein as the access site, and then 5000 IU of intravenous heparin was administered. The trans-septal sheath was exchanged for the 12-Fr delivery catheter which was subsequently loaded with the 28-mm AmplatzerTM AmuletTM device. The delivery catheter was advanced up to the LAA ostium and under TOE guidance the lobe of the device was carefully pushed to the landing zone and deployed at that level. The deployment of the proximal disc was then achieved by advancing the delivery cable while unsheathing the disc . The final result was excellent without significant residual leak, pericardial effusion, and embolic complication .The remaining hospital stay was uneventful and he was discharged on the following day. Clopidogrel 75 mg/day and aspirin 81 mg/day for 1 month with adequate FVIII prophylaxis and then only aspirin 81 mg/day for 2 months were recommended. No antithrombotic was given after 3 months. The patient did not report any thrombotic or haemorrhagic adverse events and there were no complications related to implanted device after 1 year of follow-up.