A 62 year old Caucasian female was hospitalized for six days for treatment of a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbation. Management included steroids and antibiotics. Home medications included clopidogrel for coronary artery disease. Her weight was 46.58 kilograms with a BMI of 17.7 and an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 60.65 ml/min. During the hospitalization she was treated for DVT prophylaxis with enoxaparin 40 mg by subcutaneous injection daily.Seven days after discharge, the patient returned to the emergency department complaining of diffuse abdominal pain, increasing abdominal girth, and anterior wall bruising. An abdominal CT scan confirmed a large RSH . Both general surgery and interventional radiology were consulted. She was managed conservatively. Her hematocrit dropped from 34.8 to 25.3%; however, she declined transfusion of blood products. During the course of her stay, the patient experienced acute hypoxic respiratory failure and did not wish to be intubated. Her medical status deteriorated and, with support from her family, the patient chose to be made comfortable with minimal supportive care. She expired due to sepsis and respiratory failure two days after re-admission.
A 79 year old male Caucasian was admitted for worsening dyspnea and management of atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular rate and COPD exacerbation. His clinical course was further complicated by resistant gram negative and gram positive pneumonia and hypoxic respiratory failure. His weight was 59 kilograms with a BMI of 18 and initially his eGFR was 41.98 ml/min. He received subcutaneous abdominal injections of both prophylactic enoxaparin 30 mg and insulin sliding scale therapy. On day 2, his eGFR was calculated at 53.94 and his enoxaparin dose was increased to 40 mg daily.On day 5, he was noted to have abdominal pain and a noncontrast CT scan confirmed a left RSH that expanded considerably over 12 hours on follow up CT. Interventional radiology was consulted but ultimately the patient was managed conservatively with fluid resuscitation and close observation. His hematocrit dropped from 46 to 25.8%. The patient was discharged after 15 days to a long term acute care facility for further management of his respiratory failure and healthcare associated pneumonia.
An obese 44 year old Caucasian female with multiple chronic medical problems was readmitted to our facility from a ventilator capable extended care facility for sepsis and acute on chronic hypoxic respiratory failure. Comorbidities included spina bifida and central obesity with a BMI of 27. She was admitted on warfarin therapy for a history of recent deep vein thrombosis; however, she was subtherapeutic, with an International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 1.59. She was, therefore, treated with full dose enoxaparin 80 mg by subcutaneous injection twice daily. Her eGFR was 148.65 ml/min. Coumadin was held as the patient was treated with anitfungal and antimicrobial therapy that could prolong her INR.On day 8, she complained of abdominal pain and a CT scan confirmed a large right RSH . Repeat CT scan one day later showed extension of the hematoma and concern for possible active arterial extravasation. Both general surgery and interventional radiology were consulted. The patient underwent a failed attempt at embolization due to access complications. Due to hemorrhagic shock she required transfusion with 10 units of RBCs and pressure support ventilation in the intensive care unit. Her hematocrit dropped from 34.9 to 20.6%. Anticoagulation was reversed with fresh frozen plasma, vitamin K, and one dose of recombinant factor VIIa. The patient subsequently underwent successful embolization with thrombin and coiling of the right inferior epigastric artery by vascular surgery two days after the initial hematoma. Serial CT scans confirmed no further bleeding. After two weeks, anticoagulation therapy was reinstituted without further evidence of bleeding. The patient was ultimately discharged to a long term acute care facility for continued management of her chronic respiratory failure.