A 50-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for evolution of progressive dyspnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, orthopnea and fatigue, and abdominal distension. These symptoms began 2 months earlier, when he was diagnosed at a different hospital with bacterial pneumonia complicated by bilateral parapneumonic effusion, which required drainage. His past medical history included bilateral lipoma, which was surgically treated 1 year prior to admission, and thyroiditis 3 years earlier. He reported regular moderate alcohol intake (100 g/wk) and that he had smoked 20 cigarettes a day for 30 years. The study protocol was approved by the ethics review board of the First Hospital of Jilin University (No. 2016-263). Informed written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.

Upon admission, his respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, pulse was 102 beats/min, and blood pressure was 98/65 mm Hg. Bleeding points were scattered in the abdominal skin and hemorrhagic purpura were around the eye orbit. Physical examination revealed jugular venous distention and abolition of bilateral basilar breath sounds based on pulmonary auscultation. There was no cardiac murmur; however, a third heart sound was heard.

An echocardiography test of the chest demonstrated small bilateral pleural effusions, 42 mm under the left 7th rib and 54 mm under the right 7th rib. Electrocardiography (ECG) demonstrated a sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 93 beats/min, poor R-wave progression in leads V1–V3 with right axis deviation, and low voltage criteria. Echocardiography revealed diffuse left ventricular hypertrophy (septal and free wall thickness of 17 and 14 mm, respectively) with normal ventricular cavity size (diastolic and systolic chamber diameters of 45 and 23 mm, respectively). Enlarged atria (35 × 50 × 45 mm), and mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation were observed. The left ventricle was interpreted to have severe diastolic dysfunction (mitral E wave velocity = 0.8 m/s, A wave = 0.27 m/s, medial E/e′ = 20), as well as mildly impaired systolic function with an impaired ejection fraction of 54% based on 2-dimensional echocardiography. The early diastolic transmitral filling velocity to atrial filling velocity (E/A) ratio increased to 4.25. The ventricle wall was characteristic sparkling and of granular texture. The echocardiographic appearance of thickened ventricle accompanied with low QRS voltage in ECG was characteristic. These abnormalities were considered suggestive of amyloidosis. To further evaluate both myocardial and pericardial pathologies, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed on a 3.0-T MR scan system. The cardiac MRI showed diffuse, subendocardial delayed gadolinium enhancement.

Additional testing revealed troponin I was mildly elevated at 0.14 ng/mL (normal 0–0.034 ng/mL). Plasma N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was elevated at 15,000 pg/mL (normal 0–400 pg/mL). Serum electrophoresis failed to detect monoclonal gammopathy in the serum, but immunoelectrophoresis revealed free lambda light chains. Serum free light–chain (FLC) analysis showed an altered kappa/lambda ratio of 0.01, with lambda light chains increased at 1240 mg/L (normal 8.3–27.0 mg/L). Bence-Jones protein was not detected in the urine. Bone marrow examination confirmed benign monoclonal gammopathy with 8.5% plasma cells, and biopsy stained for Congo red was negative. There was no evidence of multiple myeloma on skeletal survey. Autoantibody screening was normal. The glomerular filtration ratios were normal with daily proteinuria. A periumbilical fat aspirate sample confirmed amyloidosis. The patient was finally diagnosed with AL amyloidosis with cardiac and skin involvement, and in stage III using the Mayo 2012 staging system.

The patient's therapeutic plan was to perform 3 cycles of therapy with bortezomib (1.3 mg/sqm/d) and dexamethasone (20 mg/d) administered on the 1st, 8th, 15th, and 22nd days of each 3-week course. Cyclophosphamide was subsequently administered on the 2nd, 9th, 16th, and 23rd days (300 mg/d). Unfortunately, 5 days after the second cycle of therapy with bortezomib, the NT-proBNP level increased from 15,000 to 31,100 pg/mL, and troponin I increased from 0.14 to 0.463 ng/mL. The patient died because of a fulminant syndrome characterized by infiltrative pulmonary disease with hemorrhage, severe pulmonary infection, and heart failure.