An 81-year-old Korean man visited our out-patient clinic complaining of cough, dyspnea, and febrile sensation. He denied any previous medical histories. He stopped smoking tobacco 30 years ago, and never drank alcohol in recent years. His vital signs were: blood pressure 140/80 mmHg, heart rate 96 beats/minute, respiratory rate 22 breaths/minute, and body temperature 38.2 °C. On physical examination, crackle was noted in both lungs. Laboratory tests revealed a white cell count of 7800/mm3 with slight left shift (neutrophils 88.6%), C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 223.6 mg/dL (normal < 5.0 mg/dL), total bilirubin level of 1.5 mg/dL, and alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase levels of 59 and 61 IU/L, respectively. His sodium level was 125 mEq/mL. In arterial blood gas analysis, which was checked in ambient conditions, pH, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2), partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2), bicarbonate, and oxygen saturation levels were 7.50, 30 mmHg, 48 mmHg, 23.4 mmol/L, and 87%, respectively. The result of a test for human immunodeficiency virus was negative. Serologic tests for Mycoplasma and Chlamydia were negative. Streptococcal and Legionella urinary antigens were negative. Anti-nuclear and anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. A chest X-ray revealed diffuse haziness dominant in his right lung field. Chest computed tomography revealed ground glass opacity in both lungs with small amounts of pleural effusion dominant in the right hemithorax. With an initial assessment of community-acquired pneumonia, we administered nasal oxygen at 4L/minute and empirical antibiotics with a respiratory quinolone. At hospital day 2, thoracentesis was conducted in the right hemithorax and a turbid yellowish fluid was obtained. Pleural fluid analysis revealed lymphocyte-dominant exudate with white cell count of 560/mm3 and adenosine deaminase level of 4.4 IU/L. On the same day, opacities were found on chest X-ray and hypoxemia rapidly progressed to require high flow oxygen supply with fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 0.8 at a flow rate of 40 L/minute. At hospital day 3, he had to be intubated and mechanically ventilated due to worsening hypoxemia. The initial PaO2/FiO2 after application of mechanical ventilator was 65, which was compatible with the definition of “severe” ARDS. Potential cardiac dysfunction was ruled out using transthoracic echocardiography. Antibiotics were escalated to carbapenem. Multiplex real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was conducted using AdvanSureTM respiratory virus real-time RT-PCR kit (LG Life Sciences, Seoul, Korea) to detect respiratory viruses using tracheal aspirate. Results revealed positive for human RSV type B. Under the diagnosis of RSV-induced ARDS based on the Berlin definition, we started antiviral therapy of orally administered ribavirin 400 mg every 12 hours with concomitant intravenously administered methylprednisolone 30 mg every 24 hours. After treatment, hypoxemia and lung lesions gradually improved. At hospital day 17, he was extubated and we tapered methylprednisolone to orally administered prednisolone 15 mg. Finally, his chest X-ray cleared and he was discharged on hospital day 27 without any complications or drug-related adverse events. Orally administered ribavirin was maintained until his discharge.