A 56-year-old previously healthy Chinese female was admitted to our medical center because of detection of a malignancy-suspected nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid by a routine ultrasonography examination two months ago, which displayed a 1.28 cm*1.14 cm hypoechoic nodule inside the right lobe of thyroid with irregular shape and fairly clear margins close to the posterior capsule, and the Color-flow Doppler imaging showed short-trip blood flows inside . There were no complaints of palpitation, hyperhidrosis, hoarseness, dyspnea, dysphagia, osteoporosis or convulsion of limbs. The patient was soon scheduled for surgery, before which a preoperative assay of level of serum calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P) showed normal (Ca 2.50 mmol per liter, P 0.94 mmol per liter).
During the operation, it was found that the tumor was completely located inside the right lobe of thyroid, the texture of which was soft, and the thyroid membrane was intact while no infiltration of adjacent structures was seen. The intraoperative rapid pathology highly suspected malignancy while no characteristic papillary pathological structure was detected, remaining further classification still in need of postoperative paraffin pathology. In addition, during the operation, we detected that some right VI lymph nodes were abnormal swell and hyperplasia, consequently, we finally performed right thyroid lobectomy combined with right VI lymphadenectomy.
The patient was sent back to ward in generally good condition after a smooth surgery and an immediate postoperative assay of calcitonin (CT) and carcinoembryonic(CEA)antigen showed no abnormality (CT < 1.5 pg per milliliter, CEA 2.32 ng per milliliter). After three days of medical care, the patient recovered well and was discharged smoothly. The postoperative paraffin pathological diagnosis revealed adenocarcinoma of parathyroid and the level of serum parathormone (PTH), Ca and P showed no abnormality (PTH 66.1 pg per milliliter, Ca 2.31 mmol per liter, P 1.17 mmol per liter). In addition, 99 m-Tc-MIBI-Pertechnetate imaging showed that the rest parathyroid appeared no abnormality. At a six-month follow up visit after operation, no discomforts or side effects were complained by the patient as well as no obvious locally recurrence were indicated by ultrasonography and the patient is still under regular routine follow up.