A 55-year-old Taiwanese woman had a history of Hailey—Hailey disease with some stable erythematous macerated patches over bilateral axillary and submammary areas without regular treatment. She presented with four large (size ranged from 2 × 2 cm to 4 × 4 cm), itchy, tendered, erythematous, weeping, and infiltrated noduloplaques with a surface cobblestone appearance over the vertex and occipital scalp for 5 days (a,b). Skin biopsy was performed under the impression of atypical infection and oral minocycline and topical gentamicin ointment were administered. A histologic examination revealed surface erosions with serum crusts, papillomatosis, and acanthosis with finger-like downward projections of the epidermis. The dermal changes included prominent papillary dermal edema and heavy lymphohistiocyte infiltration extending from the upper dermis to the reticular dermis (c). Cytoplasmic vacuolation (koilocytic change) of the upper epidermis and intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions in vacuolated epidermal cells (d) were also noted. No acantholysis change related to Hailey—Hailey disease was noted. Special stains, including Grocott-Gomori’s methenamines silver (GMS), periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), and acid-fast stain all revealed negative results. The tissue Gram stain and fungal and mycobacterial culture were also negative.
One week later, her skin lesions improved partially with less swelling and oozing, but was still indurated with some yellowish crusts. On questioning, the patient reported that she was a farmworker that raised goats and sold goat milk. Many lambs had some skin lesions located at the muzzle area during that period. Since Orf infection was highly suspected based on the occupational history and consistent histologic findings, we further arranged a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded skin biopsy specimens.
The genomic DNA was extracted from the skin tissue slides. The extracted genomic DNA was used for PCR amplification using primers forward 5′-CGGTGCAGCACGAGGTC-3′, and reverse 5′-CGGCGTATTCTTCTCGGACT-3′ according to Andreani et al. with some modification. These primers are specific for the B2L gene, which encodes the major membrane protein of parapoxvirus. The primers were added to more base pairs (bp) (33 bp on the forward primer and 34 bp on the reverse primer) to add an adaptor sequence for the subsequent next generation sequencing. The adaptor sequence was following the instruction of Illumina guidance (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on the iSeq 100 Sequencing Machine (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The DNA product was run on 2% agarose gel and revealed that the size of the DNA products was 147 bp (80 + 33 + 34 bp) (a). The DNA sequence specific for the B2L gene (80 bp) (b) was confirmed using next generation sequencing. Thus, orf infection was diagnosed.
At a follow-up visit 2 weeks after initial presentation, all the noduloplaques on the scalp resolved with residual erythema and some crusts.