A 50-year-old man presented with positive fecal occult blood test results. He denied any previous medical or surgical history. On digital examination, a solid tumor 5 cm from the anal verge on the posterior side of the rectum was palpated, and there were no anal fistulas or abscesses. Colonoscopy revealed a rectal tumor below the peritoneal reflection, occupying three-quarters of the circumference . A pathological diagnosis of the biopsy specimen indicated a well-to-moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no significant regional lymphadenopathy or distant metastasis. Therefore, the clinical diagnosis was rectal cancer cT3N0M0, cStage IIa (UICC TNM classification 8th edition) .
We indicated preoperative chemoradiation therapy (CRT), comprising 45 Gy in 25 fractions; tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil potassium (S-1), 80 mg/m2/day at days 1–14 and 21–35 (2 cycles). The patient did not experience any significant adverse events. Four weeks after completion of CRT, a follow-up CT and MRI showed that the primary tumor had shrunk with a partial response as defined by the Japanese Society for Cancer of the Colon and Rectum (JSCCR) , but a small liver mass highly indicative of metastasis was also detected. This was later diagnosed as cavernous hemangioma using gadolinium ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid-enhanced MRI 3 months after CRT initiation. We then indicated consolidation chemotherapy, consisting of capecitabine combined with oxaliplatin (XELOX regimen: intravenous oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 [day 1] followed by oral capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 twice daily [day 1, evening to day 15, morning]). His tolerance to chemotherapy gradually declined due to peripheral sensory neuropathy (CTCAE Grade 1 to 2 ) after three cycles. As such, we excluded oxaliplatin and continued consolidation chemotherapy with three cycles of capecitabine alone (1000 mg/m2 twice daily [day 1, evening to day 15, morning]). Four weeks after completing consolidation chemotherapy, follow-up colonoscopy showed that the primary tumor achieved a complete response based on the JSCCR guidelines . Since a follow-up CT simultaneously showed thickening of the edematous rectal wall, we planned to perform low anterior resection as a radical surgery after neoadjuvant therapy.
However, he presented with persistent anal pain 2 weeks after the last chemotherapy session. Anorectal examination revealed tenderness and rigidity around the posterior side of the anus, which was distant from the primary tumor. MRI revealed a high-intensity mass behind the anus, suggestive of an anal fistula . We considered the differential diagnosis of a benign anal fistula or implantation metastasis into the anal fistula. Coring-out fistulectomy was performed, and the resected fistula was pathologically diagnosed as tubular adenocarcinoma, which has similar morphological characteristics to rectal cancer . The resection margin was deemed positive because of the cauterized margin of cancer cells. This result suggested an implantation metastasis to the anal fistula. Therefore, instead of low anterior resection, abdominoperineal resection was performed to resect the primary rectal tumor and metastatic lesion simultaneously.
Twelve weeks after completing consolidation chemotherapy, we performed laparoscopic abdominoperineal resection. The postoperative course was complicated by a perineal abscess requiring percutaneous drainage. Otherwise, it was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 25th postoperative day. Histopathological examination revealed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, ypT2, INFb, Ly0, V0, Pn0, pPM0, pDM0, ypN0 . The therapeutic effect was grade 2 according to the definition of the JSCCR .
Subsequently, we investigated the origin of the tubular adenocarcinoma from the resected anal fistula by immunohistochemistry and found that it was CDX-2-positive, CK20-positive, CK7-negative, and GCDFP-15-negative . These findings implied that the anal fistula adenocarcinoma was consistent with metastasis and intraluminally implanted rectal cancer. The patient declined to undergo postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. No recurrence was detected until his last follow-up 21 months after the surgery.