This case involves a 29-year-old mother who has given birth four times, currently in her second month postpartum, presenting to the emergency department with complaints of headaches and blurred vision persisting for three weeks. She also reported experiencing right-sided body weakness for one day. Despite being treated twice before for migraine headaches, a diagnosis of CVT was eventually made. There is no personal or family history of thromboembolism. Upon examination, her blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, and all other vital signs were within normal limits. She was fully conscious, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 15/15. Motor strength was 4/5 in the right upper extremity, 4+ in the right lower extremity, and 5/5 in the left upper and lower extremities. Meningeal signs were absent. Laboratory tests including complete blood count, random blood sugar, organ function tests, and viral markers were all normal. A contrast-enhanced head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a filling defect along the superior sagittal sinus, resembling a delta sign, as well as a tubular filling defect along the posterior aspect of the superior sagittal sinus. Enoxaparin treatment was started, and the patient was admitted to the medical ward. On the admission day, the patient experienced a single episode of generalized tonic-clonic seizure and was subsequently moved to the intensive care unit, where phenytoin was initiated. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with MRV conducted on the second day of admission revealed a focal filling defect in the right anastomotic vein and the posterior segment of the superior sagittal sinus. The patient underwent an ophthalmologic assessment, which revealed a diagnosis of papilledema. Treatment with acetazolamide was initiated accordingly. She remained in the intensive care unit for 5 days and subsequently spent 11 days in the medical ward. After a total of 16 days of hospitalization, the patient’s condition improved with the combination of phenytoin, acetazolamide, and warfarin. Considering the postpartum period as a temporary risk factor for CVT, oral anticoagulation and other medications were ceased after six months of treatment. The patient is presently in good health, indicating an absence of weakness, headaches, or any lingering symptoms previously experienced.