A 37-year-old female, 159 cm tall, weighing 53 kg, presented with progressive exertional dyspnea for 6 months. A diagnosis of autoimmune PAP was confirmed based on her history, high-resolution computerized tomography (HRCT), and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) findings. WLL of the left lung, in which pulmonary infiltrates were denser than in the right lung on HRCT, was performed under general anesthesia due to exacerbation of dyspnea during follow-up. The first lavages were performed with 10,000 ml of normal saline, with an almost equal volume of returning effluent. Although her postoperative course was smooth for 4 months, she again developed exertional dyspnea and new and denser pulmonary infiltrates. Thus, a second WLL was planned 8 months after the first WLL.
Arterial blood gas (ABG) values before the second WLL, with the patient breathing room air, are as shown in Table . Pulmonary function tests revealed a restrictive pattern: vital capacity (VC)=1.44 (44.1%), forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) =1.07 (39.8%), and carbon monoxide diffusion capacity (DLCO)=4.80 (20.8%). A 6-min walk test showed desaturation with exercise from 91 to 73%, resulting in the test being aborted after 3 min. Since the radiological involvement was greater on the left side, a repeated left lung lavage was planned with stand-by extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) to prevent fatal hypoxemia.
After entering the operating room, electrocardiography, pulse oximeter (SpO2), and non-invasive blood pressure monitors were attached. After pre-oxygenation with 5 L/min of 100% O2 for 5 min, general anesthesia was induced and maintained with propofol, remifentanil, and rocuronium, and a 37 Fr left-sided double-lumen tube (DLT) was inserted. Correct positioning of the DLT was confirmed using bronchoscopy. Radial artery cannulation was performed for ABG analysis, which revealed a PaO2 of 467.4 mmHg following 5 min of bilateral mechanical ventilation with an FiO2 of 1.0. End-tidal PaCO2, arterial blood pressure, and bladder temperature were also monitored intraoperatively. In addition to usual monitors, a FloTracTM monitoring system (Edwards Lifesciences, California, USA) and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) were prepared. After induction of anesthesia, baseline ABG revealed within the normal limits . The patient was placed in the supine position with the right lung side slightly tilted downward.
The bronchial lumen of the DLT in the left main bronchus was connected to the saline delivery system. During one lung ventilation (OLV) of the right lung, after letting the patient’s left lung degas for 15 min and recruitment maneuver, ABG showed a PaO2 of 194.9 mmHg under an FiO2 of 1.0. Confirming adequate oxygenation during OLV, we started lavage. The ventilator settings were kept unchanged during OLV [PCV Peak 15 cmH2O, PEEP 6 cmH2O, I: E 1:1.5, RR 14/min]. Lavage was performed by repeatedly filling the left lung with irrigating solution while performing OLV of the right lung with an FiO2 of 1.0.
In every lavage procedure, 600 to 1000 ml of normal saline flowed into the left lung at a rate of 100 ml/min from a height of 30 cm above the patient, followed by passive drainage under gravity. The procedure was repeated 15 times using the instillation of warm saline and removal of the effluent. A total of 14 l of fluid was instilled into the left lung. WLL was performed satisfactorily, with the amount of effluent removed being almost equal to the instilled volume. The effluent contained very large amounts of amorphous sediment which gradually cleared. After 2.5 h of lavage, that is, nearly at the end of WLL, ABG values are as shown in Table . The pH, base excess, glucose, Na+, K+, and Cl− values suggested a strong ion difference (SID=20.36) . Dilutional hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis was diagnosed, likely due to excessive alveolar absorption of normal saline during WLL. The intraoperative infusion was 1260 ml including 700 ml of acetate Ringer’s, 50ml of Carbonate Ringer’s, and 510 ml of normal saline. Intraoperative urine volume was 90ml.
The patient remained hemodynamically stable during WLL, and there were no significant findings suggesting massive absorption of the lavage fluid by FloTrac Sensor, TEE, or no pulmonary edema on the chest X-ray.
Due to concern of continued postoperative fluid shifts, we decided to keep the patient intubated, and the DLT was replaced with a single lumen endotracheal tube. The patient was transferred to the ICU overnight for mechanical ventilation with a positive end-expiratory pressure of 10 cm H2O. Additionally, furosemide was given to remove excess fluid. ABG values returned to their normal limits 10 h after WLL was completed . She was extubated 15 h following the completion of WLL. She had no further metabolic acidosis and was subsequently discharged 4 days post-procedure.