A 46-year-old female patient was previously diagnosed with breast cancer (right breast, cT2N1M0 Stage IIB, invasive ductal carcinoma, ER-positive, HER2-positive) at the age of 44. After initially completing preoperative chemotherapy (anthracycline and taxane plus anti-HER2 therapy), the patient underwent curative surgery. The final pathological diagnosis was pathological complete response (ypT0N0). Adjuvant treatment of 10-year TAM concomitantly with 1-year trastuzumab was planned. There was no previous or family history of cardiac disease, and no abnormal findings on cardiac function evaluated after surgery. The patient had a history of hepatitis C and was treated with antiviral agents (sofosbuvir and ribavirin) for 12 weeks resulting in a sustained virological response (SVR).
Two months after starting TAM and resuming trastuzumab, the patient visited her general physician with a complaint of fever and dyspnea. Blood tests showed a marked increase in hepatic enzymes, and the patient was rushed to our emergency room on suspicion of drug-induced liver injury. Upon arrival at the hospital, the patient was conscious, temperature was 36.6 °C, blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, pulse was 80 bpm, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, and SpO2 was 99% (in-room air). Blood tests revealed elevated hepatic enzymes, decreased coagulability, thrombocytopenia and marked metabolic acidosis. Table A shows the blood test findings at the time of the emergency room visit. The patient was observed in the emergency room with bed rest and intravenous fluids, while the hospitalization process was underway based on the initial diagnosis of drug-induced fulminant hepatitis caused by TAM. During this time, tachycardia (140 beats/min) with ST-segment elevation appeared on the monitored electrocardiogram (ECG), and the ECG indicated anterior wall myocardial ischemia and third-degree atrioventricular block. Shortly thereafter, the patient went into cardiac arrest. Approximately 24 h had passed since the initial visit to her general physician. Resuscitation was started immediately, and because acute coronary syndrome was suspected, the patient was moved to the cardiac angiography room, where tracheal intubation, intra-aortic balloon pumping, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (V-A ECMO) were started.
Coronary angiography (CAG) results were negative for ischemic heart disease. A diagnosis of fulminant myocarditis was made based on the pathophysiology and a myocardial biopsy was performed. Blood tests at the time showed CK 761 (U/μL), CK-MB 24 (U/μL), troponin T 1010 (ng/mL) and proBNP 7204 (pg/mL), with a significant increase in myocardial enzymes . Steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 1000 mg × 5 days) and immunoglobulin therapy (1.0 g/day × 2 days) were started immediately after admission. Details of the main treatment after cardiac arrest are shown in Fig. . After the start of treatment, the symptoms of heart failure improved steadily and the patient was transferred to a general ward on the 14th day before being discharged on the 28th day.
Histological findings of the myocardial biopsy taken at the time of CAG are shown in Fig. . Within the myocardial tissue, degeneration and necrosis of myocardial cells were observed with marked lymphocytic infiltration. There was no infiltration of eosinophils or multinucleated giant cells. The infiltrating lymphocytes were predominantly CD8-positive T cells, a finding consistent with the histology of lymphocytic myocarditis. Serum cytomegalovirus, coxsackie B virus and adenovirus antibodies were elevated eightfold, fourfold and fourfold (based on complement fixation test), respectively. Taken together, these findings were consistent with acute viral myocarditis. HCV–RNA was tested before steroid administration and RNA was not detected.
After intensive care, despite the improvement in symptoms of heart failure, the patient’s heart rate remained at 20–30 bpm. Hence, a permanent pacemaker was inserted and the patient was discharged on the 28th day. After discharge from the hospital, an attempt was made to remove the pacemaker, but bradyarrhythmia remained, thus the pacemaker was retained and remains to date. Ten months have passed, since the TAM was recommenced, and the patient remains on a good course with no elevation of liver enzymes or any findings that suggest recurrence of breast cancer.