7-month-old male infant admitted to a tertiary hospital for treatment and evaluation of a severe case of persistent vomiting, refusal of food and neurological findings including axial hypotonia with poor head support, poor suck-swallow coordination, lack of social smile and contact, and abnormal oral-motor movements. The osteotendinous reflexes are normal. There is no perinatal, personal or family history of interest. They report normal neurological development to date and deny known consanguinity.

A battery of complementary tests (blood analysis, metabolic and autoimmune study, imaging tests, electroencephalogram, auditory evoked potentials of the brain stem, fundus of the eye...) was performed during admission with anodyne results, among which only the isolation of respiratory syncytial virus in a nasopharyngeal aspirate and the findings of the brain magnetic resonance, in which a bilateral and symmetric diffusion restriction in the anterior aspect of the bulbo-protuberant union compatible with the diagnostic suspicion of a subacute rhombencephalitis is described, are highlighted. Therefore, treatment with two doses of intravenous immunoglobulins (2 g/kg in total) was initiated, and the patient was discharged after 10 days of admission as a result of a progressive improvement in the neurological clinical and a recovery of tolerance by oral route.

He is subsequently monitored in outpatient neuropediatric consultations. The parents report clinical normality and a slight improvement in the examination is evident: he has better contact and visual tracking, achieves stable sitting for a few seconds without support and the masticatory movements appear only occasionally and in the supine position. The osteotendinous reflexes are still present.

However, at 10 months of age, he was readmitted to the hospital for a case of food rejection after the administration of a vaccine. A case of neurological regression, consisting of irritability, inexpressive face and absence of social smile, progressive evident axial hypotonia, proximal weakness and osteotendinous reflexes, which become lively and with equine feet, is very striking in the exploration. It is decided, therefore, to extend the metabolic studies and request new neuroimaging.

On this occasion, the brain resonance shows more conclusive findings: a generalized bilateral and symmetrical affectation of the signal intensity of the deep and subcortical white matter with affectation of the U-fibers and of the globus pallidus, which corresponds to a neurometabolic picture compatible with leukodystrophy. It also presents an altered spectroscopic study, with a slight increase in choline, and the N-acetyl aspartate is normal. With this result, the genetic study is expanded with a clinical exome directed to leukodystrophies of early onset, in which a pathogenic mutation in homozygosity is identified that affects the EIF2B5 gene and that is associated with the diagnosis of leukoencephalopathy with evanescent white matter, of autosomal recessive inheritance.

In addition, a family genetic study is requested, and both parents and his two brothers are healthy heterozygous carriers.

He required a new admission at 15 months of age due to a first convulsive episode, and treatment with levetiracetam was initiated. During his stay, neurological regression persisted and he showed a poor response to stimuli, as well as the impossibility of feeding orally, which led to the placement of a nasogastric tube. He could be discharged to his home thanks to the follow-up by the paediatric home hospitalisation unit, which established palliative care due to the advanced stage of the disease. The patient died at 15 months of age as a result of the evolution of his disease. He died at home, asleep, calm and surrounded by his family.
