A 22-year-old woman who was 5 months postpartum presented with a left-sided breast lump of 3 months duration. The lump was associated with pain and tenderness. For the last 15 days, she had also developed retraction of nipple along with thick nipple discharge. This was her first pregnancy and she could not feed her child on this side. There was no history of fever or trauma to the breast. On examination, her left breast was grossly enlarged with red and inflamed overlying skin. The nipple-areola complex was markedly enlarged with hyperpigmentation of areola but there was no excoriation. Thick discharge was seen on the nipple. On palpation, a large, multinodular, tender lump of about 6.0 × 5.0 × 2.4 cm was felt in the upper and outer quadrant. The lump was firm to hard in consistency. It was free from the chest wall and the overlying skin. The opposite breast was normal. A clinical possibility of inflammatory carcinoma was suspected and the patient was sent for fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC). This confirmed a benign inflammatory lesion. A course of 2 weeks of antibiotics was given. However, the lump persisted following which it was excised and sent for histopathology. The postoperative period was uneventful. At present, both mother and baby are healthy and the baby is feeding from the right breast.
Grossly, the specimen was received in the form of multiple irregular tissue pieces measuring 0.8 × 08 × 1.0 cm to 4.0 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm in size. The outer surface was lobulated and the cut surface showed multiple yellowish, soft nodules ranging from 0.3 to 1.0 cm in diameter. The margins of each nodule were circumscribed and well demarcated from the surrounding stroma. The adjacent areas were whitish and translucent .
Microscopic examination revealed two types of lobules separated by an extensively hyalinized stroma . Some of these lobules showed classical lactational changes comprising many hyperplastic and dilated acini filled up with pink, eosinophilic secretions. These acini were lined with round to oval cells with fine chromatin and conspicuous nucleoli. Many of these cells had granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. Others had abundant, clear vacuolated cytoplasm with the nucleus pushed to the periphery . The ducts were also dilated and filled up with milk . The second type of lobules depicted ongoing involutional changes in the form of sheets of macrophages replacing and destroying the acini . In places, the phagocytic cells showed prominent admixture with lymphocytes some of which were also found infiltrating into the acinar epithelium. A few lymphoid aggregates were also noted around the individual ducts and acini . Based on all these findings, a diagnosis of lactating breast with delayed involution was offered.