A 57-year-old man was referred to neuro-oncology for brain MRI findings concerning for cortical laminar necrosis in the setting of metastatic melanoma. He was originally diagnosed with Stage IIIB (pT4bN1aM0) BRAF V600E-mutated cutaneous melanoma 6 years before evaluation with positive sentinel lymph node biopsy. Brain MRI at that time was normal. He had received multiple treatments throughout the years but for the past 30 months had been treated only with encorafenib and binimetinib with stable systemic disease. His medical history was otherwise unremarkable and he had no risk factors for vascular disease.
Routine, asymptomatic surveillance brain MRI with contrast was obtained and was notable for gyriform T1 shortening in the right pars opercularis, new from most recent imaging performed 23 months prior . Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted imaging showed no discernable enhancement, T2-weighted sequences showed no local edema, and diffusion-weighted imaging showed no diffusion restriction. These findings were most consistent with cortical laminar necrosis from chronic infarction. Nonetheless, given his clinical history and lack of vascular risk factors, metastatic disease remained a diagnostic consideration and close interval follow-up was planned.
Repeat MRI obtained 3 months later revealed gyral expansion in the region of the T1 shortening as well as a new contrast-enhancing adjacent nodule with vasogenic edema . Given imaging features, he underwent craniotomy revealing a subpial lesion that was grossly melanotic. The lesion followed and infiltrated gray matter in a gyriform pattern, with an adjacent melanotic nodule . A total resection was achieved utilizing subpial dissection to protect nearby Sylvian vessels. The surgical specimen showed cortical gray matter with infiltration by neoplastic cells in a primarily perivascular pattern with no definitive tumor mass. The neoplasm was composed of large cells with atypical nuclei and prominent nucleoli. The majority of the tumor cells showed melanin pigment. All these findings were consistent with a metastatic malignant melanoma. The tumor expressed the mutant BRAF V600E protein by immunohistochemistry. The patient recovered well without postoperative neurological deficit. He received Gamma Knife radiosurgery to the surgical bed with a dose of 9 Gy at the 50% isodose line.