A 47-year-old African American male with a past medical history of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency presented with three months of worsening bilateral upper extremity radicular pain/numbness and tingling radiating to both shoulders. On examination, he had bilateral hyperreflexia, bilateral Hoffmann’s and Babinski’s signs, all reflecting the presence of significant cervical myelopathy.
The cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated congenital spinal stenosis and a 2.5 cm intramedullary C4–C6 spinal cord lesion that enhanced with contrast on the T2 image and was diffusely hyperintense on the T2-weighted studies [-]. The abdominal-chest computed tomography and endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (i.e., of mediastinal hilar lymphadenopathy) revealed non-caseating granulomas consistent with sarcoidosis. The cardiac positron emission tomography scan also confirmed cardiac sarcoidosis characterized by a patchy abnormal increased signal u in the left ventricle. Further, the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein level was high (>390) .
With the initial diagnosis of multisystemic sarcoidosis/probable neurosarcoidosis, the patient was started on daily IV methylprednisolone (dose of 1 g). After developing a left punctate pontine stroke (i.e., resulting in left internuclear ophthalmoplegia), vertical nystagmus, and mild left ptosis, he was started on clopidogrel and aspirin. However, as the subsequent contrast brain MRI revealed pachymeningitis, leptomeningitis, and a T2-hyperintense lesion in the pons, the patient was subsequently started on infliximab (5 mg/kg) and referred to neurosurgery with the diagnosis of severe cervical myelopathy secondary to a cervical C4–C6 intramedullary neurosarcoid lesion.
To decompress but not biopsy the C4–C6 intramedullary mass, the patient underwent a C3–C6 laminectomy and C3– C7 posterior spinal fusion. Although one day postoperatively, he developed a new right-sided motor hemiparesis that lasted for two weeks; the repeat MRI scan did not show any new cord lesions or increased intrinsic/extrinsic cord compression. Nine months later, the patient experienced four transient relapses of hemiparesis/quadriparesis (i.e., none of which warranted or were treated surgically due to no new MR findings) for which he received varying doses of rituximab, methotrexate, and corticosteroids .