A 61-year-old obese male underwent laparoscopic partial nephrectomy due to an incidental tumor in the left kidney that was found during a work-up for hypertension. Microscopic examination of the tumor revealed that this was a chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. After one year of surveillance, a routine follow-up evaluation revealed a tumor in the left seminal vesicle. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-circumscribed heterogeneous solid tumor in the left seminal vesicle measuring 32 mm across its largest dimension, with well-defined cleavage planes with the rectum and bladder walls . The patient then underwent laparoscopic surgical excision of the left seminal vesicle.
Grossly, the seminal vesicle measured 6 x 3 x 2 cm, and the cut surface showed a solid, well-circumscribed, brownish and smooth nodule measuring 30 mm across its largest dimension. The surgical margins were free from tumor. Microscopic examination of the tumor disclosed well-defined nests of cuboidal cells separated by vascular fibrous septa without evidence of vascular invasion, mitotic figures or necrosis. Gland-like structures were identified focally. The individual tumor cells had a large central nucleus and small to medium-sized nucleoli, and granular eosinophilic cytoplasm .
The diagnostic possibilities at this point included metastasis of the previous chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma of the seminal vesicle and paraganglioma. Immunohistochemical characterization was used for the differential diagnosis (antibodies summarized in ). The tumor cells were immunoreactive for chromogranin and synaptophysin . At the periphery of the tumor nests, S100 protein-positive cells were identified, probably corresponding to sustentacular cells, in the absence of tumor keratin expression . Absence of immunoreactivity for keratins (AE1/AE3, CK7 and CK8/18) ruled out the hypothesis of primary or metastatic carcinoma, and supported the diagnosis of seminal vesicle paraganglioma. The Ki-67 labeling index was less than 2%. VHL and SDHB mutations were investigated using genomic DNA extracted from paraffin-embedded tumor sections (both from the seminal vesicle tumor and from the chromophobe renal cell carcinoma). No genetic alterations were found either in the VHL or in the SDHB genes.
Thorough imaging analysis showed that there was no tumor elsewhere, which therefore reinforced the diagnosis of primary seminal vesicle paraganglioma. The patient is still alive after 14 months of follow-up and his blood pressure is under control.