The patient is a 45-year old woman of Japanese descent with urothelial carcinoma of the right renal pelvis. The family history was negative for any malignancies in first-degree relatives. She has been a life-long non-smoker and has no occupational exposure to aniline dyes, radiation, or other chemicals. After presenting with gross hematuria in November 2013, a CT-IVP showed an abnormal, mass-like infiltration measuring 2.9 x 2.4 x 3 cm of the middle to lower right renal collecting system involving the renal parenchyma and invading the sinus fat. Ureteroscopy and biopsy revealed a transitional cell malignancy of the right lower pole renal calyx. In December 2013, she underwent a hand-assisted right nephroureterectomy.
Pathology revealed high-grade urothelial carcinoma invading the renal parenchyma and peripelvic fat without a significant inflammatory component . The resection margins were negative. She was deemed as having G3 pT3N0M0, AJCC Stage III cancer. Post-operatively, she received 6 cycles of adjuvant gemcitabine-cisplatin chemotherapy and completed the treatment by July 2014. A CT scan immediately following adjuvant treatment revealed a new contralateral lymphadenopathy measuring 1.2 cm. Subsequently, a repeat scan revealed a new nodular lesion in the right renal bed and an increase in the dimensions of the left sided lymph node to 2.3 cm including two additional areas of metastatic disease: a lesion overlying the right iliopsoas muscle and the left para-aortic adenopathy. PET scanning disclosed that the 3 lesions seen on CT were hypermetabolic. A CT-guided biopsy confirmed metastatic urothelial carcinoma.
Molecular profiling was performed at Foundation Medicine, Inc. utilizing next generation DNA sequencing to identify actionable genomic alterations in key oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes [exonic regions of 315 genes]. This testing revealed 73 mutations among 62 genes . Additionally, 340 variants of unknown significance [VUS] abnormalities were also identified among 166 genes (not shown). Three deleterious mutations were identified in MSH2 (A913fs*2, E226*, E580*) and one in MSH6 (R361H) .
The hypermutant genotype was phenotypically evaluated with 4-gene MMR IHC testing that showed loss of expression of both MSH2 and MSH6 .
Germline DNA testing at Myriad Inc. was negative for all known Lynch mutations. Subsequently, the patient’s primary tumor was tested at Clarient GE, Inc. [Aliso Viejo, CA] for PD-L1 expression and found 2+ staining in 80 % of cells .
The patient enrolled on a phase I clinical trial of an anti-PD-L1 inhibitor MEDI4736 and MEDI0680, [MedImmune Inc., Gaithersburg, MD] in Los Angeles [Clinical trial #: NCT02118337]. Within 2 months at the first radiographic evaluation, she had a complete disappearance of all cancer . After 10 months of treatment, she developed grade 1–2 uritcarial rash and polyarthralgias in her hands and a positive ANA 1:160, but has no signs of severe or life-threatening autoimmunity or other criteria for a diagnosis of SLE. She has a confirmed continuous complete remission at 11 months and continues to participate on study.