A 2-year-old girl, with a family history of early-onset cardiomyopathy and a medical history of recurrent upper respiratory tract infections necessitating only symptomatic care, visited her primary care pediatrician with symptoms of increasing lethargy, cough, shortness of breath after minimal exercise (such as walking, eating, and crying), puffy eyes, and edema in the lower extremities. Subsequently, she was referred to a pediatric cardiologist, who conducted an echocardiogram and baseline laboratory tests in a private clinic setting. The initial assessment revealed heart failure with a 30% ejection fraction. Following this diagnosis, the patient received outpatient treatment consisting of oral medications (Furosemide, Captopril, Spironolactone, Digoxin, and Carvedilol) and underwent frequent follow-up visits.
During the 7-month period following the initial diagnosis, the patient's condition remained stable with no significant improvement or deterioration until one week prior to her presentation at our Emergency Department of the American University of Beirut Medical Center (AUBMC). At that time, she experienced frequent vomiting, worsening lethargy, and increased shortness of breath leading to a state of cardiogenic shock.
On presentation, she was ill-looking with mottled skin, cyanotic lips, cold extremities, weak peripheral pulses and delayed capillary refill time. She was afebrile, tachypneic, tachycardic, and hypotensive (respiratory rate (RR) of 60 breaths/minute, heart rate (HR) of 166 beats/minute, blood pressure (BP) of 78/31 mmHg and percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 100% on face mask oxygen 5 liters/minute). Auscultation revealed faint heart sounds and diffuse rhonchi over the chest. Mild hepatomegaly was also noted.
Initial laboratory assessment was consistent with severe metabolic and respiratory acidosis as shown by arterial blood gases (PH: 7.01; PCO2: 51 mmHg; Bicarbonate: 13 mmol/L; Base excess: -18 mmol/L; lactic acid: 9.8 mmol/L). Chest X-Ray revealed cardiomegaly with increased interstitial marking and EKG revealed first degree atrioventricular block . Echocardiogram on arrival showed severe biventricular systolic and diastolic dysfunction (ejection fraction less than 20%), with moderate bilateral atrioventricular valve regurgitation, left ventricular outflow tract velocity time integral (LVOT VTI) of 4 . Evidence of left ventricle diastolic dysfunction included a Mitral E/A ratio of 1.9, an E wave deceleration time of 35 msec, elevated systolic pressure in the pulmonary artery, PV A wave reversal exceeding the duration of the MV A wave, along with a severely dilated left atrium. A diagnosis of decompensated dilated cardiomyopathy with cardiogenic shock was made.
Patient was intubated and started on Epinephrine drip, Milrinone drip and diuretics. She was admitted to Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) for extensive diagnostic workup and management where she received an advanced multidisciplinary care including cardiology, metabolic diseases, critical care, infectious diseases and nephrology specialists.
She remained intubated and mechanically ventilated throughout her hospital stay. Serial echocardiographic assessments revealed worsening ventricular function (EF less than 17%), despite various cardiac medications (Epinephrine, Norepinephrine, Milrinone, Dobutamine, Digoxin, Carvedilol), and aggressive diuresis (Furosemide, Spironolactone, Acetazolamide, Hydrochlorothiazide, Bumetanide). Two doses of intravenous Levosimendan infusions were also administered; the third dose was stopped due to transient hypotension.
Metabolic and genetic work up was done and was negative. Whole exome sequencing later revealed a homozygous mutation in the MYL3 (Myosin Light Chain 3) gene, associated with familial autosomal dominant MYL3-related cardiomyopathy.
Her hospital stay was complicated by multiple infections including multilobar pneumonia and candiduria, for which she received broad spectrum antibiotics and antifungals. Progressively, the child’s condition continued to deteriorate as she developed end-organ dysfunction, including renal and hepatic failure with severe lactic acidosis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. After a total of 70 days of hospitalization, the patient developed rare ectopic beats then went into cardiac arrest followed by a cessation of electrical and mechanical activity of the heart, despite cardiopulmonary resuscitative efforts.