A 68-year-old woman, who had a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus, underwent laparoscopic low anterior resection (LLAR) for treatment of her rectal cancer in December 2011. Histological examination revealed a well differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, pT3N0M0 stage II A according to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM classification system . The surgical margin was negative, and there was no vascular or lymphatic invasion. No adjuvant therapy was given, and there was no evidence of recurrence for 3 years.
Three years after the LLAR, the follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan revealed liver metastasis in Couinaud segment V . A diagnosis of liver metastasis of rectal cancer was made, and she therefore underwent a laparoscopic anterior segment liver resection in February 2015. Histological examination revealed a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma without vascular or bile duct invasion, and with a preserved surgical margin .
Two years after undergoing hepatectomy, the follow-up CT scan revealed dilation of the left intrahepatic bile duct and a high-density mass in the common trunk of segment II and segment III (B23). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) also revealed a mass in B23 . The biopsy findings from ERCP confirmed adenocarcinoma. Therefore, she underwent left and caudal lobectomy with extrahepatic bile duct resection in April 2017. Histological examination revealed a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma in segments II and III that invaded into the left hepatic duct and the liver parenchyma, forming a 20 mm nodule. There was no vascular invasion, and the surgical margin was preserved . The postoperative diagnosis was intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, pT2N0M0 stage II according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 8th edition.
In October 2017, a follow-up CT scan revealed a 15 mm mass with enhancement in the early phase in the common bile duct, and lymphadenopathy at 8a. MRCP also revealed a 15 × 6 mm low intensity mass at the end of the common bile duct, and a slightly high diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) but no corresponding low signal on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map . A diagnosis of lower bile duct cancer was made. Consequently, she received pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy in November 2017. Histological examination revealed a well to moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with preserved surgical margin. Although there was no vascular invasion, lymph node (LN) 8a metastasis (2/2) was observed .
Upon comparison, the histology of the current surgical specimen was found to be similar to those from the earlier surgeries. Immunological findings also revealed similar cytokeratin (CK) expression patterns of the specimens, which were negative for CK7 and positive for CK20 , indicating that the tumor originated from the colon or rectum. Based on these findings, a definitive diagnosis of rectal cancer with metastases to the liver, intrahepatic bile duct, and lower bile duct was made. The patient was followed up as an outpatient for 2 years, and no apparent recurrence or metastasis was observed.