A 70-year-old Greek-Caucasian man was admitted to our hospital with diffuse abdominal pain of sudden onset three hours prior to his admission. The patient did not complain of nausea, vomiting or diarrhea and his temperature and arterial pressure were normal despite an elevated pulse rate (90 ppm.). His latest stool passage was blood-free and a digital rectal examination revealed nothing pathological.
During physical examination, the patient's abdomen was mildly distended with diffuse guarding and marked rebound tenderness. Abdominal sounds were diminished during auscultation.
Laboratory investigations revealed normal values for his hematocrit, hemoglobin, white blood cell count, and platelets. Renal and hepatic function tests were also normal and his blood glucose was a little elevated at 167.8 mg/dl (normal 70 to 110 mg/dl).
The patient's medical history included colonic diverticular disease, an endoscopic excision of benign rectal polyps four years prior to his presentation, and ongoing arterial hypertension and osteoporosis treatment. Ten years prior to presentation in a random ultrasound examination, the patient was found to have several simple liver cysts including two large hepatic cysts and other smaller ones. The largest cyst had a size of 13 cm. At the time, his pancreas, spleen and kidneys were normal . A second ultrasound examination was performed nine years after the first one (and just 13 months prior to his present admission) due to the patient being admitted after an accidental fall. A reduction in the size of the largest cyst form 13 cm to 4.6 cm and a small amount of free liquid in the patient's right abdominal fossa were identified as the only difference from the previous ultrasound report.
During the patient's present admission, there was no free air in his abdomen. An abdominal X-ray examination did not show bowel air-fluid levels. Abdominal ultrasound examination showed a significant quantity of free liquid in his abdominal cavity, around the spleen and liver, as well as in the Douglas pouch. Since the patient's general condition was deteriorating and he was already showing symptoms of paleness, sweating, increased abdominal guarding and marked rebound tenderness in the whole abdominal area, we decided to perform an exploratory laparoscopy.
The laparoscopy revealed a vast amount of opaque-yellowish peritoneal fluid occupying majority of his abdominal cavity without any obvious origin, so the operation was converted to laparotomy.
The exploration of the patient's abdominal cavity revealed a ruptured liver cyst that originated from the lower surface of his right liver lobe . Unroofing of the cyst using LigaSure to the liver parenchyma margin, plus omentoplasty and cholecystectomy, were performed as the gallbladder was part of the anterior cystic wall. Intraoperative frozen sections of multiple specimens from the cystic wall showed no evidence of malignancy, while cytology and cultures of the cystic fluid were negative. Serological tests for Echinococcus and tumor markers, CEA and CA 19-9, all showed negative results.
Two drains were positioned, one at the patient's cystic cavity area and the other at his Douglas pouch. The postoperative course of the patient was uneventful and three days later the drainages were removed. The patient was discharged in excellent general condition eight days after his admission.