A 91-year-old man hospitalized in our geriatric center for delirium. His medical history consisted of a non-investigated major neurocognitive disorder and peripheral neuropathy of the lower limbs for 4 years with no etiological diagnosis. His usual treatment was ginkgo biloba extract and grape seed extract. He lived at home. His family reported an increase in behavior disturbances associated with cough over the 3 previous weeks.
At admission, the physical examination revealed fever, rhinorrhea, cough and widespread bronchi attributed to bronchitis. The neurological examination showed a bilateral loss of epicritic sensitivity in the lower limbs, but normal motor function. Delirium was also noted. There was isolated cervical lymphadenopathy. Initial biological tests showed normal levels of hemoglobin, platelets and leukocytes. A nasopharyngeal swab was taken on admission in order to perform molecular assay for respiratory viruses (i.e., multiplexed in-house RT-PCR for Influenza virus A and B, Rhinovirus/Enterovirus, human Metapneumovirus, Parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, non-SARS-Cov-2 coronavirus) identified a human metapneumovirus (hMPV) infection. Serology for hMPV was not performed.
The initial course was favorable with symptomatic care (aerosols of saline solution, paracetamol and respiratory physiotherapy) plus low-dose benzodiazepine for the delirium. Five days after viral diagnosis, the lymphocyte count increased from 1.16 to 10.86 × 109 cells/L, while the symptoms of the infection remained under control. Serum protein electrophoresis suggested inflammation. The immunophenotyping of lymphocytes showed a profile of CD 5+, CD 23+, low FMC-7, and CD19b-, which is consistent with B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
We did not find other lymphadenopathies, splenomegaly or hepatomegaly during the physical examination or on imagery. He had no B symptoms other than fever consecutive to his infection (i.e., nighttime sweats and weight loss).
The lymphocyte count fluctuated considerably during hospitalization, with a maximum of 12.39 × 109/L . We did not perform FISH or IGHV mutation testing.
Because of the novel hematological finding and the unclear history of peripheral neuropathy, other laboratory tests, including for cryoglobulins, were performed. Renal and hepatic function were normal. The lab results found monoclonal IgG K cryoglobulinemia (0.1 g/L) associated with an increase in the activity of rheumatoid factor (7.5 IU/mL; normal < 3.5) and C3 (1.756 g/L; normal 0.811–1.570). There was a decrease in C4 activity (0.017 g/L; normal 0.129–0.392). Hepatitis C serology was negative, as were antinuclear antibodies.
The diagnosis of CLL associated with type-1 IgG K cryoglobulinemia revealed by hMPV infection was retained. The peripheral neuropathy was linked to an isolated clinical manifestation of cryoglobulinemia.
Given the absence of disability, significant gait disorders or skin lesions, the advanced neurocognitive condition, a Binet A (or Rai stage 1) CLL classification and the patient’s age, the care team decided not to treat the CLL. After discharge from the hospital, the patient was admitted to a nursing home.