70-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, ischemic heart disease, and degenerative joint disease who presented with progressive weakness of proximal muscles and myalgia over several months. The patient's current medication was tramadol/paracetamol 75 + 650 mg every eight hours, fluoxetine 20 mg/day, furosemide 40 mg/day, metformin 1,000 mg/day, linagliptin 2.5 mg/day, and simvastatin 20 mg/day (for the last seven years).

She began to have problems climbing steps and getting out of a chair. Her weakness progressed gradually until she was unable to walk unaided, comb her hair or bathe without support. She reported anorexia and weight loss of 15% in the past 10 months. She denied fever or associated chills, rash, oral ulcers, dyspnoea, chest pain, dysphagia or visual disturbances. There was no family history of neuromuscular disease.

The physical examination revealed significant proximal muscle weakness of the upper and lower extremities (shoulder abduction 3/5, elbow flexion 4/5, hip flexion 3/5, knee flexion 4/5 bilaterally, according to the Medical Research Council scale of muscle strength) and was unable to rise from a sitting position. Deep tendon reflexes, sensation and coordination were intact. Cardiac and pulmonary auscultation and abdominal examination revealed no abnormalities. Physical examination did not reveal cutaneous manifestations suggestive of dermatomyositis.

Laboratory tests showed an elevation of creatine kinase (2,954 U/L, ref. 10-149), aldolase (45.6 U/L, ref. <7.6), aspartate transaminase (124 U/L, ref. 10-31) and alanine transaminase (95 U/L, ref. 10-31). Serologic tests for herpes simplex virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C were negative. Serology for hepatitis B virus revealed a past infection (hepatitis B virus DNA was negative). Thyroid function was normal.

Nerve conduction studies and electromyography showed abnormal spontaneous muscle activity in proximal muscles of the upper and lower extremities, suggestive of irritable myopathy. A biopsy of the right deltoid muscle showed deep myopathic features with numerous necrotic fibers, some regenerating fibers, and perimysial infiltrate of inflammatory cells (predominantly composed of macrophages and T cells), combined with a diffuse overexpression of major histocompatibility complex class I. The test for antibodies to connective tissue diseases and myositis, including antinuclear antibodies, anti-dsDNA, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-Sm, anti-RNP, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies PR3, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies MPO, and myositis panel for Mi2, Ku, SRP (signal recognition particle), PL7 (antithreonyl-tRNA synthetase), PL12 (antialanyl-tRNA synthetase), EJ (antiglycyl-tRNA synthetase), OJ (antiisoleucyl-tRNA synthetase), TIF1-γ (transcriptional intermediate factor 1 gamma), MDA5 (melanoma differentiation associated gene 5), SAE (small ubiquitin-like modifier activator enzyme), PM-Scl100, PM-Scl75, and Jo 1 (anti-histidyl-tRNA synthetase), was negative. Anti-3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (anti-HMG-CoA) reductase antibodies were positive (>200, ref. <20).

Given the association between inflammatory myopathies and malignancy, cancer screening was reviewed. Colonoscopy, mammography, and past cervical cancer screening did not show significant abnormalities. Chest and abdominal computed tomography, thyroid ultrasound, and positron emission tomography were negative for malignancy.

SINAM was diagnosed and the statin was discontinued. He started with 1 g methylprednisolone/day for three days, followed by 60 mg prednisolone/day (0.75 mg/kg/day). Due to the lack of improvement in his symptoms, he was started on intravenous immunoglobulin therapy for five consecutive days (0.4 g/kg/day).

This combination of treatment allowed a significant improvement in muscle strength and myalgia, and a substantial reduction in the creatine kinase level, to 1,029 U/L. After 21 days of hospitalization, she was discharged with a decreasing dose of steroids and methotrexate was initiated. After three months of follow-up, the neurological examination was normal and the creatine kinase level returned to normal (15 U/L). At that time, the patient was medicated with methotrexate 10 mg/week and prednisolone 20 mg/day.
