A five-year and nine-month-old female was referred to pediatric endocrinology consultation for central hypothyroidism, short stature, and hyperprolactinemia. At first examination, her weight was 17.5 ± -1.19 kg (mean ± SD and height 94.8 ± -4.62 cm. She had a peculiar phenotype with rounded facies, micrognathia, broad forehead, strabismus, tapering/slender fingers, hypotonia of the lower limbs, muscle atrophy in the distal third of the lower extremities, and equinovarus feet. The patient did not walk independently until orthopedic shoes and walker were provided. The external genitalia were normal of a female.
She was born at term with a birth weight of 3550 g, height of 49 cm and head circumference of 36 cm. She required admission to the neonatology unit due to moderate neonatal depression, axial hypotonia with hypertonia of the upper limbs, weak suction with difficultly in swallowing, and frequent choking episodes with aspiration pneumonia.
The patient was followed-up by pediatric gastroenterology section for gastroesophageal reflux disease and recurrent pneumonia. She received omeprazole to treat the GI problem. She has recurrent crises of abdominal pain since the first year of life. These crises were preceded by presyncopal symptoms that include sweating, pallor, hypotonia, and decay, which occur every two or three months. Abdominal ultrasonography and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were normal. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed and confirmed a gastric volvulus; therefore, a gastropexy was performed. After surgery, she continued episodes of abdominal pain. In the last ultrasound scan, findings of intrahepatic portosystemic shunt were observed. These findings were confirmed with abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan evidencing an intrahepatic cavo-caval shunt with agenesis/hypoplasia of the intrahepatic inferior vena cava. Liver function and ammonium levels were normal.
She also presented signs of autism disorder, poor language development and a global developmental delay. Multiple genetic studies were performed without any etiological diagnosis: karyotype, array-CGH, and methylation test for Prader-Willi/Angelman alterations on 15q11-q13 as previously reported . Electromyography showed a myopathic pattern with continuous myotonia. Muscle biopsy was normal and genetic testing for myotonic dystrophy was negative. Genomic DNA from blood samples of the patient and her parents were collected for whole-exome sequencing. A DNA library was prepared using the Ion AmpliSeqTM Exome RDY kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and sequencing of the DNA library was performed with ion proton sequencing technology. The Ion Reporter version 5.0 platform was used to align the patient’s and her parents’ data to the reference genome and identify genetic variants. Variant data were filtered using population frequency, frequency in database of in-house samples, mode of inheritance, evolutionary conservation, functional predictors, and disease association, followed by detailed assessment for genotype-phenotype correlation, disease mechanism, and literature review, as described previously . After exome sequencing and variant prioritization, the presence of the heterozygous variant c.3019 C > T in the MAGEL2 gene resulting in the occurrence of a premature stop codon (p.Gln1007Ter) was detected. Since neither of her parents presented this change, this variant seemed to develop de novo in the patient. In addition, a methylation test was performed in order to determine if this mutation was present in the active or inactivated allele of the gene. The expression of this gene is subjected to imprinting, in such a way that the maternal copy is not active due to a hypermethylation of the CpG island present around the 5’ end of MAGEL2 gene. The analysis of the variant after using restriction enzymes sensitive to methylation allowed to conclude that this variant was indeed present in the allele of paternal origin, that is, in the only active copy of the gene. Accordingly, this change c.3019 C > T detected in the MAGEL2 gene was considered pathogenic and the cause of most, if not all, of the clinical manifestations present in the patient (Appendix 1 in Supplementary File).
From an endocrinological point of view, at the age of four, the patient’s blood test revealed signs of central hypothyroidism, hyperprolactinemia, and GH deficiency (thyroid-stimulating Hormone (TSH): 6.01 mU/L (ranged 0.5 - 4), free T4: 0.74 ng/dL (ranged 0.7 - 1.9), prolactin 452 ng/mL (ranged 2 - 29), insulin-like growth factor (IGF) - 1 < 25 ng/mL (ranged 32 - 259). Upon confirming these findings, she started treatment with L-thyroxine. When she was six years old she started treatment with recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH), 0.02 mg/kg/day, by subcutaneous injection, but the treatment was discontinued after one or two months because of benign intracranial hypertension. Therapy was restarted when she was nine years old with a height of 101.2 ± 5.74 cm. The first-year growth response was the following: height 109.6 ± -4.72 cm and growth rate of 9.1 cm per year (P100). After two years, her height was 120.3 ± -4.09 cm. Adherence to rhGH was positive with a rise in the IGF-1 levels ranging 97 - 150 ng/mL. Under treatment, the muscular tone also improved and the patient started to walk. Prolactin levels normalized, but high values of ACTH (aderno cortico tropic hormone) were observed with normal cortisol values (ACTH 370 pg/mL (ranged 9.0 - 40.0), basal cortisol 11.5 μg/dL (8h: 6.20 - 19.40) in the last blood tests. The patient is closely monitored.
In addition, the patient underwent surgery to correct her equinovarus foot deformity and is receiving rehabilitation treatment. She has also improved cognitively and is attending a special education school, presenting a good level of understanding although language continues to be dysprosodic. In sum, the patient has a moderate level of dependence in daily life activities.