A 76-year-old Asian male had a history of chronic coughing. A chest radiograph taken with the patient in standing position showed pleural effusion and tumor shadows in the right middle lung field . Scout imaging revealed that the tumor was located in the upper lung field, with a possibility that it had moved . Computed tomography (CT) showed a 13-cm tumor in his right upper lung lobe mainly located at S1-3 and massive pleural effusion in the right thoracic cavity . The patient was scheduled for investigation of suspected lung cancer or pleural tumor.
Twelve hours later, he came to ER with sudden dyspnea and fever. Vital signs were blood pressure 156/87 mmHg, heart rate 117 bpm, temperature 39.0 °C, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, and percutaneous oxygen saturation of 96% on 5 L oxygen flow. CT showed that the right upper lung lobe had shifted to the posterior thoracic space , causing the right middle and lower lung lobes to be pushed up toward to the apex; the right upper lung lobe had also rotated 90° counterclockwise toward the hilum . The pulmonary artery was not disrupted but was stretched in an arc. There was a thrombus in the upper pulmonary vein and non-contrast regions in the peripheral tumor; impediment to blood flow was suspected. Torsion of the right upper lung lobe was diagnosed, and emergency right upper lobectomy was performed through a right anteroaxillary thoracotomy.
Intraoperatively, the right upper lung lobe had shifted to the posterior thoracic space; the middle lobe was compressed to the apex; and the lower lobe was distended in the hilar front. The right lung had rotated 90° counterclockwise toward the hilum. There was no color change of the pleura due to ischemia and congestion from the lung surface. There was about 1300 ml of serous pleural effusion, which was no malignant. The pulmonary vessels had been stretched but were not completely obstructed. There were no adhesions in thoracic space, but the oblique and horizontal fissures of the lung were incomplete by thickening of pleura due to inflammation. As concerned about thrombus and necrotic material in the right upper lung lobe, we first dissected the pulmonary vein, then the superior trunk of the pulmonary artery, before resolving the torsion and performing the lobectomy.
The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged. Pathological examination of the resected lung revealed a lung adenocarcinoma, pT3N2M0 stage IIIA. The patient is undergoing postoperative chemotherapy.