A 50 year old male from a VL endemic village of Bihar presented to the OPD of this institute in August 2007. He had fever with weakness and pallor of about 3 months duration. The fever was associated with chills. He also complained of frequent loose motions in the last 6 months and had lost about 7 kg of weight. He had dry cough of one month duration associated with small amount of haemoptysis and oral ulceration more marked on the tongue. He also complained of frequent micturition and pain in the metatarsophalangeal joints of the big toes bilaterally alongwith some amount of generalized joint pain.
He was a truck driver by profession and was a frequent visitor to the red light areas of metropolitan cities namely Mumbai and Kolkata. On close questioning he revealed having frequent sex with multiple commercial sex workers. He use to take alcohol, toddy and smoked 2–3 cigarettes per day. He had two small children aged 8 years & 6 years (both girls). At the time of presentation he had bradykinesia with mask facies and characteristic pill rolling tremor more marked on the right side. The arms swing was also absent on the right side while walking and his gait was festinant. There were no features of forgetfulness or dementia, history of falls or any associated autonomic disturbances. He however had micrographia with monotonous speech.
On clinical examination he had a mouth temperature of 102°F (39°C) with a pulse rate of 120/min. His respiration rate was 20/min and his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg in the left upper limb in supine posture. Chest and cardio vascular system examination were normal except for sinus tachycardia. His liver and spleen were palpable 2 cm and 4 cm below the respective coastal margins in the mid axillary lines. On central nervous system examination the mask facies, bradykinesia, pill rolling tremor, cogwheel rigidity and festinant gait were elicited. Bradykinesia and rigidity were asymmetric. The palmo-mental and glabellar tap reflexes were positive bilaterally. The planters were bilaterally flexor. All the above symptoms were more marked on the right side.
The patient was subjected to various hematological and biochemical investigations along with splenic aspiration, chest x-ray postero-anterior view, ultra sonography of abdomen and computerized tomography (CT scan) of the brain. He had a hemoglobin level of 6 gm/dl along with a total count of 4000 cells/mm3. Liver and renal function tests were normal. His fasting blood sugar was 120 mg/dl and post prandial level was 160 mg/dl. His serum uric acid was 7.2 mg/dl. Western Blot for HIV1 was positive. His CD4 count was 180/μl and CD8 count was 643/μl. Splenic aspirate for Leishman Donovan bodies was 3+ according to WHO criteria. Ultra sound showed hepatosplenomegaly with features of fatty liver. CT scan of the brain and ECG were normal. ELISA and PCR for tuberculosis were negative. MRI and spinal fluid examination were also done and found normal.
Based of the above findings a diagnosis of HIV1, VL and Parkinsonism was made. Other associations were diabetes mellitus and hyperuricaemia. He was put on diabetic diet and started on Miltefosine 50 mg capsules twice daily for 28 days after meals along with iron and folic acid supplements. He was also administered Allopurinol in the dose of 100 mg tablets twice daily. He was started on highly active antiretroviral therapy with two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors namely Zidovudine (200 mg) plus Lamivudine (150 mg) and one non nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor namely Nevirapine 200 mg twice daily after food. Parkinson's disease was treated with Entecapone (100 mg), levodopa (100 mg) and Carbidopa (25 mg) combination twice daily with Triphenhexidyl (2 mg) twice daily along with Selegiline hydrochloride 5 mg twice daily. Other D2 receptor agonists like ropinirole or pramipexole were not added.
After one month of treatment his spleen had regressed, there was no fever and no LD bodies were seen in the bone-marrow aspirate. He was continued on antiretroviral therapy (ART) and Anti-Parkinsonian therapy (entekapone, levodopa, carbidopa, triphenhexidyl and selegeline) along with allopurinol. His CD4 increased to 300/ml. He was able to walk with considerably less tremor. He, however, relapsed for visceral leishmaniasis after 3 months of therapy and was treated with Amphotericin B in the dose of 1 mg/kg body weight for 15 days in 5% dextrose intravenous infusion on alternate days. He was told to report after one month but was ultimately lost to follow up. About 6 months later, it was gathered from his relatives that he had died. VL, itself, is a disease of poorest of the poor as it mainly affects the low socio-economic group and the combination of HIV and Parkinsonism makes it more difficult for the people of poor countries likes India for proper treatment compliance and regular follow-up visits. It is hoped that possibly due to this reason the patient could not turn up and eventually he might have contracted some other AIDS related complications and lost his life. We really feel pity for his poor family.