A 41-year-old Caucasian woman referred 6 months of bilateral blurred vision, more intense when she woke up. She had undergone surgery for implantation of cosmetic NewColorIris devices in both eyes 15 years before, without any complication or ocular trauma during that time .
Ocular examination confirmed low hyperopia (+ 0.75 D) in both eyes and she did not wear contact lenses (CL). Her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. The slit lamp examination showed bilateral and symmetric slight corneal edema with early decompensation, epithelial bullae and presence of pigment in the endothelium (specular microscopy showed a low endothelial cell count in the right eye (1268 cells/mm2), as well as in the left one (1122 cells/mm2). Silicone cosmetic implants in front of the iris were also observed in the AC with a central hole of 3.4 mm that did not match the pupillary axis in the right eye . Although iris evaluation was limited due to those implants, iris atrophy was observed by backlighting.
The position of both iris implants was assessed in detail by the means of anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT, CASIA2, Tomey Corporation, Nagoya, Japan), and decentration was measured with several scans . The decentration of the iris implant from the pupillary axis in the right eye was 475 μm to the temporal sector and 238 μm superiorly . The iris implant in the left eye was more centered: it had moved 308 μm superiorly but only 15 μm to the temporal quadrant .
IOP measurements obtained with Goldmann applanation tonometry were 28 mmHg and 18 mmHg in the right eye and in the left eye, respectively. Central corneal thickness was 588 μm in the right eye and 559 μm in the left eye.
Gonioscopy (performed with a Posner gonioprism) demonstrated a tendency to angle closure in both eyes (grade II in the superior, inferior and temporal quadrants and 0 in the nasal quadrant, according to Shaffer’s grading system to assess angle opening), with a large amount of pigment at the angle, more increased at VI o’clock . Those findings were also identified by the means of the iris-trabecular contact (ITC) analysis provided by AS-OCT: the ITC index was 18.3% in the right eye and 13.3% in the left eye, with nasal areas of possible peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) in both eyes .
Fundal examination revealed no pathological findings and the optic discs were normal, with a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.4 in both eyes. Humphrey computerized perimetry performed with SITA standard 24–2 strategy (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, USA) showed no perimetric defects in either eye. The retinal nerve fiber layer thickness measured by OCT (Triton, Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was within the normal limits in both eyes.
Based on all these results, the most likely diagnosis was bilateral corneal decompensation, as well as ocular hypertension (OHT) in the right eye, due to secondary pigment dispersion syndrome. Beta-blockers eyedrops were prescribed for her right eye, and the surgical removal of both cosmetic implants was considered as a further management option. The patient did not attend the scheduled follow-up visits.