A 78-year-old female with hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, coronary artery disease, and atrial fibrillation, presented with shortness of breath over the last several months. She is unaware of any significant diseases in her family, and she had no major surgeries except for vaginal hysterectomy, which was uneventful.
Physical examination on admission indicated signs of mild heart failure with a continuous holosystolic murmur at the cardiac apex and rales at the base of the lung. Chest X-ray shows mild pulmonary oedema and a significant dilated left heart silhouette . Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) indicated a left ventricle (LV) ejection fraction of 50%, severely dilated left atrium (LA) and right atrium (RA), severe mitral regurgitation with malcoaptation, and centrally directed flow jets, and mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation (Video 1). The proximal isovelocity surface area derived effective regurgitant orifice area measured 0.43 cm2 with LV end-systolic diameter of 42 mm.
A cardiac heart team discussed all treatment options, including valve replacement surgery, percutaneous valve repair (PMVR) using a clip, and transcatheter mitral valve replacement (TMVR) study trial. The patient underwent an abdominal and chest computed tomography (CT) angiogram to assess the feasibility of TMVR, which indicated large MV dimensions excluding her from the procedure. No other major abnormal findings were reported on CT except for cholelithiasis and suspected renal cysts.
Considering the patient’s high mortality risk for surgery (3.96% by the Society of Thoracic Surgeons score), unfavourable anatomy for TMVR, and patient preference, we decided to proceed with a PMVR using an edge-to-edge technique.
Under ultrasound guidance, we introduced a 6 Fr sheath into the right femoral vein using a micropuncture catheter and confirmed its location by angiography.
While ascending, the wire took an abnormal path on the left side of the chest and beyond the cardiac silhouette and then downwards towards the RA . A multipurpose catheter showed RA trace and a flow-jet directed to the left side supporting the location right-sided chambers (Video 2). Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed that the trajectory was from the superior vena cava (SVC) to the RA without passing through the IVC-RA junction . Given this, we decided to stop the procedure as it cannot safely be performed.
Retrospective analysis of the CT revealed an interruption of the IVC at the level of the hepatic segment. The IVC was drained directly into dilated azygos veins along with the hemiazygos and the accessory veins and entered the RA via the SVC. The massive enlargement of the LA led to significant compression of the azygos vein before draining to the SVC ( and corresponding , Video 3, ).
The patient was referred to surgery, where the mitral and the tricuspid valves were repaired successfully and discharged home in good health. Two months following the surgery, the patient reported a significant improvement in daily life activity and denied exertional dyspnoea. She engaged in cardiac rehabilitation and felt much better than before the surgery.