7-year-old male patient with a diagnosis of acute lymphoid leukemia of T precursors, who was finishing the cycle of induction chemotherapy with the PETHEMA 2013 protocol (which includes L asparaginase, Vincristine and Daunorrubicin + continuous prednisone for more than a month). During hospital stay, he developed a clinical picture of 12 days of epigastric abdominal pain and occasional vomiting. The segmental physical examination described exquisite pain to the palpation of epigastric, with peristalsis present, without data of obstruction. The laboratory examinations showed moderate neutropenia, with increased c reactive protein (CRP).

Acute pancreatitis was initially suspected but ruled out as pancreatic enzymes and abdominal computed tomography were normal. Steroid acid-peptic disease was then suspected and medical treatment with proton pump inhibitors, prokinetic and oral tolerance was continued.

The next day, he presented with increasing abdominal pain at night, associated with emetic episodes on multiple occasions, evolving with haematemesis, electrolyte imbalance (severe hypokalaemia), hyperglycaemia, severe neutropenia and signs of shock, which required transfer to the paediatric intensive care unit (PICU). Emergency esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed, in which an acute erosive haemorrhagic pangastritis was reported, consistent with necrotizing gastritis, confirmed by biopsy.

Management was initiated with fasting, potassium replacement, fluid replacement, omeprazole in continuous infusion, ondansetron. Laboratory tests and blood cultures were negative with no bacterial isolation. The patient progressed to catecholamine refractory shock, requiring mechanical ventilation, antibiotic management, multiple vasoactive support with norepinephrine, epinephrine and vasopressin.

The critical condition was overcome and parenteral nutrition was indicated on the second day due to prolonged intestinal rest. The EGD on the sixth day showed persistence of necrotizing gastritis. Therefore, intestinal rest, proton pump inhibitors and sucralfate were maintained. A control EGD was performed 30 days after intestinal rest, showing significant improvement of extensive necrosis of the body, fundus and gastric antrum, however, with persistence of necrosis area that compromised 20% of the greater curvature of the gastric body. Tolerance of the start of enteral nutrition (polymeric diet) was evaluated and, depending on tolerance, progressed to bland diet without irritants or lactose.

It was initiated orally, with adequate intrahospital tolerance for 72 hours, for which hospital discharge was indicated with double dose of proton pump inhibitors and sucralfate and attention to warning signs. On control at 2 months of discharge, it was found hemodynamically stable, in the control EGD complete improvement of the necrotizing gastritis was observed, remaining areas of fibrosis at the level of the corpus antrum region.

The chemotherapy treatment was postponed for a month and a half after the resolution of the critical condition associated with the necrotizing gastritis, and the same high-risk PETHEMA protocol was initiated, but in the intensification stage the doses were reduced to 50% of the cytostatic. In the next stage, the protocol was continued with the usual dose. The end of treatment studies were done and the patient is in complete remission, without complications associated with the underlying pathology; for two years to date.
