A 78-year-old male patient was referred to our tertiary, university hospital outpatient clinic with pain in his right leg. His medical history included a laminectomy of L3-L5, performed 1.5 years before his current visit, because of spinal stenosis as a result of degenerative scoliosis. This procedure was followed by the collapse of the vertebral bodies of L2 and L3 with compression of the right nerve root and spinal stenosis at L3. There had not been any wound problems or other complications after the first procedure. Further medical history included bilateral total hip arthroplasty, revision of the left hip arthroplasty after 19 years, left total knee arthroplasty, hypertension, and ulcerative colitis (without medication). The physical examination showed a lumbar scoliosis with a painful and slightly reduced range of motion of the spine whereas the sacroiliac and hip joints showed a pain-free and normal range of motions. The knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were lower on the right side. Sensation and motor function were normal. The radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed degenerative scoliosis with the apex on L2-L3 with the collapse of the vertebral bodies of L2 and L3. Serum markers for infection, 2 months before the presentation at our clinic, were as follows: C-reactive protein (CRP) <1 mg/L, leukocytes 8.8 × 10 e9/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 12 mm/h. To exclude a possible spondylodiscitis, as a cause of the sudden vertebral body collapse a positron-emission tomography-computed tomography scan was performed, which showed no clear signs of infection but severe degeneration at level L2-L3 . We planned a surgical decompression of L2-L3 on the right side with a posterior spondylodesis of L1-L5. During the ambulatory waiting time before surgery, the patient’s symptoms worsened. He was unable to walk and stand because of severe pain in the lumbar spine, without signs of neurological impairment. Four weeks before the onset of progressive symptoms, a broken molar was removed during a dental procedure. The patient interview revealed no alternative explanation for his worsening condition. He was admitted to the hospital, and the date of surgery was advanced. Serum infection markers showed a CRP of 174 mg/L, leukocytes of 11.9x10e9/L, and ESR of 128 mm/h. A new MRI scan showed the previously seen destruction of L2-L3, with an extensive fluid collection in the remaining intervertebral space, paravertebral myositis, and multiple abscesses . Based on the new clinical situation, adecompression of L2 and L3 and a posterior spondylodesis T12-L5 was performed obtaining deep cultures of tissue and the abscess in the disc space. Vancomycin and ciprofloxacin were started postoperatively. Weakness of the right quadriceps was observed in the first postoperative hours, and a CT-scan showed a medial position of both L4 screws. These were replaced by using a revision procedure in the same day. Unfortunately, the weakness persisted in the following weeks. All intraoperative cultures showed P. micra, and the antibiotic treatment was changed to penicillin intravenously (12 g daily) based on the sensitivity spectrum. The pain and infectious signs subsided, and the serum infection markers improved after 2weeks of antibiotics as follows: CRP 43 mg/L and leukocytes 9.3 × 10 e9/L. The antibiotic treatment was continued orally with clindamycin (600 mg three times daily) for 4weeks. At the last visit to the outpatient clinic, at 1 year after surgery, the patient reported only occasional backpain. Blood results as follows: CRP 8 mg/L, leukocytes 8.6 × 10e9/L, and ESR 32 mm/h. Radiography of the spine showed unchanged spinal instrumentation and no signs of spondylodiscitis relapse.