A 10-year-old HIV-infected girl who presented to Mulago National Referral Hospital in Kampala, Uganda with a new-onset, generalized tonic-clonic seizure, which resolved with rectal diazepam given in the hospital. The seizure was preceded by a severe frontal headache and subjective fevers for 3 days. Otherwise, she did not have rash, vomiting, diarrhea, night sweats, or weight loss at presentation. There were no known contacts with tuberculosis. On initial exam, she was well appearing, with no abnormalities in vital signs or neurologic examination.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) results showed WBC of 0–1 per high powered field (hpf), red blood cells (RBC) 1–2/hpf, protein 43 mg/dL, glucose 2.5 mmol/L (normal 3.3–4.4). Rapid cryptococcal antigen in CSF and blood were positive. An acid-fast stain and Indian ink stain were positive (++) for yeast cells. An opening pressure was not obtained due to lack of supplies. Two days later, the CSF culture returned positive (++) for Cryptococcus neoformans, and she was diagnosed with cryptococcal meningitis. Bacterial meningitis and HIV encephalopathy were the other considerations. CD4 count at the time of presentation was 445 cells/milliliter.
She was diagnosed with HIV at 6 years of age. Since starting ART, she reported poor adherence, leading to treatment failure and switch to second-line therapy (ABC-3TC-EFV➔AZT-3TC-LPV/r) 8 weeks prior to the onset of her current symptoms; viral load at that time was 224,000 copies/milliliter. Her mother reported excellent adherence, with no missed doses, since starting second-line line ART. Her most recent CD4 count was from 3 years prior at 366 cells/milliliter. There were no recorded cryptococcal antigen tests from the previous year.
On admission, she was started on amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.8 mg/kg/day) and high dose oral fluconazole (12 mg/kg/day), as flucytosine is not readily available. Given ongoing neurologic symptoms (headache, vomiting), several therapeutic lumbar punctures were performed throughout admission (day 2 of hospitalization 8 mL was drained, day 6, 10 mL, day 10, 15 mL and day 18, 12 mL) with transient improvement in symptoms. Despite this, on day 16 of hospitalization she developed bilateral cranial nerve VI palsy (see Fig. ). CSF analysis showed a negative India ink stain and culture; CSF cell counts were not obtained due to a shortage of reagents. A CT head with/without contrast from day 17 showed mild parenchymal edema of left parietal lobe, otherwise normal. HIV viral load obtained at that time was 262 copies/milliliter. Given persistent symptoms, her induction therapy of amphotericin B and high dose fluconazole was increased from 14 to 21 days. She did not receive other adjuvant therapy such as glucocorticoids.
At discharge on day 21, she remained with bilateral cranial nerve VI palsy, but otherwise asymptomatic and seizure-free. Her cranial nerve defects resolved within 10 weeks of discharge and she has remained on oral fluconazole. Six months after discharge, she remains without seizures, cranial nerve palsies, or other sequala of CCM.
This case report received IRB approval. We have obtained written consent from the primary caregiver of the child (the mother) and written assent from the child to publish the case report and associated images.