An 83-year-old Caucasian man, in otherwise good health, was referred to our hospital with intermittent anal bleeding and irregular bowel patterns. A colonoscopy revealed a 1cm solitary rectal polyp, which was completely removed by endoscopic resection .
Histological examination showed a tubular adenoma with low-grade intraepithelial dysplasia and focal localization in the stroma by highly proliferative large lymphoid cells . The base of the adenoma was not involved.
Immunohistochemical stains demonstrated that the lymphoid cells expressed CD20 (clone 2B11 + PD7/26, DAKO; Figure d and e) and B-cell lymphoma 2 (clone 2B11 + PD7/26, DAKO; figure not shown), but not CD3 (clone F7.2.38, DAKO), CD5 (clone 4C7, DAKO), CD10 (clone 56C6, DAKO), CD23 (clone DAK-CD23, DAKO), CD30 (clone Ber-H2, DAKO), CD138 (clone MI15, DAKO) and cyclin D1 (clone EP12, DAKO). Approximately 90% of the neoplastic cells reacted positively when stained with an antibody to Ki-67 (clone MIB1, DAKO; Figure f).
Finally, molecular genetic analysis detecting the rearrangement of the FR2/LJH/VLJH region of the immunoglobulin heavy chain was performed and a monoclonal amplicon of approximately 260 base pairs (expected band between 240 and 280 base pairs) was detected, demonstrating malignancy and clonal association of the lymphoma infiltrates in the adenoma . Molecular analyses were carried out as previously described [,] and according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Commercial reagents by DAKO Cytomation, Milan, Italy and by Diachem S.r.l., Naples, Italy to perform immunohistochemical and a B clonality assay were used, respectively. All used products are compliant with the requirements of the in vitro diagnostic directive 98/79/EC.
The patient underwent full staging for lymphoma. Dawson’s criteria were used in the differential diagnosis between primary colorectal involvement and GI tract involvement secondary to systemic lymphoma . He had no fever, weight loss or night sweats. A physical examination revealed no alteration. There was no lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Blood-cell count, serum biochemistry and immunoglobulins were either within normal limits or negative. A bone marrow biopsy showed no evidence of lymphoma. His chest X-ray was unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) of his total body revealed no evidence of extraintestinal involvement. A diagnosis of primary DLBCL was made. Ann Arbor stage 1A was established. Subsequently, he was referred to a hematologist for further management. Since the lymphoproliferative lesion was limited and there was no evidence of disseminated disease, and accounting for the advanced age of patient, it was considered inappropriate to perform surgical resection. He did not receive chemotherapy, but he was referred to follow-up with clinical examinations and CT scans at 6-monthly intervals only. He showed no clinical or radiologic recurrence at the time when we wrote this paper (1 year past).