In this report, we present a 26-year-old male with a past medical history of Behcet's disease who developed progressive vision loss and severe hypotonia. He had received 15 mg of methotrexate weekly and 7.5 mg of prednisolone daily as well as multiple injections of subtenon triamcinolone acetonide (TA; 40 mg). He had also undergone phacoemulsification and posterior chamber intraocular lens placement for cataract in his both eyes. Pars plana vitrectomy with silicone oil injection was performed in his right eye for hypotony. Visual acuity was 20/400 in his right eye and “hand motion” in his left eye. Ocular hypotony persisted despite all these treatments in the absence of active inflammation. Corneal folds and band keratopathy were noted after few weeks. Fundus was poorly visible but it was remarkable for cystic changes in the macular region. B-scan showed a significant serous choroidal detachment due to severe hypotony in both eyes. To increase the IOP, multiple injections of 40 mg of subtenon and 4 mg of intravitreal TA were administered; however, no improvement was observed in vision, IOP status, and serous choroidal detachment. Visual acuity deteriorated because of persistent hypotony maculopathy. Ibopamine (a dopamine agonist) eye drops were used for three months with an increase in IOP of 2 mm Hg in both the eyes, but no change in vision was detected.
We discussed the details of our experimental treatment based on published studies with the patient and proceeded with the treatment after obtaining a written consent. Subsequently, high-dose latanoprost eye drops (XALATAN, 0.005%, Pfizer) were administered every 6 hours in both eyes.
One month later, IOP increased to 4 mm Hg, and at two months, to 7 mm Hg. After two months of latanoprost treatment, we performed a drug rechallenge test by discontinuing latanoprost for four weeks and then resuming the drug to prove its effect on IOP. After 6 months, IOP was stable at 7 mm Hg and remained unchanged even after 24 months. B-scan showed significant improvement in hypotony maculopathy and fluid resolved subretinally . The patient's vision improved to 20/200 in his right eye and “finger counting” at 1.5 m in his left eye.