A 51-year-old female patient with a 27-year history of bipolar disorder was admitted to the psychiatric clinic in September 2017 due to depressed mood, ideas of reference, delusions of persecution and anxiety. It was known from her medical history that her first psychotic episode (acute paranoid syndrome) occurred in 1990. The patient was hospitalized for a few weeks and was treated with antipsychotic drug (perazine) with a good result. Within the next 10 years the patient was hospitalized 4 times and diagnosed with depression and mania. The depressive episodes were treated with different antidepressant drugs (imipramine, perazine and venlafaxine) in combination with mood stabilizers (carbamazepine and/or lithium), whereas antipsychotic drugs were used to treat the mania. After the last hospitalization (in 2000) for depression, the patient continued her treatment (imipramine, perazine, lithium and carbamazepine) as an out-patient until 2008. The treatment of the patient was modified due to fluctuations in her mental state. Imipramine and carbamazepine were withdrawn and fluoxetine was commenced. In 2015, the patient was hospitalized owning to acute intoxication with lithium (> 1.2 mmol/l), renal failure and extrapyramidal symptoms. Lithium was withdrawn and gabapentine was initiated for the extrapyramidal symptoms. In addition, hypothyroidism was diagnosed and levothyroxine was prescribed, which patient took until 2016. Within the next 2 years the patient was taking fluoxetine (60 mg/d), perazine (150 mg/d) and gabapentine (800 mg/d). During that time carbamazepine was commenced (200 mg/d, max. to 800 mg/d) to stabilize the patient’s mood, but owing to severe deterioration of her mental state (intensification of both psychotic and depressive symptoms), the drug was withdrawn and lithium (max.1000 mg/d) was reintroduced. Additionally, olanzapine (5 mg/d) for psychotic symptoms and biperiden (4 mg/d) for muscle stiffness were added. Throughout the disease (since the first psychotic episode in 1990 until the last hospitalization in 2017), there were no psychiatric comorbidities diagnosed. Periodic hypothyroidism (in 2015) treated with levothyroxine and renal failure caused by acute intoxication with lithium were notable for the patient’s history.
The patient was admitted to the psychiatric clinic in September 2017 due to depressed mood, ideas of reference, delusions of persecution and anxiety. During her admission disturbances of consciousness were not observed and the patient was auto- and allopsychically orientated. The patient’s general condition was good (blood pressure: 115/70 mmHg, pulse 72, respiratory rate16/min and BMI 27,22). A regular systolic murmur was noted and lungs were clear bilaterally. The abdomen was symmetrical without distention and bowel sounds were normal in quality and intensity in all areas. The patient had dry skin and varicose veins of the lower extremities. Her laboratory results showed lithium levels of 1.48 mmol/l, GFR 35 ml/min, creatinine 1.56 mg/dl and WBC 10.42 × 10^3/ml. A urinary tract infection was diagnosed (leukocytosis 10.2 × 10^3/ml, positive result of urine inoculation-Klebsiella oxytoca) and antibiotic therapy was initiated (sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim). After 5 days of treatment her physical state deteriorated, she developed a fever of 38.4 °C and her laboratory results revealed a toxic level of lithium carbonate 2.34 mmol/l, creatinine 2.05 mg/dl and GFR 25 ml/min. Acute renal failure was diagnosed by a nephrologist and as a result the lithium was withdrawn and the antibiotic therapy was replaced with ceftriaxone 2 g/d (lower nephrotoxicity). Normal saline was administered to the patient for two days in order to decrease the toxic level of lithium. The patient’s general condition and laboratory findings improved (level of lithium 1.34 mmol/l, creatinine 1.94 mg/l, GFR 27 ml/min), and 7 days later the antibiotic therapy was discontinued. Other laboratory results (biochemistry, hematology, lipidemia, ions and hormone levels- TSH, fT3, fT4) were found to be within normal range, so other somatic disorders, apart from renal failure, were excluded.
After stabilization of her somatic condition, and despite her treatment (the patient was continuing treatment with fluoxetine 60 mg/d, olanzapine 5 mg/d, gabapentin 800 mg/d, perazine 150 mg/d and biperiden 4 mg/d), the patient’s mental state deteriorated significantly (depressed mood, ideas of reference, aggravated delusions of persecution), so the treatment was changed accordingly. All drugs taken by the patient so far were gradually withdrawn (olanzapine and perazine over 6 days; fluoxetine over 4 weeks, gabapentine over 3 weeks and biperiden over 1 week) and lamotrigine (200 mg/d) and aripiprazole (30 mg/d) were initiated. Lamotrigine was used to replace lithium, as it is a good mood stabilizer without any nephrotoxic influence on the kidneys. Lamotrigine was commenced at a dose of 25 mg/d, which the patient took for 2 weeks. The dosage was then increased to 50 mg/d for a week, and then incrementally increased each week up to the final dose of 200 mg/d. Aripiprazole was initiated at a dose of 7.5 mg/d in order to reduce delusions and was uptitrated to the final dose of 30 mg/d over 2 weeks. As a result of the insufficient effectiveness of aripiprazole and lamotrigine treatment, which lasted 6 weeks, (ideas of reference, delusions of persecutions were maintained and problems with sleep), quetiapine was added (50 mg/d) in the 6th week. A partial good response to the treatment was observed after 7 days (partial reduction of delusions and mood stabilization), so the doctors decided to uptitrate the quetiapine dose to 400 mg/d, which took 9 days. Further treatment with aripirazole, lamotrigine and quetiapine resulted in NMS development. A description of NMS and its treatment is presented in Table .
To assess and quantify the causal role of antipsychotic drugs in the mediation of NMS, the Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) Probability Scale was used. According to this scale each drug was assigned to a probability category on the basis of points, which were calculated as follows: aripiprazole 2, lamotrigine 3 and quetiapine 5. Number of points: > 9 means definitive adverse drug reaction; 5 to 8 points- probable adverse drug reaction; 1 to 4- possible adverse drug reaction and 0- doubtful adverse drug reaction .