The patient was a 92-year-old man who had long been treated for chronic kidney disease with renal anemia, atrial fibrillation with a slow ventricular response, and chronic heart failure of unknown cause. He was admitted to a local hospital because of progressive shortness of breath and systemic edema. He was treated with intravenous diuretics, but the response to treatment was unsatisfactory. Moreover, his renal function progressively deteriorated as a consequence of the administration of high-dose diuretics. At that point, he was transferred to our hospital for further treatment.

On admission, his blood pressure was 98/48 mmHg, his heart rate was 44 beats/min, and his oxygen saturation was 96% (room air). Cardiac auscultation revealed bradycardia with an irregular rhythm, a prominent second heart sound with fixed splitting, and a Levine III/VI systolic regurgitant murmur in the fourth intercostal space. On inspection, he had severe leg edema extending from the foot to thigh level, prominent jugular venous distention, and abdominal distention, which was consistent with right heart failure. Chest radiography showed enlargement of the cardiac silhouette and bilateral pulmonary effusion. Electrocardiography demonstrated complete right bundle branch block and atrial fibrillation with a slow ventricular response. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed significant dilatation of the right atrium and ventricle, which resulted in dilatation of the tricuspid annulus and severe tricuspid regurgitation. Furthermore, distention of the inferior vena cava to 30 mm in diameter was observed without a visible respiratory change. Doppler echocardiography revealed an increased pressure gradient of 45 mmHg across the tricuspid valve, consistent with pulmonary hypertension. Unexpectedly, from the subxiphoid view, a 13×10 mm ostium secundum ASD with left-to-right shunt was detected, and the pulmonary-to-systemic-blood-flow ratio was 2.36. Transesophageal echocardiography confirmed a 13×13 mm stium secundum ASD next to the sinus of Valsalva with a dominant left-to-right, bidirectional shunt. A cardiac catheter examination showed a pulmonary artery pressure of 34/8 mmHg (mean pressure 16 mmHg), pulmonary vascular resistance of 84 dyn·s·cm5, and a significant step-up of oxygen saturation from the superior vena cava (75%) to the right ventricle (91%).

Radiography and electrocardiography of the 92-year-old male patient with heart failure of unknown cause. A chest radiograph obtained on admission shows significant cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion. An electrocardiogram obtained on admission shows atrial fibrillation with a slow ventricular response.

Transthoracic echocardiography on admission of the 92-year-old male patient with heart failure of unknown cause. Both the right ventricle and atrium are significantly dilated with concomitant tricuspid annular dilatation. Severe tricuspid regurgitation is visible. The pressure gradient across the tricuspid value was 45 mmHg, indicating pulmonary arterial hypertension. Subxyphoid view: The ostium secundum atrial septal defect was clearly visible. SVC: superior vena cava, IVC: inferior vena cava, RA: right atrium, RV: right ventricle, LA: left atrium, LV: left ventricle, ASD: atrial septal defect

Transesophageal echocardiography of the 92-year-old male patient with an ostium secundum atrial septal defect (ASD). A preoperative mid-esophageal sagittal view shows an ostium secundum ASD. The M-mode echocardiogram clearly shows a dominant left-to-right shunt through the ASD with a small right-to-left shunt during early systole. A preoperative mid-esophageal aortic valve short-axis view shows an ostium secundum ASD next to the sinus of Valsalva. Intraoperatively, the size of the ASD was measured using a sizing balloon and a Figulla Flex II® (21 mm) occluder was successfully deployed. ASD: atrial septal defect


Subsequently, the patient's heart failure proved to be refractory to the best-practice treatment with cardiotonic drugs [intravenous dobutamine (3.5 μg/kg/min)], high-dose diuretics [furosemide (20 mg/day) and tolvaptan (15 mg/day)], and of warfarin (2 mg/day). Further complicating the situation, the patient's renal function progressively deteriorated during this treatment, which negatively affected the hemodynamic control. In this case, the intractable heart failure was attributable to the combined hemodynamic disturbances, including an ostium secundum ASD with a large shunt burden, secondary tricuspid regurgitation, and atrial fibrillation with a slow ventricular response. The ASD was considered to play a central role in the condition of the patient. After a thorough discussion within the heart team, transcatheter closure was scheduled despite the fact that the patient was a nonagenarian with multiple comorbidities. On the 32nd hospital day, this procedure was performed under general anesthesia. Using an 18-mm balloon, a pre-procedural occlusion test was performed under right-sided catheter monitoring. This revealed the absence of a hemodynamic exacerbation. Because the measured defect size was 15.5 mm in diameter, to completely enclose the sinus of Valsalva, a Figulla Flex IIⓇ occluder device (21 mm, Occlutech, Jena, Germany) was finally selected and successfully deployed without any complications (Fig. 3C). After device implantation, only clopidogrel (75 mg/day) was prescribed on top of warfarin to avoid the hemorrhagic complications.

Immediately after ASD closure, the patient's hemodynamics became controllable without the need for inotropic medication or intravenous diuretics, and his renal function gradually improved. The patient was discharged on the 9th day after ASD closure.

Surprisingly, the patient's heart returned to sinus rhythm, and not only the cardiomegaly but also the bilateral pleural effusion showed significant improvement at one month after ASD closure. Moreover, despite the long-term volume overload, the right heart showed significant reverse remodeling, and the cardiac output markedly improved from 2.8 L/min to 4.4 L/min. At 10 months after ASD closure, his heart failure symptoms showed a marked improvement to NYHA functional class I. At present, he is caring for his sick wife in their own home.