In august 2018, an 81-year-old caucasian man presented to the emergency department with fever, progressive dyspnea, dry cough and left pleuritic chest pain.
Patients symptoms started 3 wk ago and worsened progressively.
His medical history was consistent with chronic lymphocytic leukemia, initially treated in 2007 with Fludarabine, Cyclophosphamide and Rituximab therapy with chronic lymphocytosis, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia and chronic kidney failure with an eGFR of 28 mL/min/1.73 m2. He reported no smoking or alcohol abuse and used to work as an upholsterer.
None.
Physical examination revealed fever (38.1°C), tachycardia (105 bpm), peripheral percutaneous oxygen saturation was 100% with 2 liters of oxygen with tachypnea, normal blood pressure and almost abolished left vesicular murmur. Adenopathy, hepatomegaly or splenomegaly were not observed. Cardiovascular and neurologic examination were normal.
Biology tests revealed neutrophilia (18.7 g/L) and elevated CRP (297 mg/L) consistent with inflammatory response, along with stable lymphocytosis (242 g/L) and anemia (7.8 g/L).
Chest X-ray at admission showed a large left pleural effusion with contralateral tracheal deviation. Complementary computed tomography confirmed a walled-off, loculated left pleural effusion, with right lung parenchyma considered normal.
First bedside pleural puncture showed a citrine exudate (pleural protein 37 g/L, pleural fluid protein to serum ratio 0.61), unfortunately cytological examination was not performed.
Despite intravenous treatment with cefotaxime, the patient condition worsened with persistence of fever, neutrophilia, and severe hypoxemia appeared. Bacteriological standard culture of the pleural liquid sample was negative, as well as repeated blood cultures. In order to look for a tuberculosis etiology, auramine stained sputum smears and cultures were performed but remained negative. Spot-test for tuberculosis was not performed. Ten days after his admission, because of the uncontrolled large pleural effusion with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, the patient underwent surgical thoracentesis with evacuation of 2 liters of purulent liquid. We chose surgery instead of repeated pleural drawings, because local sepsis was not controlled nor bacteriologically documented. Pleura was thick and nodular, with white pseudo-membranes. Treatment with metronidazole was added to cefotaxime after the surgery in order to cover anaerobic bacteria. Cytobacteriological examination and cultures of the liquid were negative. Lymphocyte phenotyping ruled out B-cell lymphoma as a complication of his chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Three days after, the patient progressively developed multiple organ failure requiring intensive care unit admission. As no massive transfusion was initiated during surgery and shock was the main matter, fluid overload could not explain the evolution in multiple organ failure. After a slow unfavorable evolution during the ten first days of hospitalization, the patient’s condition worse brutaly three days after surgical thoracocentesis leading to septic shock complicated of multiple organ failure. Despite antibiotherapy with cefepime and amikacin, invasive mechanical ventilation, vasopressor infusion and renal replacement therapy, the patient died of uncontrolled septic shock few hours after ICU admission.
The day after, mycobacterial culture of surgical pleural samples yielded Gram-negative bacilli . Rapid identification using matrix-assisted desorption ionization–time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; Microflex LT; Bruker Daltonics, Leipzig, Germany) was performed and L. pneumophila was identified. The bacteria were addressed to the National Reference Center of Legionella and molecular typing analysis by sequence-based typing was performed and showed that the strain of L. pneumophila serogroup 1 belonged to Sequence Type 1. Urinary antigen research retrospectively performed on a urine sample of the patient confirmed the presence of L. pneumophila serogroup 1.
We believe that chances of super infection or co-infection with another bacterium are scarce. Patient indeed received broad spectrum antibiotics directed against common bacteria causing pleural empyema (including anaerobic bacteria, gram-negative bacillus, streptococci and staphylococci), and repeated standard bacteriological cultures remained negative.
Retrospectively, our patient presented the following risk factors: Male sex, aged more than 50 years, chronic lymphocytic leukemia with history of immunocompromising treatments, chronic kidney failure, diabetes mellitus and weaned smoking.