A 43-year-old male patient, a cigarette smoker who works as an office employee, was diagnosed with MG in February 2019. The condition started on December 2018 with weakness in the left side of his face associated with dysarthria that was misdiagnosed as left Bell’s palsy, for which the patient received steroid therapy and physiotherapy with no response to the medication. A few months later, the condition progressed to be associated with diplopia with a blurring of vision, followed by bulbar manifestations in the form of dysphagia with nasal regurgitation to fluid and frequent choking. Within a few days, the patient developed neck muscle weakness, especially flexion, with proximal weakness of the upper and lower limbs. These manifestations had diurnal variation, with increased symptoms at the end of the day and increased with exertion. Till this time, the patient received non-specific treatment.
The patient sought medical advice, and repetitive nerve stimulation in the frontalis and deltoid muscles was done in February 2019, revealing a positive decrement test for myasthenia. The serum level of the acetylcholine antibody was positive, and the titer was 7.9 nmol/l (negative if < 0.4 nmol/l). The patient was hospitalized and received six sessions of plasmapheresis with complete improvement. During this time, no chest imaging was done to assess the thymus gland status and the patient was managed conservatively and was prescribed acetylcholine esterase inhibitors (pyridostigmine 60 mg) twice daily with azathioprine twice daily and steroids that were gradually tapered, but the patient was incompliant with the treatment and developed recurrent attacks of exacerbations.
In September 2021, the patient complained of epigastric pain, dysphagia, and repeated food regurgitation and sought medical advice several times. Upper endoscopy revealed only hyperemic edematous mucosa with multiple fundal and pre-pyloric gastric ulcers. The patient was prescribed medical treatment with proton pump inhibitors with no improvement in his gastrointestinal tract (GIT) symptoms (vomiting and dysphagia, described as a sensation of food sticking behind his chest).
In November 2021, the patient developed worsening of his MG symptoms with a chest infection suggestive of pneumonia and was admitted to the hospital’s intermediate care unit. The patient was investigated for Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection with a complete metabolic profile, and multislice computed tomography (MSCT) chest were done. The complete metabolic profile was normal, apart from absolute lymphopenia. The MSCT chest with and without contrast showed a ground glass appearance in both lungs suggestive of COVID-19 (CORAD III). Other findings in the MSCT chest included: iso-dense left anterior mediastinal soft tissue mass measuring about 6.7 × 6.7 × 5 cm, with minute foci of calcification. The mass showed homogenous enhancement in the post-contrast study, partially encasing the left innominate vein with no definite infiltration . Also, the distal part of the esophagus was minimally dilated and filled with fluid with no definite mass lesion. At first, the patient was managed for his COVID-19 infection. In January 2022, after controlling the infection, CT guided true cut needle biopsy was done for his left anterior mediastinal mass, which revealed undifferentiated neoplasm for immunohistochemistry.
A few days later, the patient was transferred to neurology due to his myasthenic crisis. His neurological examination showed bilateral ptosis, diplopia, weakness of muscle of facial expression, neck muscle weakness more in neck flexors, and proximal weakness of both upper and lower limbs (grade 4a according to the medical research council muscle grading system), with unremarkable rest of neurological examination. The patient received five sessions of plasmapheresis with complete improvement apart from unexplained persistent dysphagia and vomiting. The patient was assessed by a cardiothoracic consultant and prepared for elective thymectomy. In March 2022, transsternal extending thymectomy of left thymus mass with partial resection of innominate vein via median sternotomy. The histopathological examination revealed a picture of thymoma type B2, p T1 (cortical thymoma and polygonal cell thymoma). After surgery, the patient was stable because he did not need postoperative mechanical ventilation and did not develop a postoperative myasthenic crisis. The patient was discharged home and received the postoperative treatment (levofloxacin, bronchodilators and anti-inflammatory) and continued MG medication (pyridostigmine 60 mg four times daily).
In June 2022, another attack of MG exacerbation for which the patient was admitted and received five sessions of plasmapheresis with partial improvement of his symptoms except for persistent vomiting after meals and regurgitation of undigested food with dysphagia. The patient was discharged on medical treatment (pyridostigmine 60 mg three times daily, azathioprine 50 mg twice daily, and steroid with gradual tapering). After gastroenterology consultation for his GIT symptoms and investigations, including upper endoscopy, barium swallow, and high-resolution esophageal manometry (HRM), the diagnosis of achalasia was confirmed. Upper endoscopy showed dilated esophagus with retained fluid and spastic cardia . The barium swallow study showed dilated esophagus with a bird beak appearance, and HRM showed achalasia type II . In July 2022, elective pneumatic balloon dilatation (PBD) was done with successful dilation and remarkable improvement of the patient’s GIT symptoms. The patient is now stable on his MG medical treatment for the sixth month’s follow-up.