A 53-year-old female patient presented with a 10-year history of enlargement of right heart cavities with mild elevation of pulmonary artery pressure and mild dyspnoea. Her baseline electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with incomplete right bundle branch block, cardiac auscultation revealed a fixed split S2. First echocardiographic cue of the congenital disease was a partial reverse flow of the RUPV and evidence of relevant left-to-right shunt at the level of the SVC , as assessed by transoesophageal echocardiography. Her past medical history includes dyslipidaemia, arterial hypertension and anxiety disorder.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) confirmed right heart dilatation with normal biventricular function and showed dilatation of the pulmonary trunk (38 mm). 3D magnetic resonance angiography (Golden-angle RAdial Sparse Parallel MRI) demonstrated a large side-to-side communication (cavopulmonary window) of the RUPV with SVC of 19 mm resulting in isolated PAPVR. The RUPV retained its connection to the LA and as a result forming a PAPV drainage.
Flow measurements were done of the ascending, and descending aorta, as well as pulmonary artery (not shown) and showed a significant left-to-right shunt with Qp:Qs of 1.6. Approximate (no axial correction) net forward flow in the SVC distal to the cavopulmonary window was markedly elevated (113 mL). It was much higher than the usually expected backflow from head and upper extremities (difference of net forward flow of ascending and descending aorta: 96 mL − 63 mL = 33 mL) and further confirmed significant left-to-right shunting.
At right heart catheterization, the anomalous connection of the RUPV to the SVC was confirmed by a jump in the oxygen saturation of the SVC proximal to the cavopulmonary window of 76–96% at the level of the cavopulmonary window. Angiographically, there was evidence of significant left-to-right shunting with a Qp:Qs of 2.2.
Given the haemodynamic significance of this patient’s shunt, right cavity dilatation, and mild elevation of pulmonary artery pressure the defect has been repaired using minimally invasive axillary thoracotomy . An atrial tunnel patch was inserted through a patent foramen ovale (PFO) to redirect flow from the RUPV to the LA .
In a follow-up CMR 7 months after the operation, it could be demonstrated that the cavopulmonary window was closed with unchanged normal connection of the RUPV to the LA. Yet, there was evidence of a post-operative interatrial shunt (Qp:Qs = 1.2) in proximity to the ostium of the inferior vena cava. Right ventricular end-diastolic volume (RV EDV) was in the upper normal range (RV EDV indexed 106 mL/m2).