A 55-year-old male who underwent a radical surgical procedure was referred to our medical facility for further evaluation and management of a local recurrence of anastomosis. The patient previously underwent laparoscopic high anterior resection and Japanese D2 lymph node dissection after being diagnosed with rectosigmoid cancer at the age of 53 years. According to the ninth edition of the Union for International Cancer Control , rectal cancer was pathologically diagnosed as pT3N0M0 Stage IIA. After surgery, the patient received adjuvant therapy of uracil–tegafur and leucovorin for a year at the previous hospital. He was symptom-free for 1 year and 3 months, and no signs of recurrence were observed.
One year and 3 months after the surgery, the serum level of carcinoembryonic antigen increased to 20.2 ng/mL. CT scan indicated the development of a tumor at the anastomosis site that was massively attached to the upper part of the sacrum and a small nodule, and it was suspected that peritoneal dissemination was present on the ventral right side of the anastomosis . In addition, a positron emission tomography–CT scan confirmed an abnormally high accumulation of 2-[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose on the recurrent lesion . A colonoscopy confirmed the diagnosis of LRRC , and histopathological examination of the biopsy specimens revealed adenocarcinoma cells. LRRC was deemed unresectable for R0 clearance and was genetically characterized as RAS wild type. Therefore, we administered systemic chemotherapy with mFOLFOX6 and panitumumab. The recurrent tumor shrank after 11 rounds of treatment, the diminutive nodule near the anastomosis disappeared, and no signs of distant metastasis were observed. However, the recurring tumor remained in contact with the upper part of the sacrum . We determined that radical surgical resection was still not possible, and CIRT facility was consulted. It was determined that CIRT could not be performed because of the close proximity of the intestinal anastomotic site. This was decided based on the fact that the dose of CIRT is higher than the dose tolerable for the intestinal tract, and its proximity to the intestinal tract can increase the risk of ulcers, bleeding, and perforation. Therefore, it was proposed that the exposed intestinal tract should be removed within 1–2 months after CIRT considering its late toxicities. The patient provided informed consent and selected multidisciplinary therapy incorporating CIRT as the treatment option.
CIRT was administered daily 4 days/week for 16 fractions. The total irradiated dose was set at 73.6 Gy (relative biological effectiveness–weighted dose [RBE]). The radiation field included the tumor with a 10-mm margin. As a result, approximately 5 cm of the intestinal tract was included in the irradiated area . The patient was re-evaluated 1 month after irradiation with multiple imaging studies, but no significant changes in the tumor were observed. In addition, there were no significant adverse effects in the intestinal tract, except for light erythema, mucosal edema, and erosion at the anastomosis .
Surgical removal was performed as planned 8 weeks after CIRT. Surgery was performed laparoscopically with regional removal of the intestine. Despite the presence of adhesions that seemed to be related to the prior surgery, no significant adhesions with other organs were detected within the CIRT-irradiated area. In the irradiated area, the tissue was extremely firm owing to severe fibrosis, thus making it difficult to distinguish the dissected layer. Therefore, we proceeded with sharp dissection as close as possible to the sacrum, with the connective tissue being sharply dissected along the sacral surface using monopolar electronic scalpels and ultrasonically activated devices. This dissection line was selected to prevent any exposure of the intestinal lumen. However, sharp dissection resulted in a significant amount of exudate production, thus making it difficult to maintain a clear field of view during the surgical procedure within the pelvis. We verified the anastomosis from the prior surgery using intraoperative colonoscopy. Further, we estimated the extent of irradiated bowel based on the distance from the anastomosis using the preoperative irradiation map as a guide. The physician who designed and performed preoperative CIRT participated in the surgery and provided advice on the resection line. The rectum was resected 2 cm distal to the anastomotic tumor, and the entire irradiated bowel was removed . Re-anastomosis was performed using the double-stapling technique, and a temporary loop ileostomy was constructed. No complications were observed except for a paralytic ileus, which delayed the start of meals for 7 days. Histopathological examination of the removed rectum revealed massive fibrosis and scattered small numbers of cancer cells . The nuclei of these cancer cells showed irregularly marked swelling and chromatin clumping . Because of intimal thickening that contained foamy cells, small vascular lumen was narrowed near these degenerated cancer cells . These morphological changes suggested the presence of the CIRT effect, which was estimated as TRG3 according to the previously proposed criteria . No adjuvant therapy was administered, and tumor markers and imaging were performed every 3 months after the surgery. The temporary ileostomy was closed 8 months after the surgical intervention. The quality of life of the patient, especially defecation function, was maintained. The patient continues to survive with no obvious signs of recurrence 24 months after surgery.