A 53-year-old woman presented with bilateral visual loss. She had a prior history of “IIH” by modified Dandy criteria 19 years prior but aggressive surgical treatment with lumboperitoneal shunt placement and two revisions failed to improve the vision. She had a pituitary adenoma that was resected but the vision did not improve and she presented with 3 weeks later with new-onset headache and visual loss. Her BMI was 35.44 kg/m2. Past medical history included depression, hepatitis C, hyperlipidemia, and uterine cancer post-hysterectomy. The patient was taking trazodone for anxiety and buprenorphine for chronic pain. She had allergies to penicillin, tolterodine, ondansetron, metoclopramide, and prochlorperazine. She never smoked and had no history of alcohol or drug use. The family history was non-contributory.
At presentation she reported new headaches, transient visual obscurations, and a history of “papilledema” and “IIH” in 2003, at the age of 35. In 2003, cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal and lumbar puncture (LP) revealed normal CSF contents but an elevated opening pressure, which was compatible with the modified Dandy criteria for IIH. The patient had progressive visual loss that required LP shunt and had a subsequent shunt revision.
From 2015 to 2018, she began experiencing painless peripheral vision loss, which she and her physicians attributed to “old damage from the pseudotumor cerebri”.
The patient presented again in 2018 with progressive peripheral vision loss in both eyes. A repeat cranial MRI showed a prior stable mild Chiari I malformation but a new suprasellar pituitary adenoma . A diagnosis of compression optic neuropathy was made. Visual acuity was hand motion in the right eye (OD) and 20/60 in the left eye (OS). Automated perimetry (Humphrey visual field (HVF) 24 − 2) revealed a temporal hemianopic impairment with a superimposed inferior altitudinal field loss OS and diffuse depression OD. Repeat LP results revealed normal CSF and opening pressure. The patient had a Grade 1 pituitary adenoma removed completely via a transnasal technique, but her vision did not improve, likely due to the prior optic atrophy that was present for years prior to resection.
In February 2020 the patient presented to the neuro-ophthalmology clinic at Houston Methodist Hospital with one-month worsening headaches and vision loss for which she was admitted. On neuro-ophthalmic examination, the visual acuity was no light perception OD and counting fingers OS. The right pupil was amaurotic. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of the retinal nerve fiber layer and the macular ganglion cell layer showed diffuse loss OU. New subretinal and intraretinal edema was seen on OCT and ophthalmoscopy showed diffuse optic atrophy OU.
Repeat cranial MRI showed gross total resection of the pituitary adenoma with no recurrent or residual disease. LP showed normal opening pressure and CSF content. Repeat orbital MRI with contrast however showed symmetric thin peripheral optic nerve sheath enhancement of the intra-orbital optic nerves OU . Serum MOG-Ab testing was positive at a 1:100 titer. She was treated with intravenous steroids followed by plasma exchange and rituximab. There was an improvement of subretinal fluid collection following the plasma exchange, and she continued rituximab every 6 months. In September of 2020 her VA was NLP OD and 20/400 OS but the incomplete improvement was attributed to prior optic atrophy. In August of 2021 OCT was done and her VA was stable at NLP OD and 20/400 OS. On May 3, 2022, she presented with 3 weeks of worsening vision and headaches, her VA was NLP OD and CF OS, with a right RAPD, on OCT global was 75 OD and 67 OS after being 99 OD and 84 OS and showed bilateral optic atrophy despite treatment for MOGAD likely due to the delayed treatment of MOGAD.