The present case reports a 37-year-old man suffering from metastatic osteosarcoma originating in the distal part of the left femur. In March 2018, the patient entered the hospital with pain in the left leg as the major symptom. An MRI scan showed a large tumor with extramedullary parts and an intraosseous diameter of 13 cm. The histological examination of the biopsy showed a mostly epithelioid, in part osteoblastic, high-grade osteosarcoma. In the CT scans of the thorax and abdomen, there was no metastasis detectable. Before surgery, the patient was treated with a neoadjuvant regimen analog to the EURAMOS-1 trial with two cycles of doxorubicin and cisplatin and four cycles of high-dose MTX. In the intermediate staging performed by a further CT scan before surgical resection of the tumor, there was still no sign of distant metastasis. In the restaging-MRI of the left thigh the tumor showed a decrease in size. Limb saving surgical resection of the entire tumor (R0) was performed in August 2018. The tumor showed regression with 30% vital tumor cells (grade IV Salzer-Kutschnik).
Surgery was followed by an adjuvant chemotherapy analog to the EURAMOS-1-protocol containing two cycles of doxorubicin and cisplatin, two further cycles of Doxorubicin and eight cycles of high-dose MTX. The start of adjuvant chemotherapy was delayed for two weeks because of a wound infection.
The final staging after the last chemotherapy cycle showed two new pulmonary metastases in the CT scan of the lung. Hence, curatively intended surgical resection was performed in April 2019.
In September 2019, the patient had a seizure and in an MRI of the brain multiple cerebral metastases became visible. A neurosurgical resection of a symptomatic metastasis was performed, followed by a total brain irradiation with a boost on parafalcial and occipital metastases.
In a systemic restaging performed by a total body FDG-PET-CT scan and an MRI of the brain, the patient then showed a rapid systemic disease-progression with metastases affecting the lung, the mediastinum, the left adrenal gland, the brain, soft tissue, bones, and the skin. (, , )
In a molecular testing of the most recent tissue sample of the resected brain metastases, the tumor showed a high expression of PD-L1 (TPS 90% CPS 92%) but microsatellite stability (MSS). The patient was still in a good performance state (ECOG 1). A salvage chemotherapy containing the in osteosarcoma therapy established drugs ifosfamide and etoposide was not performed because of an acute kidney failure in the patient’s history and a high amount of cumulative neurotoxicity after the total brain irradiation. Benefit-risk ratio was not considered being favorable for this option. Referring to the case of a patient with advanced osteosarcoma reported by Nuytemans et al. , who reached a stabilization of disease-progression undergoing immunotherapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab, an individual therapy attempt with the same treatment combination was conducted, as there was no further established therapy and no ongoing study available.
Starting in December 2019, we exposed the patient to the immunotherapy combination of Nivolumab 3 mg/kg and Ipilimumab 1 mg/kg every 3 weeks for four times analog to the established treatment protocol for kidney cancer. In the following restaging performed by a PET-CT scan and an MRI of the brain 3 months after starting the therapy, the patient showed a clear response to the therapy with a profound remission of all tumor lesions (, , ). In some of the lesions, a minimally elevated uptake of FDG remained residually, whereas the lesions were not metrically measurable any more in the corresponding CT scan. In brain MRIs, minimal residual structures were interpreted as gliosis after total brain irradiation and immunotherapy. A definite distinction between inflammation or scar and minimal tumor residuals was not possible in PET-CT scans and MRIs.
In February 2020, the patient suffered from herpes zoster as a complication, which was treated with brivudine for 7 days.
The patient developed a mild facial palsy of the right side in March 2020, which can be considered as a side effect of the immunotherapy. In an examination of the cerebrospinal fluid, a slightly increased cell count of 9/nl could be detected but no signs of VZV encephalitis or meningeosis carcinomatosa, respectively.
In March 2020, the patient developed an immunotherapy-related pneumonitis with clinically mild symptoms but clear correlations in CT scans of the lung and noticeably reduced diffusion capacity in a subsequent lung-function examination. Therefore, immunotherapy had to be discontinued, and nivolumab maintenance could not be started according to protocol.
For treatment of pneumonitis, the patient received prednisolone with an initial dose of 50 mg per day (0.5 mg/kg). Because of decreasing signs of pneumonitis in control CT scans and an improving diffusion capacity in lung function, prednisolone could be quickly tapered to 7.5 mg, and re-exposure to nivolumab was feasible in June 2020. In the actual PET-CT scan and MRI of the brain, the patient still showed a profound remission of all tumor lesions, and there was no detectable sign of a relapse (, ). Currently, prednisolone is completely tapered, and the patient undergoes nivolumab maintenance (240mg) every 2 weeks. The performance state has further improved, and the patient is starting reintegration into work.
outlines the patient’s history.