A 32-year-old Iranian man with an unremarkable medical history presented with the chief complaint of a lump on the dorsal ulnar side of his right hand and wrist. He first noticed his symptoms approximately one month earlier. The patient reported that the mass had been there for one month and had been growing steadily over the previous month. There was no prior trauma history or constitutional symptoms, and his past medical, and family history was otherwise unremarkable. He noted some swelling in the left dorsal area but no fever, chills, or pain. Furthermore, in part of his social history, he did not abuse alcohol, drugs, or cigarettes. Also, at the time of admission, his vital signs were in normal range (pulse rate = 75, blood pressure = 118/83, temperature = 36.7, O2 saturation = 98%). In addition, as Table depict all patient’s laboratory findings except 25-Hydroxy Vitamin D3 were normal. Thus, for his low level of 25-Hydroxy Vitamin D3, supplement medication (a tablet of Vitamin D3 1000 mg daily) was started.
Standard hand-wrist radiographs were taken to rule out any foreign body or fracture.
There was no evidence of bone involvement, and no foreign bodies or breaks in any cortical margins were noted. The primary physician clinically suspected the case as a ganglion cyst during that period. After receiving conservative treatment (a tablet of Naproxen 500 mg when he suffers from pain) for 2 months, the size of the lesion gradually increased. On clinical examination, a mass of size 30 × 20 mm was found between the second and third metacarpal bones of the dorsal surface of the left hand, extending up to the proximal of the metacarpal bones and the distal part of the wrist joint. Moreover, in terms of neurovascular examination patient did not have any significant abnormalities, despite the tumor size. The patient could flex and extend his wrist suitably. His deep tendon reflex was normal. Moreover, his sensation and precipitation were literally acceptable. As well, his muscle power was 5 out of 5. In addition, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) was performed, and the image was reviewed by a radiologist. The image revealed a hypersignal lesion in T2 that was iso to a hypersignal lesion in T1 in the deep soft tissue of the middle and medial side of the hand in the 3rd and 4th web with encasement of the 4th metacarpal bone. The lesion was suggestive of a cystic structure with fine internal septation and heterogeneous signal intensity. A deviation of the flexor tendon was observed due to the mass effect of this lesion. Additionally, displacement of the extensor tendon of the hand was observed in the 3rd, 4th, and 5th fingers .
With the patient under local anesthesia, an excisional biopsy was performed, which revealed a gray gelatinous, loose mass adhering to the lumbrical and interosseous muscles and invading the carpometacarpal joint. The mass was excised in total and sent to the pathology laboratory for review.
Unfortunately, the patient had poor follow-up and did not return to the clinic after 2 months when he reported a recurrent lesion at the same location . Furthermore, in that follow-up, he brought the pathology report which revealed synovial sarcoma (biphasic). Considering the pathology report, abdominal—pelvic, and thoracic CT scans were requested for him and the result of the aforementioned images was literally normal. The patient was referred to an orthopedic oncologist. As a part of patient treatment, amputation was also suggested to the patient However, the patient refused to start his treatment and had no more follow-ups.