A 44 year old Caucasian male was referred by his primary care physician for a recurrent asymptomatic left sided massive pleural effusion. The pleural effusion was first discovered on a chest X-ray obtained to follow-up his left 8th, 9th and 10th rib fractures from an accidental fall. The effusion was recurrent over one and a half month even after drainage with thoracentesis and chest tube placement . The initial chest X-ray immediately after his fall that revealed the acute fractures did not show any pleural effusion or blunting of costophrenic angles . The patient had no significant past medical history, denied recent travel, but admitted to smoking tobacco and consuming alcohol. The patient worked, as a maintenance man, but at the time of presentation was unemployed.
At presentation the patient had normal vital signs with an oxygen saturation of 93% on room air. Physical examination revealed an average built man in no apparent distress, non-labored breathing, central trachea, absent breath sounds with a stony dull percussion note on the left hemi thorax. Abdomen was soft and non tender with a palpable liver 10 cm below the costal margin. Laboratory investigation revealed mild anemia, hypoalbuminemia (3.1 gm/dL), normal BUN, creatinine, electrolytes and urine analysis. Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis showed pH 7.48, PaCO2 34 mm Hg, PaO2 63 mm Hg, HCO3 25 mEq/L, oxygen saturation 93% on room air. Pleural fluid study showed lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 112 U/L, pH 7.80, WBC 76, Polymorphs 40%, Eosinophil 1%, glucose 139 mg/dL, albumin 0.90 gm/dL, RBC 1300/mm3, amylase 169 U/L, pleural fluid – serum LDH ratio was 0.48. Pleural fluid gram stain, cultures (aerobic, anaerobic, AFB, fungal) and cytology were all negative. Computerized tomography of chest showed the massive left-sided unilateral pleural effusion with complete collapse of the left upper and lower lobes, but no pulmonary embolism or malignancy. . Echocardiogram was normal. Ultrasound of abdomen was remarkable for fatty liver, but no ascites. Magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatography (MRCP) showed normal pancreas and biliary system without ascites. Tuberculin skin test, ANA, ANCA, AMA, ceruloplasmin, TSH, HIV, RPR, and Hepatitis virus serology were normal. Due to frequent massive re-accumulation a diagnostic and therapeutic video assisted thoracoscopy (VATS) procedure was performed, which revealed a 2 cm diaphragmatic hernia with inflamed, friable, incarcerated omentum and small amount of bowel. This inflamed omentum was determined to be the etiology for the recurrent pleural effusion. About 3.5 liters of pleural fluid was removed by VATS. Histopathology was consistent with moderately inflamed omentum. Hernia was repaired and talc-pleurodesis was performed. There was no re-accumulation on follow-up over 2 years .