A 27-year-old Caucasian woman with hepatitis C (HCV), current IVDU, and TVR was transferred to our institution for IE due to surveillance blood cultures yielding Candida parapsilosis and Staphylococcus. Three months prior to this admission, she had completed a 6-week course of antibiotics, followed by TVR with a CorMatrix valve for endocarditis. Post-operative complications included pulmonary embolism (PE) treated with coumadin. Prior to arrival, levofloxacin, piperacillin-tazobactam, vancomycin, nafcillin, and amphotericin B were initiated. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and pelvis revealed a pericardial effusion, mild hepatosplenomegaly, and anasarca. She was afebrile, with a blood pressure of 131/70 mmHg and heart rate of 90 b.p.m. Cardiovascular exam was remarkable for grade 2/6 holosystolic murmur at the left lower sternal border and jugular venous distention (JVD) to her ears. She had a distended abdomen and 3+ pitting oedema in bilateral lower extremities extending to her knees. Complete blood count showed normal white count, platelet count of 12 × 109/L (normal range 150 000–450 000 × 109/L), normocytic anaemia with haemoglobin of 9.7 g/dL (normal range 12–16 g/dL), and an international normalized ratio (INR) >10 (normal rage of 1.0–2.0) reversed with IV vitamin K and discontinuation of coumadin. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 27 mm/h (normal range 0–23 mm/h), fibrinogen was 140 mg/dL (normal range 200–400 mg/dL). Aspartate transaminase (AST) was 55 U/L and ALT - alanine transaminase was 20 U/L (normal range are 10–31 U/L and 10–41 U/L, respectively). Peripheral blood smear revealed numerous schistocytes and rare large platelets. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a mobile mass involving the TV with a large pericardial effusion measuring 4.21 cm by 3.73 cm. There was also evidence of elevated intrapericardial pressure causing diastolic compression of the right ventricle (RV) . Removal of 600 mL of serous pericardial fluid returned negative for bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Analysis was consistent with an exudative effusion. There was no apparent abscess or paravalvular leak. Repeat TTE following pericardiocentesis showed reduced pericardial effusion with relief of RV compression. On Day 8, she developed cardiogenic shock with worsening metabolic acidosis despite vasopressors that were started the day before. TTE showed torrential tricuspid regurgitation (TR) with a filling defect in the right PA (, , ). Left ventricular function was normal but the RV was dilated and poorly functional. There was an attempt to perform CT chest, however, due to haemodynamic instability, she underwent emergent surgery. Several units of platelets, fresh frozen plasma, and packed red blood cells were required during surgery. The TV was replaced using a Biocor valve following retrieval of the CorMatrix valve from the PA. Pathology of the extracted valve showed acutely inflamed tissue with bacteria, fungal element and acid-fast bacilli. She was discharged home on a prolonged course of antibiotics with Linezolid, Amikacin and Micafungin. All her laboratory values improved. Upon discharge, the patient moved out of state, however, was re-admitted within 2 months for blood cultures positive for AFB. TEE revealed new TV vegetations. Due to recurrent IVDU, she was not a candidate for surgical intervention and was treated with 6 weeks of Linezolid and Imipenem. The patient has since been lost to follow-up.