A 76-year-old female patient was diagnosed with a left polycystic VS Koos grade D in the cerebellopontine angle in 2011 [Figure and ]. The patient suffered from severe hearing loss, which was also the presenting symptom. Because of advanced age and serious cardiovascular comorbidity, a wait and scan policy was followed.
The medical history of the patient included hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, thrombosis of the right carotid artery, acute myocardial infarction, total knee replacement, thoracic and lumbar fractures, diabetic retinopathy, aortic valve replacement, coronary artery bypass surgery, and postoperative arterial fibrillation. The patient used an extensive list of medications, which included anti-coagulants.
The VS remained stable on follow-up. In May 2016, the patient presented with a severe headache and a facial palsy House and Brackmann (HB) grade 5. Computerized tomography (CT) scan showed an ITH . The patient was then hospitalized in a peripheral hospital. The anti-coagulant therapy was stopped accordingly. After a couple of days, the facial palsy improved to a HB grade 3 and the patient was discharged. However, 1 week later, the partial facial palsy progressed to a HB grade 6. The CT scan revealed a second hemorrhage in the tumor . The patient was then referred to the Maastricht University Medical Centre for treatment. Neurological examination upon arrival revealed an optimal EMV score with a facial palsy HB grade 6. Other cranial nerves were intact. A few days later, the patient deteriorated to a score of E3M6V3. The CT scan showed another bleeding resulting in a strong mass effect on the brainstem . In addition, there was a bilateral dilation of the lateral ventricles and the third ventricle consistent with hydrocephalus. An emergency retrosigmoid approach was employed to evacuate the hematoma and resect the VS as much as possible. In addition to these measures, an occipital external ventricular drainage was applied. During surgery, the tumor appeared very necrotic. One day following surgery, the patient recovered to an optimal EMV score. Approximately 36 hours after surgery, the patient deteriorated rapidly. A CT scan showed another hemorrhage in the same area, however, more directed toward the brainstem . Unfortunately, the condition of the patient worsened quickly and the patient deceased.
Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of VS. Furthermore, it showed an extensive hemorrhage with small focal fragments of fusiform proliferation and thick-walled dilated blood vessels. Immunological examination showed a positive S100 and a low mitotic activity (MIB1) in tumor areas. Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining was negative. The tumor area showed inflammation and contained eosinophil cytoplasm with elongated nuclei.