Female, 35 years old, with a history of asthma and alopecia areata. She presented with paresthesia of the lower limbs that progressed gradually. After one month she presented with a picture of asthenia and bifrontal headaches of moderate intensity with a poor response to analgesics and blurred vision, later with constipation and urinary incontinence. She presented with transient episodes of confusion and disorientation, with subsequent complete recovery. After three months of evolution of the clinical picture, she was admitted to a hospital in Spain for study. Complementary examinations were performed; routine laboratory, acute phase reactants (VSG, PCR), B12 and folic acid, HIV, HBV, HCV and tumour markers (CEA, CA15.3, CA125, CA19.9) were found within normal parameters. Electroforetic proteinogram without monoclonal component. Anti-GFAP antibodies in serum and CSF negative. ANAANCA, AQP4 and MOG, LGI1, NMDAR, GABAa, GABAb, GAD, Yo, Hu, Ri, Ma2, CV2, fisina, SOX1, recoverina, negative titers. Anti-GFAP antibodies in serum negative. Anti-thyroglobulin 181 (positive at low titre). Collagenogram: FAN positive 1/320, homogenous nuclear pattern. CSF: GB 53 (99% MN), glucoraquia 59 mg/dl, proteinorraquia 135 mg/dl. ADA 10.5. Cultures in CSF negative for bacteria, viruses and fungi. Oligoclonal bands type IV. Immune phenotypic cytometry, normal lymphocytes. Cytology with lymphocytes without atypia in 2 opportunities. Fundus of eye with blurring of papillae bilateral, cellular vitreous, macula normal without choroid retinitis or macular retinitis. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) with intra-retinal oedema in papillomacular bundle and bilateral papilla oedema. Study of nerve conduction: polyneuropathy sensory axonal, symmetric, with involvement of lower limbs and without denervation. Brain MRI: diffuse hyperintense lesions in T2/Flair subcortical parietal occipital, without effect of mass, without diffusion restriction. In the T1 sequence with contrast it presents captation in subcortical pattern with tendency to form a radiated and linear perivascular pattern. MRI of cervical column: oedema hyperintense in T2/Flair longitudinally extensive from bulb to dorsal spinal cord, in disposition of the centromedular. In the contrasted sequence it presents a similar pattern to the one described at the supratentorial level, with the thyroid gland and dorsal spinal column showing a pattern of leptomeningeal and parenchymal captation. Optical emission tomography of the whole body: brain with greater relative fixation of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) of both striata in the mesial temporal region and bilateral uncus. Diffuse hypometabolism of most of the cerebral cortex. FDG captation in thyroid gland and thyroid nodule. The study of the thyroid nodule was deepened with a diagnosis of left papillary and right follicular thyroid carcinoma (BRAAF 1). Total thyroidectomy with vaciamiento ganglionar and subsequent treatment with radioactive iodine was performed. In the face of the suspicion of inflammatory disease without precise etiology, it was decided to initiate corticoids with partial improvement of the clinical picture. After 6 months the patient was referred to our center in CABA, Argentina. On physical examination she presented preserved higher mental functions, visual acuity near and far 10/10, visual fields preserved, chromatic vision preserved, reactive isocortical pupils, extrinsic ocular movements without alterations, multidirectional nystagmus not depletable. Low pairs preserved. No neck stiffness, Kendall 5/5 in all muscle groups, hyperreflexia in upper limbs and live reflexes in lower limbs. Hoffman negative, bilateral clonus, bilateral reflexes indifferent, isocortical pupils, no nystagmus, chromatic vision preserved, isocortical pupils, no nystagmus, chromatic vision preserved, isocortical pupils, no nystagmus, isocortical pupils, no neck stiffness, Kendall 5/5 in all muscle groups, hyperreflexia in upper limbs and live reflexes in lower limbs. Isocortical pupils, no nystagmus, chromatic vision preserved, isocortical pupils, no nystagmus, isocortical pupils, no neck stiffness, Kendall 5/5 in all muscle groups, hyperreflexia in upper limbs and live reflexes in lower limbs. Isometria of D lower limbs. Romberg positive. Taconeante gait, with increased base of support. During her hospitalisation new complementary examinations were performed. Schirmer negative, ophthalmological evaluation with computerised visual field and OCT within normal parameters, serologies for Whipple negative, neuroconduction that confirmed the previously described findings. In the face of clinical and imaging suspicion, a dose of anti-GFAP antibodies in CSF was performed with a positive result, titre 1:100 and a diagnosis of astheno-myelopathy with autoimmune glial acid fibrillar protein was made. The patient continues follow-up in our centre without new clinical or imaging relapses, which is why a waiting policy was decided for the treatment according to evolution.
