The patient is a 69-year-old female who underwent a right radical nephrectomy 10 years ago, in 2011 for a pT3b N1 M0 grade 3 clear cell carcinoma of the right kidney. Adjuvant sunitinib therapy was initiated and then discontinued after 2 months due to myelosuppression and rash. In February 2013, the patient was found to have recurrence in the right lung upon follow-up CT imaging. The patient was started on sunitinib and then switched to pazopanib February 2014 due to progression. Pazopanib was held briefly during radical radiotherapy to oligometastatic disease.
The patient developed hypertension a couple of months after starting pazopanib. This was effectively treated with amlodipine. After persistently stable disease, she made a joint decision with her oncologist to discontinue her pazopanib June 2019. She did not experience any other side effects while on pazopanib except for some moderate gastric reflux. Her past medical history is only significant for hypothyroidism and hiatal hernia. She has family history of a father who died in his 60s of a myocardial infarction and sisters with hypertension. She has a substance history of a remote 3 pack year smoking history and occasional alcohol use. Her most recent BMI was calculated to be 24.4.
In July 2020, CT imaging showed recurrence with enlargement of a left apical pulmonary nodule. She received radical intent radiotherapy with a dose of 60 Gray in 30 fractions, then she was started back on pazopanib. Due to severe reflux symptoms and the development of atrial fibrillation, pazopanib was briefly held January 2021 and restarted February 22, 2021. She was also placed on bisoprolol and warfarin by her cardiologist during this period. CT of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis on February 10, 2021 did not reveal any signs of disease progression and demonstrated normal splenic artery anatomy .
On March 5, 2021 at 10 pm, the patient suddenly developed excruciating, sharp left upper quadrant pain that radiated to her entire abdomen. She had associated nausea and loose bowel movements but no vomiting, fever, lightheadedness, rashes or petechiae. She activated emergency medical services and was brought to her local emergency department in Northern Ontario. Her pain improved with IV opioid analgesics, but her abdomen became continually distended and her hemoglobin dropped into the low 70s. A CT of her abdomen and pelvis was performed to reveal free fluid within the peritoneal cavity and contrast pooling noted adjacent the splenic hilum, related to the splenic artery . The splenic artery measured 1.5 cm representing either a ruptured aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm. The patient ultimately received Vitamin K, 6 units of red blood cells and was transferred to a tertiary center elsewhere in Ontario for definitive treatment of her ruptured splenic artery aneurysm.
She had coil embolization of the splenic artery by intervention radiology . Her recovery was complicated by a post-operative hematoma and elevated troponin, no intervention was required.
After an extended stay in hospital, the patient was discharged home and pazopanib was discontinued. In a follow-up appointment, the patient does not disclose any complaints and states her home blood pressure has been stable. The patient remains in good health at the time of writing this case report.