A 53-year-old homeless man was admitted to the hospital due to a right femoral neck fracture. His medical history included noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. A physical examination performed at admission was unremarkable. There was no fever, lymphadenopathy, or other neurological defects. Laboratory tests revealed the following results: white blood cells, 4330 cells/mL; hemoglobin, 9.2 g/dL; and platelet count, 29,900 platelets/mL. C-reactive protein was negative, and only normochromic-normocytic anemia was present. He successfully underwent surgery for the femoral neck fracture, which was performed by an orthopedic surgeon. However, he had an episode of generalized seizures during the postoperative course, and phenytoin was administered. After this episode of generalized seizures, he was referred to our department for further examination and treatment.
A computed tomography (CT) examination of the head that was conducted without contrast showed a high-density and extraaxial mass in the right parietal convexity, and peritumoral brain edema was clearly observed . Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an extraaxial, dural-based, and homogeneously enhanced mass with clear borders that was compatible with a meningioma en plaque . The mass was iso- to hypointense on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and T2 imaging sequences and iso- to hyperintense on T1 imaging. It was strongly suspected that the patient had a meningioma en plaque.The mass was exposed with a right frontotemporal craniotomy. The tumor appeared to be a meningioma en plaque, and it was extraaxial, xanthochromic, firm, nonaspiratable, and it seemed to have a high vascularity and was dural based. The tumor was tightly adhered to the adjacent cerebral cortex and was permeated by many pial arteries and veins of the brain surface. It is very difficult to preserve these pial vessels during the total removal of a tumor.
A frozen section of the lesion showed inflammatory cell infiltration, which mainly consisted of lymphocytes and plasma cells, and the presence of these cells was initially interpreted as some kind of hematologic disorder or inflammatory pseudotumor . Paraffin-embedded sections, however, showed a hypercellular pattern with features of polymorphous and mixed inflammatory infiltrates that were composed mainly of histiocytes in a background of collagen fibers . The cytoplasm in some histiocytes was foamy and eosinophilic. Some histiocytes were seen to engulf viable lymphocytes, which was thought to reflect emperipolesis (lymphophagocytosis) .
These histiocytes were immunopositive for S-100 protein and CD68, but negative for CD1α . All of these findings were consistent with extranodal RDD.
The patient had incomplete left hemiparesis after surgery. A brain CT examination conducted without contrast revealed postoperative hemorrhage and a low-density lesion in the right frontal lobe, which seemed to be due to the sacrificed pial arteries from the brain-tumor interface. His seizures completely ceased.
In order to find evidence of extra-CNS RDD, we performed a whole-body CT examination postoperatively, and findings of lymphadenopathy or other extranodal involvements were not found. The patient has been free of seizures since the surgery, and he recovered from his hemiparesis 6 months after the surgery.