A 30-year-old female hospitalized patient was referred from the Internal Medicine clinic with chief complaints of multiple oral ulcers, a sore palate, and difficulty opening her mouth ten days prior. Initially, the ulcers appeared on the buccal mucosa and palate, progressing rapidly throughout the oral cavity. Doctors from the hospital beforehand have prescribed medication to relieve the pain complaints, but there has been no improvement. Since being hospitalized, the patient has had difficulty cleaning her mouth and can only consume milk through a straw. The patient has a habit of peeling off the scabs on the lips.

The patient experienced a body fever three days before being hospitalized. There were no complaints of coughing, runny noses, or altered taste. The patient has also complained of swollen legs and abdomen, pain in all joints, hair loss, and reddish skin once exposed to sunlight three months prior. Following a previous hospital diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome, the patient was prescribed furosemide 80 mg, albumin, and methylprednisolone 32 mg. The patient stopped the drugs after taking them for two weeks without consulting a doctor because she felt her condition was improving.

Extra-oral examination at the first visit showed multiple hemorrhagic crusts and erosions in the bilateral frontal and zygoma regions passed through the bridge of the nose, an irregular shape with distinct borders, and hemorrhagic crusts on the upper and lower lips that bleed easily. Intra-oral examination revealed erythema throughout oral mucosa and multiple irregular white plaques with diffuse borders that vary in size, which can be partially scraped off to reveal patches of erythema on the palate. Based on the history and clinical findings, the suspected diagnosis in the first visit was oral lesions associated with SLE and acute pseudomembranous candidiasis, with the differential diagnoses were pemphigus vulgaris (PV), erythema major and Steven Johnson syndrome (SJS).

The internal medicine specialist made a provisional diagnosis of suspected SLE with mucocutaneous, musculoskeletal, renal, and serositis involvement. Suspected chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CCLE) and suspected toxic epidermal necrolysis-like acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (TEN-like ACLE) were established as differential diagnoses. An antinuclear-antibodies (ANA) test was performed in the second visit (third day) and showed reactive results with a homogeneous pattern (titer 1:3200). Complete blood cell count and other parameters in laboratory examination were performed to assess the patient’s general health status.

Disease activity assessment was performed using the Mexican-Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index (Mex-SLEDAI) and revealed a score of 7. Based on these examination results, the internal medicine specialist diagnosed SLE, and the oral medicine specialist diagnosed lupus cheilitis and palatal erythematous ulcer. Evaluation from the oral medicine department at the second visit showed no improvement in the oral lesions.

The patient complained of increasing crusts on her lips at her follow-up on the third visit (sixth day), while the pain in the oral cavity remained. Extra-oral examination reveals an improvement in the crust of the frontal region, bilateral zygomas, and nose bridge, but the hemorrhagic crust on the lips develops into the serosanguinolenta crust. Intra-oral examination showed multiple ulcers surrounded by diffusely bounded erythema areas on the buccal mucosa and palate. An anti-HSV-1 IgG examination was carried out, and positive results were obtained at a ratio of 1.57 times. Diagnosis of lupus cheilitis associated with HSV-1 infection, oral discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE), and palatal erythematous ulcer was established.

The patient felt that the complaints in the oral cavity had begun to improve on the fourth visit (thirteenth day), but there was still a slight stinging sensation on the lips, buccal mucosa, and palate. Extra-oral examination showed that the crusts on the lips had improved but still bled easily. Intra-oral examination revealed improvement, as indicated by a decrease in lesion size.

On the fifth visit (40th day), the patient no longer felt sore in the oral cavity, and all lesions had disappeared. The patient has been able to eat normally for the last 10 days, following a three-meal-A-day diet accompanied by routine consumption of vegetables and fruits. The patient was instructed to continue maintaining oral hygiene.


Case Management
Comprehensive management, including pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapy, was given to the patient with a multidisciplinary approach from various fields, such as internal medicine, dermatology venereology, and oral medicine.

Pharmacological therapy from internal medicine was methylprednisolone 500 mg intravenously administered for three days and continued orally at a dose of 48 mg per day, while dermatology and venereology prescribed SPF 45 sunscreen and mometasone furoate 0.1% cream. These drugs were continued alongside therapy from the oral medicine clinic, such as 0.9% NaCl solution, 0.025% hyaluronic acid mouthwash, nystatin oral suspension 100.000 IU/mL, and a mixture of ointments containing dexamethasone. Acyclovir 200 mg as an antiviral agent was added on the sixth day after the anti-HSV-1 IgG test showed a positive result. Chlorhexidine gluconate 0.2% mouthwash was given on the thirteenth day to replace hyaluronic acid mouthwash, and nystatin oral suspension was stopped.

Non-pharmacological therapy includes instructions for applying moist gauze moistened with 0.9% NaCl solution to compress lips at least three times daily. Education is given to the patient to stop the habit of peeling scabs on the lips, encouraging a healthy lifestyle and adequate hydration at least two liters per day. All lesions healed within 40 days, and the patient was still educated on maintaining oral hygiene.