The index patient was a 16-year-old girl in the second year of junior middle school in Zhejiang Province, China, who has experienced persistent cough and expectoration for 37 days since 1 March 2014. She tested positive for smear pulmonary TB and extrapulmonary TB (TB of the cervical lymph nodes) on 8 April 2014 (see Table ). She was subsequently suspended from school and treated with chemotherapy comprising isoniazid (H), rifampicin (R), ethambutol (E), and pyrazinamide (Z) since 9 April 2014, with the dosages of these medications dependent on patient’s weight (see Table ). During the treatment period (9 April 2014–8 November 2015), the index patient visited the local TB-designated hospital for further consultation every month and was followed up once a month by the local community health service center. However, the Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolate was resistant to H/R/E/S based on the results of the drug susceptibility test (DST) on 1 May 2014.
On 19 May 2014, the index patient was treated with regimens of moxifloxacin, propylthioisonicotinamide, amikacin, pyrazinamide, and pasiniazide (see Table ). On 17 July 2014, as she experienced heel pain, the chemotherapy program was adjusted to regimens of propylthioisonicotinamide, amikacin, pyrazinamide, and pasiniazide. On 1 January 2015, the chemotherapy program was adjusted to regimens of propylthioisonicotinamide, pyrazinamide, and pasiniazide.
On 14 November 2016, she was subsequently cured according to the results of the laboratory smear and X-ray examination. During the treatment period, the sputum smear test results were negative in June, September, and October 2014.
Based on the interview conducted on the index patient, her classmates and teachers were her primary close contacts. Local health authorities conducted a contact investigation in April 2014. All potential contacts were screened by performing the tuberculin skin test (TST), and close contacts with positive TST results and with induration larger than 5 mm were diagnosed with MDR-TB . The index patient’s two family members all had negative TST and X-ray examination results. There was no history of TB in her family. All 54 (49 classmates and five teachers) individuals with close contact with the index patient in the same class were screened during 12–15 April 2014, and five of these contacts had positive TST results. However, these five individuals refused to receive preventive anti-TB treatment. The five TST-positive contacts in our investigation had been consistently followed up, and based on the follow-up result, TB infection was no longer observed in the next two years in these five patients.
In April 2016, two student patients (P1 and P2) tested positive for smear pulmonary TB in different high schools. P1 has persistently experienced the symptoms of cough and expectoration since 15 January 2016 and has left school because of winter vacation since 21 January 2016. P1 tested positive for smear pulmonary TB on 2 April 2016 and experienced hemoptysis, with multiple cavities in the lung parenchyma. His M. tuberculosis isolate was resistant to H/R/E/S based on the results of his DST on 22 June 2016. P2 has persistently experienced the symptoms of cough and expectoration since 12 March 2016, and she tested positive for smear pulmonary TB on 5 April 2016. She also experienced hemoptysis during that time. The M. tuberculosis isolate was resistant to H/R/E/S based on the results of her DST on 19 June 2016. They were suspended from school since 3 April 2016 and 6 April 2016, respectively, and were initially treated with chemotherapy comprising isoniazid (H), rifampicin (R), ethambutol (E), and pyrazinamide (Z), with the dosages of medications dependent on the patient’s weight. Subsequently, the chemotherapy program was adjusted to regimens of moxifloxacin, propylthioisonicotinamide, amikacin, pyrazinamide, and pasiniazide according to their DST results. All 56 (50 classmates and six teachers) individuals who were in close contact with P1 were screened through X-ray examination and TST during 6–8 April 2016. Moreover, all 58 individuals (52 classmates and six teachers) who were in close contact with P2 were screened during 7–11 April 2016. No other cases of TB or infection were observed.
On 2 February 2017, one student (P3) from another high school tested positive for smear pulmonary TB. P3 had persistently experienced symptoms of cough and expectoration since 1 December 2016. The M. tuberculosis isolate was resistant to H/R/E/S based on the results of her DST on 20 May 2017. She was also suspended from school since 22 February 2017 and was initially treated with chemotherapy comprising isoniazid (H), rifampicin (R), ethambutol (E), and pyrazinamide (Z), with the medication dosages dependent on the patient’s weight. Subsequently, the chemotherapy program was adjusted to regimens of moxifloxacin, propylthioisonicotinamide, amikacin, pyrazinamide, and pasiniazide according to the patient’s DST results. All 51 (46 classmates and five teachers) individuals with close contact with the patient were screened through X-ray examination and TST during 22–24 February 2017, and 14 of these 51 patients had positive TST results.
Through a retrospective epidemiological investigation by local health authorities, there were no histories of TB in the patients’ families, although three student (P1, P2, and P3) patients clinically diagnosed with MDR-TB were from three different high schools in Lanxi City. However, they attended the same junior middle school and the same class as the index patient. Furthermore, they sat together in the classroom. The index patient sat in the middle of them, P1 was in the front of her, and P2, P3 were on her right and left side. Moreover, two of these patients (P2 and P3) lived with the index patient in the same dormitory , and their exposure time to the index patient was approximately 37 days. Although they all had negative TST and negative X-ray examination results at that time, the drug resistance patterns of the four patients diagnosed with pulmonary TB were identical (resistant to H/R/E/S). Their average discovery delay was 55 days.
After further retrospective epidemiological investigation, we learned that the index patient had evident risk factors for MDR-TB transmission. Epidemiological links were categorized into neighborhood environments. The neighbors (N1, N2, and N3) living around the index patient were all diagnosed with TB in 2011, 2012, and 2013, respectively . N4, who was the wife of N2, was diagnosed with TB in July 2015. Four neighbors of the index patient experienced treatment failure due to irregular treatment, and three of them did not undergo further DST investigation. All neighbors were initially treated with regimens of isoniazid (H), rifampicin (R), ethambutol (E), and pyrazinamide (Z). Only N2 was diagnosed with MDR-TB and treated with regimens of moxifloxacin, propylthioisonicotinamide, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, and pasiniazide according to the patient’s DST results (resistant to H/R/E/S). However, he still experienced treatment failure due to the adverse effects of the medications and the heavy economic cost of treatment.
Isolated strains from four patients (index patient, P1, P2, P3) were sent to Zhejiang Provincial Center for Disease Prevention and Control for repeat drug sensitivity tests and gene typing tests . Variable-number tandem repeats of mycobacterial interspersed repetitive unit loci were used to genotype the strains. When 15 site combinations were used, the TB strains of four patients were clustered. The results showed that four patients had homologous transmission (see Fig. ).