A 15-year-old female presented with three months of lower back pain radiating into her bilateral posterior thighs and knees. She had no history of trauma, infection, connective tissue disease, or previous spine condition. She had no weakness in her upper and lower extremities, bowel or bladder incontinence, saddle anesthesia, or difficulty ambulating. Twice daily ibuprofen and physical therapy for two months did not improve or resolve her symptoms. Thoracic and lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a large dorsal extradural meningeal cyst at T11–L2 with associated neural foraminal extension and bony expansion . Imaging also showed ventral displacement and compression of the distal spinal cord and nerve roots of the cauda equina. On imaging, there is a flow void noted at L1 on the left side, thought to be the site of a dural defect leading to the cyst . The patient’s bilateral lower extremity symptoms were due to the extension of the large cyst into the bilateral neuroforamina from T11 to L2 and associated ventral compression and displacement of the distal spinal cord and cauda equina nerve roots.
Instead of a traditional approach with multi-level laminectomy and given the identification of the likely site of the dural defect at L1, a minimally invasive approach in the form of L1–L2 laminectomy, fenestration of the arachnoid cyst, and L1 dural defect repair was selected to reduce the potential morbidity associated with a more extensive approach. Intraoperatively, the extradural cyst wall was located dorsally . A microdissection of the cyst was completed. A portion of the cyst wall was bipolared, cut and removed and sent to pathology for the permanent specimen. A dural defect at the L1 nerve root was confirmed . Primary repair was not possible as the dural edges were too far apart, and the dural opening was near the axilla of the nerve root. The secondary repair was completed by sealing the dural defect with a fibrin sealant, harvesting the fascial graft, and adding another layer of fibrin sealant. Valsalva demonstrated no evidence of a CSF leak, and the incision was closed in standard fashion. Histological findings of the spinal cyst wall showed benign fibrovascular tissue, consistent with a spinal arachnoid cyst.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative period. Repeat imaging four months postoperatively demonstrated no residual extradural meningeal cyst . The patient’s lower back pain, bilateral thigh pain, and paresthesias completely resolved.