A 36-year-old male, right-handed, with no prior medical history, sustained a road traffic accident as a pedestrian struck by a vehicle. He was injured on the right side of his body. He was admitted immediately to our hospital. Upon arrival, he was conscious and hemodynamically stable. Clinical examination showed a visible deformity of his right arm with diffuse traumatic ecchymosis. There was pain, tenderness and an open wound over anterior aspect of the right shoulder measuring 5 cm with moderate soft tissue injury corresponding to grade II of the Gustilo classification. There was no distal neurovascular deficit. Radiographs indicated an anterior dislocation of the shoulder with ipsilateral transverse fracture of the middle third of the shaft humerus . Thus, the patient was urgently carried to the operating theatre. Under general anesthesia closed reduction of the shoulder dislocation was performed manually without difficulty. Then, the humeral shaft fracture was stabilized using Hackethal's bundle nailing after debridement of the wound . The right limb was immobilized in a plaster slab. The next day, the patient developed severe pain and swelling in the right arm and forearm, associated with paresthesia and loss of sensation in the hand. He was unable to flex all fingers. Furthermore, radial and ulnar pulses were present but weak. Therefore, the diagnosis of compartment syndrome was clinically obvious without measuring compartment pressures. The patient was returned to the operating room for decompression. Indeed, we performed a lazy S fasciotomy of the anterior aspect of the forearm and arm. The superficial fascia was released and the deep fascia was opened . Postoperatively, there was no drainage system and the limb was immobilized with a plaster splint. The pain was relieved after the fasciotomy, the neurologic functions were recovered, and the swelling was subsided. Whereas, the primary closure of the wounds was impossible after repeat surgical debridement with removal of devitalized tissues. Hence, skin grafting was performed on 10th day . The upper limb was immobilized for 3 weeks while the wound healed. A passive rehabilitation was undertaken. At 4-month follow-up, the bundle nailing was removed and radiographs revealed good fracture union. At the latest follow-up of 10 months, he had a useful range of motion compared with the contralateral limb with a slight restriction in elbow flexion. Additionally, the Constant score was approximately 80/100 and the patient had returned to normal activities.