A 49-year-old male Chinese HCC patient with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection (having lasted more than 20 years) and cirrhosis. The laboratory results showed the following: alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 43.4 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 35.7 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 200.5 U/L, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) 188.1 U/L, bilirubin (TBil) 15.5 μmol/L, and a-fetoprotein (AFP) > 2000 μg/L. Liver function of the patient was Child-Pugh A grade and preoperative indocyanine green retention rate (ICG) was 10.5%.
Computed tomography (CT) showed a large mass about 11.3 × 9.9 cm2 in size in the right hepatic lobe, and a tumor thrombus (TT) in the right hepatic vein (RHV) extending into the IVC .
Using both his medical history and imaging findings, he was diagnosed with HCC associated with IVCTT. The clinical stage was BCLC stage C. The patient had no symptoms of right heart failure or pulmonary embolization at admission. Considering that the patient had normal hepatic function without distant metastasis, anterior approach right hepatectomy combined with IVC thrombectomy using trans-diaphragmatic intrapericardial IVC occlusion was planned for this patient .
Surgery was performed via a subcostal inverse-L-shaped incision. At laparotomy, a tumor located in the right lobe of cirrhotic liver and no detectable ascites or peritoneal metastasis was observed. After the right hepatic artery and the right portal vein branch were ligated, hepatic parenchymal resection was performed using the clamp-crushing technique with inflow occlusion (Pringle’s maneuver) following the demarcation . Then the suprarenal IVC and portal vein were dissected and taped from the caudate lobe . The retrohepatic IVC below the confluence of the common channel of the left and middle hepatic veins was encircled by a vascular clamp. The diaphragm was transected via a vertical incision exposing the right atrial appendage. Then intraoperative ultrasonography was used to show that a TT in the RHV, involving the IVC, but it had not entered in the right atrium. The supradiaphragmatic IVC was encircled though trans-diaphragmatic intrapericardial IVC . The sequence of total hepatic vascular exclusion is shown in Fig. d and the IVTT was then removed en bloc successfully with Babcock forceps, the whole removal of IVCTT with IVC exclusion cost 20 min. The total operation required 481 min and the intraoperative hemorrhage was 900 ml.
The macroscopic findings of tumor measured 10 × 11 × 13 cm3 and the TT measured 3.0 × 2.0 cm2 . Postoperative histological diagnosis showed moderately differentiated HCC (grade II-III Edmondson) had invaded the right hepatic vein with hepatic fibrosis and intravascular tumor thrombus. No positive resection margins or local lymph node metastasis were observed microscopically . The TNM stage was T3bN0M0.
Postoperative recovery was uneventful. The patient was discharged with few adverse events after the operation. The patient was disease-free at 32 months after the initial treatment .