A 43-year-old man visited our hospital with left facial swelling involving the buccal and submandibular areas.
A 43-year-old male patient was admitted to our outpatient department complaining of swelling and pain in the left hemifacial area which started two weeks prior to consult. The patient had fever for approximately 10 d, but no other systemic symptoms occurred. At the time of the visit, the patient had fever with a temperature of 38.0 °C.
The patient was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus treated with insulin. In addition, the patient had no history of illness associated with CNF, such as dental procedures, including tooth extraction, skin trauma, head and neck infections, and other facial fractures.
The patient had no medical history other than diabetes mellitus, and no family history of CNF.
Preoperative: On physical examination, trismus and thinning of the skin with crepitation were observed on the left cheek. There were also no pathological findings on dental examination.
Postoperative: On postoperative day (POD) 1, after surgical decompression by incision and drainage, the patient’s systemic condition worsened, accompanied by tachycardia, hypotension, and overall deterioration of the patient’s condition; hence, septic shock was considered.
At the time of hospitalization, the glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) level was elevated at 17.1, indicating uncontrolled diabetes. The Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotizing Fasciitis (LRINEC) scoring system was used for proper diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis. Laboratory findings showed a high white blood cell (WBC) count (15170/μL; LRINEC score 1 point), a low hemoglobin level (10.5 g/dL; LRINEC score 2 points), an elevated high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) level (212.94 mg/L; LRINEC score 4 points), a high glucose level (242 mg/dL; LRINEC score 1 point), and a slightly low sodium level (134 mmol/L; LRINEC score 2 points). The following results were normal: Creatinine, bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase. The patient had a score of 10 points in the LRINEC, indicating a high risk of CNF. In addition, the albumin level was low at 2.3 g/dL. Procalcitonin, measured on the 3rd d after admission, was elevated at 1.140 ng/mL (normal range: < 0.1 ng/mL). Blood cultures after admission, wound swabs, and tissue cultures of the surgical field showed gram-negative Klebsiella pneumoniae (K. pneumoniae).
Preoperative: On facial CT, multiple abscesses with air bubble in the left temporal, masticator, and buccal spaces along the fascial layer were observed . Pleomorphic wall-enhancing lesions were also observed in the left masseter and temporalis muscles .
Postoperative: On POD 1, follow-up CT revealed that the abscess pocket had become smaller. However, after decompression of the CNF, the patient’s general condition deteriorated and progressed to septic shock. Contrast-enhanced chest CT was performed because multiple nodules were observed on chest X-ray upon admission . On chest CT on POD 2, septic emboli and pneumonia were observed in both lungs . In addition, a lesion suspected as renal abscess was observed on chest CT. On POD 3, contrast-enhanced abdominopelvic CT (APCT) was also done, which showed multiple variably-sized renal abscesses in both kidneys . This raised the suspicion that septic pneumonia and renal abscesses were the sources of sepsis.