A 13-year-old and 6-month-old girl was brought to our attention because she was hospitalized twice in our hospital . The first complaint was “fever and vomiting for 2 days with abnormal mental behavior for 1 day”. The fever peaked at 39.2℃. 1 day earlier, she suddenly babbled, had disorientation of persons and places, was markedly irritable, and alternated with delirium indifference. Cerebrospinal fluid routine, biochemical, pressure, virus, and culture were negative. Cranial MRI suggested multiple punctate abnormal signal shadows in the white matter of the frontoparietal brain on both sides, considering the possibility of intracranial infectious lesions, diagnosed as “viral encephalitis”. After 10 days of treatment with acyclovir antiviral, dexamethasone anti-inflammatory, supplemented with mannitol dehydration to lower cranial pressure, the above symptoms soon disappeared. However, a review of liver function showed that alanine aminotransferase (ALT436U/L; reference range 5 ~ 40U/L) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST96.7 U/L; reference range 5 ~ 40 U/L) indicators were elevated, suggesting liver function impairment, and liver ultrasound indicated liver enlargement, so acyclovir was discontinued and liver-protective treatment was given, while hepatitis virus was perfected and blood ammonia was sent. However, because the blood ammonia needed to be sent for out-of-hospital testing at that time, which was a cumbersome process, and because the parents believed that the child’s liver function and condition had improved significantly, they temporarily refused. After 1 week of hepatoprotective treatment, liver function and head MRI were normal, so the child was discharged on oral hepatoprotective medication. More than two years later, the child was readmitted with “vomiting for 1 week and headache with poor mental response for 3 days”, after having been treated for 1 week at an external hospital for a proposed diagnosis of “viral encephalitis” with poor results, and was then referred to our hospital. History taken: The patient was G2P1, with no abnormalities recorded during birth. Her parents were healthy and non-consanguineous Chinese, but her mother had an unexplained miscarriage at 28 weeks of gestation in G1. The patient showed appropriate growth and normal psychomotor milestones, but with academic failure. Physical examination: drowsiness, poor mental status, normal development, non-specific cardiopulmonary and abdominal examination, negative neurological examination. The blood ammonia concentration was 287umom/L and hyperammonemia was considered at the moment. The EEG suggested a slow background, but the cerebrospinal fluid examination was not abnormal. In combination with an abdominal CT suggesting a slightly hypodense liver and brain MRI findings: abnormal nodal signal in the white matter of the brain , genetic metabolic disease was considered. Further refinement of the blood genetic metabolic screening showed elevated blood alanine (757.06umol/L; reference range 148.8 ~ 739.74µmol/L) and decreased blood citrulline (4.26umol/L; reference range 5.45 ~ 36.77umol/L). Urine organic acid gas mass spectrometry showed normal whey acids and urea, suggesting impaired urea cycling. Immediately after admission, the child was given a low protein diet, arginine to promote ammonia excretion (100 ~ 200 mg/(kg-d)), coenzyme Q10 (10 ~ 20 mg/(kg-d)) and levocarnitine (30 ~ 200 mg/(kg-d)) to regulate metabolism, lactulose to improve ammonia metabolism, vitamin B complex to promote nerve repair, and intravenous fluids to The child was given intravenous fluids to promote urinary ammonia excretion. After 1 week of treatment, the child’s headache and vomiting resolved significantly and she was discharged with instructions to follow a strict low-protein diet and to recheck her blood ammonia regularly. During hospitalization to clarify the type of urea cycle disorder, further refinement of whole exome sequencing after seeking parental consent identified compound heterozygous mutations in CPS1 (NM_001875), a missense mutation (c.1145 C > T, p. Pro382Leu) and an unreported de novo non-frame shift mutation (c.4080_c.4091delAGGCATCCTGAT, p.Lys1360_I le1364delinsLys), respectively.
CPS1 is localized on chromosome 2q34 and contains 43 exons spanning over 120 kb and encoding 1500 amino acids . We performed mutation screening using high-throughput sequencing technology, and all detected CPS1 mutations were lineage verified by Sanger sequencing, aligned with the human genome (GRCh37 / hg19) reference sequence provided by the UCSC database, and compared with the currently known human CPS1 sequence (National Center for Biotechnology Information, transcript number NM_001875). The database of mutant loci and single nucleotide polymorphisms (dbSNP) , the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) and the Millennium Genome Database for comparative annotation. Finally, two compound heterozygous mutations were found in CPS1 of this child, the missense mutation c.1145 C > T (p.Pro382Leu) (NM_001875) and the non-frame shift mutation c.4080_c.4091delAGGCATCCTGAT (p.Lys1360_Ile1364delinsLys) (NM_001875), where c.1145 C > T is a reported pathogenic mutation in CPS1D , while the non-shifted mutation c.4080_c.4091delAGGCATCCTGAT is found in OMIM, UCSC, HGMD, dbSNP, 1000 Genome, ExAC and gnomAD publications and public databases are new and not reported. The missense mutation c.1145 C > T results in an amino acid change from the non-polar amino acid proline (P) to the non-polar amino acid leucine (L), and the non-shift mutation c.4080_c.4091delAGGCATCCTGAT would result in an amino acid deletion at positions 1361–1364 (isoleucine-leucine-isoleucine-glycine), resulting in a protein length change. The pathogenicity of these two mutant loci was further analyzed using various prediction tools (SIFT, Polyphen2_HDIV, PROVEAN, MutationTaster, M-CAP, REVEL, GERP, phyloP20way, phastCons20way), Fig. A shows the pathogenicity using Mutation Taster for the pathogenicity prediction. Two variants were classified as “possibly pathogenic” according to the variant classification criteria of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG 2015), and these variants were verified by Sanger sequencing in a family with a mother carrying the c. 4080_c.4091delAGGCATCCTGAT heterozygous mutation and a father with the c.1145 C > T heterozygous mutation , but without clinical manifestations, were consistent with an autosomal recessive disease pathogenesis pattern. Protein structure maps were generated using Swiss-pdb Viewer 4.10.The CPS1 protein structure of the missense mutation c.1145 C > T is shown in Fig. , and the CPS1 protein structure of the non-frame shift mutation c.4080_c.4091delAGGCATCCTGAT is shown in Fig. , with a theoretical 25% risk of disease in either fetus at the time of parental birth.
Although the child complied with a low protein diet for a short time after discharge and had regular blood ammonia checks, due to poor compliance, he was rushed to our PICU more than 8 months after his second discharge due to vomiting and coma after a large high-protein diet (hot pot), and in combination with the cause of this onset and the underlying disease of CPS1D, the emergency blood ammonia was 301 µmol/L (reference range 11.2 ~ 48.2umol/L). As the child was in a critical condition and in a coma, he was immediately given haemodialysis 7 times (1 time/day), fluid infusion, arginine and sodium benzoate to promote ammonia excretion, levocarnitine to promote metabolism, lactulose to reduce ammonia build-up in the intestine and B vitamins, as well as a ban on oral feeding and low amino acid intravenous nutrition. The child’s consciousness turned clear on the 7th day of treatment, the blood ammonia completely decreased to normal on the 43rd day, and he was discharged from the hospital on the 46th day. No hospital admissions for hyperammonemia at follow-up to date.