A 72-year-old Japanese woman with a 10-year history of T2DM had symptoms of diarrhea and persistent pain in left lower abdomen for 2 days and visited the emergency room in Kawasaki Medical School. She had an approximately 10-year history of hypertension and dyslipidemia. At that time, she was taking 4 mg/day of benidipine hydrochloride and 20 mg/day of azilsartan for the treatment of hypertension, and 25 mg/day of alogliptin and 500 mg/day of metformin for T2DM, and 2.5 mg/day of rosuvastatin for dyslipidemia. She had no remarkable family history. She was a housewife and she did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol. She had no past history of digestive disease or obstetrics and gynecology disease. She had mild tenderness to palpation in her abdomen. Her height and body weight were 150.0 cm and 69.5 kg, respectively. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 150/87 mmHg, heart rate 110 beats/minute, and temperature 36.4 °C. Inflammation markers were markedly elevated: white blood cell (WBC), 20,110/μL (neutrophil, 89.0%); C-reactive protein (CRP), 16.12 mg/dL. Anemia and mild hypoalbuminemia were observed although their causes remained unknown: red blood cell, 304 × 104/μL; hemoglobin (Hb), 9.3 g/dL; total protein (TP), 6.8 g/dL; and albumin (Alb), 3.2 g/dL. Her liver and renal function were within normal range as follows: aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 14 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 9 U/L; gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP), 8 U/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 202 U/L; creatinine (Cre), 0.81 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 7 mg/dL; Na, 134 mEq/L; K, 3.8 mEq/L; Cl, 99 mEq/L; Cre clearance, 66.9 mL/minute; and urinary Alb, 15.1 mg/g·Cr. As shown in Fig. , her abdominal computed tomography (CT) on admission revealed a large tumor with calcification in left side of intrapelvis (upper middle panel) which was not observed in abdominal CT 1 year before (upper left panel). She had abdominal CT 1 year before by a urologist because bladder diverticulum was suspected at an annual medical checkup with abdominal ultrasonography. The tumor size was as large as 65 mm in diameter. In addition, as shown in Fig. , MRI showed a large tumor in left side of intrapelvis at the same lesion site observed in CT. An axial T1-weighted (T1W) image through the pelvis showed a markedly dilated fallopian tube posterior to the left ovary (upper left panel). Axial T2-weighted (T2W) image showed a slightly higher intensity (upper right panel). Axial diffusion-weighted (DW) image and contrast-enhanced T1W image showed a high intensity lesion at the same place (lower left and right panels). Based on these findings, we finally diagnosed her as having pyosalpinx.
On admission, she had symptoms of diarrhea and persistent pain in left lower abdomen, but there were no findings in physical and neurological examinations. Her glycemic control was relatively good: HbA1c, 6.6%; glycoalbumin, 23.6%. In addition, her HbA1c levels were around 6% for over 1 year with the medication (metformin 500 mg, alogliptin 25 mg). However, during the acute phase of infection, we treated her with intensive insulin therapy using insulin aspart and insulin glargine. Tumor makers were within normal range: carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), < 1.0 ng/mL; cancer antigen (CA) 19-9, 6.0 U/mL; and CA-125, 11.0 U/mL. Pathogenic bacteria were not detected. Her Treponema pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) was positive but rapid plasma reagin (RPR) for Treponema pallidum was negative. Candida antigen and β-D-glucan were negative. Neisseria gonorrhoeae deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and Chlamydia trachomatis DNA in the urine were negative. Although pathogenic bacteria were not detected, we started antibiotics therapy for pyosalpinx (13.5 g/day of tazobactam/piperacillin and 500 mg/day of levofloxacin) . We discussed the necessity of surgery such as laparoscopy with gynecologists, but finally we selected antibiotics therapy without laparoscopy because her symptoms and laboratory data were very much improved. Her laboratory data 14 days after starting the antibiotics were improved and became within normal range (WBC, 5500/μL (neutrophil 47.4%); CRP, 0.04 mg/dl); we stopped antibiotics . Laboratory data were within normal range even after stopping antibiotics. T2DM was well controlled with orally administered anti-diabetes drugs (metformin 500 mg, alogliptin 25 mg, and gliclazide 10 mg): HbA1c, 6.0%; glycoalbumin, 16.5%. The tumor gradually reduced in size: 25 days later (upper right panel, Fig. ), 3 months later (lower left panel, Fig. ), and 6 months later (lower middle panel, Fig. ) compared to that on admission (upper middle panel, Fig. ); however, the tumor did not disappear completely even 6 months later. Finally she was discharged without any symptoms and/or problems. After discharge, she had no symptoms and/or problems, and her inflammation markers remained within normal levels for at least 6 months.