A 62-year-old man with metastatic stage IV squamous cell cancer (SCC) and no prior history of autoimmune disease was treated with nivolumab every 2 weeks (3 mg/kg) from July 2016 to April 2017, resulting in complete clinical remission of his SCC. Nivolumab was ceased in April 2017, after he developed musculoskeletal irAEs with disabling polyarthritis involving shoulders, elbows, proximal interphalangeal joints and right knee, classified as a grade 3 irAE. C reactive protein (CRP) was markedly elevated at 210 mg/L. Rheumatoid factor (RF), anticyclic-citrullinated peptide antibody (ACPA) and HLA-B27 were negative, and radiographs demonstrated no erosive changes. Despite prednisolone (20–25 mg daily), intra-articular corticosteroid and sequential hydroxychloroquine (200 mg daily) and methotrexate (20 mg weekly; ), his synovitis remained active.
Given the lack of definitive therapeutic guidelines for rheumatic irAEs, the emergence of synovial biopsy-guided therapeutic approaches in RA and following our experience with arthroscopic ST biopsies, the patient underwent arthroscopic ST biopsy of his right knee in November 2017 (200 days following cessation of nivolumab).
At arthroscopy, nivolumab-induced synovitis was more severe macroscopically than the synovitis in comparator treatment-naïve early RA ST, with florid synovial hyperplasia and hypervascularization throughout (, and see ). Several ST biopsies were undertaken from areas of synovitis within the knee. Matched peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) and SF samples were collected. ST, SF and PBMC samples from this patient were compared with samples from three treatment-naïve patients with RF and/or ACPA-positive early RA (defined as within 12 months of onset of symptoms and fulfilling the 2010 American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism classification criteria), from whom samples were collected at the time of diagnosis. Additional PBMC and SF samples were collected from the irAE patient at the conclusion of 6 months infliximab therapy. All patients gave written informed consent.
ST samples were analyzed using histology, and flow cytometry following disaggregation. Histology was performed on serial 5m sections from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded ST blocks. Sections were stained with H&E or labeled with the following primary antibodies for immunohistochemistry (IHC): CD45RO (Dako; UCHL1), CD55 (BioRad; C67), CD68 (Dako; KP1), TNFα (LifeSpan; C7952), IL-6 (Santa Cruz; 130326), and via a National Association of Testing Authorities approved protocol with PD-1 (CellMarque; MRQ22), PDL-1 (Ventana; SP263). Antibody-stained sections were incubated with horseradish peroxidase linked secondary antibody, followed by colorimetric visualization with either 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole substrate-chromogen (for CD45RO, CD55, CD68, TNFα and IL-6) or 3,3′-Diaminobenzidine (for PD-1 and PDL-1). Nuclear counterstaining was performed with Mayer’s haematoxylin. Negative controls included the use of IgG isotype controls or omission of the primary antibody. Whole slide scans were captured on an Olympus VSI120 bright-field microscope at x20 magnification and sequential regions of interest compared for staining intensity. Semiquantative assessment of staining intensity was perfomed by two independent assessors using previously described techniques.
For flow cytometry, fresh ST was dissociated using Milytenyi Tumour Dissociation Kit (Milytenyi; 130-095-929) and the gentleMACS dissociator as per manufacturer’s recommendations. Matched SF and whole blood was collected for each patient at arthroscopy and for irAE only, after 6 months of infliximab treatment. PBMCs were purified using Lymphoprep reagent. Cells were washed and counted prior to staining for flow cytometry with Zombie UV (BioLegend) in serum free PBS, followed by washing and staining with CD45RO-UV395 (BD; UCHL1), PD1-BV421 (BD; EH12.1), CD3-PerCP/Cy5.5 (BD; SK7), CD8-Alexa647 (BD; RPA-T8), CD4-Alexa700 (BD; SK3), CD20-APC/H7 (BD; L27) in 2% Fetal calf serum. Cells were resuspended in 2% fetal calf serum ready for FACS acquisition on a BD FACSAria Fusion flow cytometer. Analysis of cytometry data was performed using FlowJo 10.4
Analysis of the IHC inflammatory cell infiltrate pathotype revealed lymphoid (follicular) pattern of the patient with irAE and a similar pattern in one of the RA controls; of the two other RA controls, one had diffuse and the other low (or pauci) immune infiltration. IHC of ST from the patient with irAE revealed infiltrating memory T-cells (CD45RO+) and extensive CD68 expressing macrophages (lining and sublining) , and there were no detectable B cells; in comparison, two (of the 3) RA ST revealed presence of B cells within the lymphoid aggregates and slightly less extensive CD68 expressing lining/sublining macrophages. The irAE ST displayed abundant TNFα, compared with lower levels of IL-6 labeling . This differential cytokine expression was similar to that previously observed in a proportion of patients with RA. Finally, we detected abundant levels of PDL-1 labeling in both RA and irAE ST but there was no detectable PD-1 in ST from the patient with irAE . In summary, the synovial cellular infiltrate in ST was similar to the RA ST and was indicative of TNFα dominant RA-like disease. Critically, the presence of cellular intense and dominant staining of the proinflammatory cytokine TNFα in irAE ST influenced our decision to prescribe Infliximab (an TNF antagonist) instead of an alternative bDMARD such as Tocilizumab (an IL-6R antagonist) for this irAE.
We then performed multiparameter flow cytometry to further characterize infiltrating T-cells in ST, SF and PBMCs in response to nivolumab-induced irAE, and, to identify changes in peripheral and SF T-cells after infliximab treatment.
CD4 +T cells were gated and CD45RO and PD-1 expressing cells were identified . Abundant memory T-cell infiltration was observed in both ST and SF compartments for RA and irAE samples, with samples from PBMCs exhibiting lower memory T-cell frequency. Importantly, we detected a reduction in PD-1 labeling on T-cells from irAE samples compared with early RA controls. In particular, prior to commencing infliximab, there was approximately a 20-fold reduction of PD-1 +memory T cells in the SF compartment and 4-fold reduction in the ST compartment when compared with RA . Furthermore, while early RA comparators exhibited fewer peripheral PD-1 +memory T-cells in PBMCs compared with RA ST and SF compartments, we observed complete ablation of PD-1 labeling in irAE PBMC memory T-cells .
Commencement of infliximab (5 mg/kg) led to a dramatic clinical response , coupled with a precipitous fall in CRP to 0.36 mg/L. This improvement persisted despite weaning of prednisolone to 5 mg/d and methotrexate to 10 mg/week . Infliximab was ceased after 6 months and at last follow-up—18 months after nivolumab cessation—he continues to have minimal synovitis, well controlled on low-dose methotrexate and prednisolone (5 mg daily) and, critically, no recurrence of his lung cancer.
Interestingly, in PBMCs and SF collected after 6 months of infliximab therapy, we identified a near restoration (compared with RA) of PD-1 expressing CD4 +memory T-cell frequency .