Here, we present a 29-year-old lady who presented to our hospital with a history of two months of progressive, painless abdominal distension and progressively increasing yellowish discoloration of the eyes. She also had generalized weakness and weight loss of 4.5 kg in the same duration. She denied changes to appetite or bowel habits, melena, hematemesis, and altered sensorium. She had no personal or family history of chronic liver disease, no history of alcohol, or use of any drug or alternative medicine. Besides jaundice, there were no peripheral stigmata of chronic liver disease. Abdominal examination revealed a grossly distended abdomen with fluid thrill consistent with ascites. Similarly, examination of breast revealed a hard, non-tender irregular mobile mass measuring 3cm × 4 cm on the left upper quadrant of the left breast and another hard, non-tender, immobile irregular mass measuring 3cm × 2cm in the lower quadrant of the right breast.
Liver function tests were deranged with impaired synthetic function. Viral screening and autoantibody tests were negative. Serum Ceruloplasmin level was normal. She had normal alpha-fetoprotein but elevated cancer antigen 125 and carcinoembryonic antigen. Laboratory findings are listed in . Ascitic fluid analysis showed high SAAG (1.7g/dl) and low protein (1.2 g/dl) ascites. Three samples of ascitic fluid for malignant cytology were negative. UGI Endoscopy showed Grade 2 oesophageal varices without any red colour signs and mild portal hypertensive gastropathy.
Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly with coarse echotexture and a few well-defined hyperechoic nodules with surrounding hypoechoic rim, ascites, and a patent portal vein without splenomegaly. The chest X-ray was normal. Breast ultrasound showed spiculated, hypoechoic lesion (2.5 × 2.2 × 1.8 cm) in the right breast suspicious of malignancy and multiple well-defined hypoechoic oval lesions in bilateral breasts. Tru-cut biopsy from the right breast showed nests, cords, and a few tubules of tumor-infiltrating the fibro adipose tissue, which was suggestive of infiltrating duct carcinoma (Nottingham Histological score 8, Grade 3), while a tru-cut biopsy from the left breast was suggestive of a fibroepithelial tumor.
Triple phase CECT showed the enlarged and irregular outline of the liver with multiple variable-sized hypodense lesions with slight enhancement in the arterial phase and washout in the delayed phase with the dilated portal vein (13.4mm) and gross ascites but no splenomegaly (, , ).
However, the patient died after three weeks of presentation to the hospital before any therapeutic measures were initiated concerning the liver metastasis, with the primary being breast carcinoma.