A 57-year-old patient with a history of active smoking, from a rural area of a municipality in Colombia, presented to the local hospital with a suicide attempt after ingesting a toxic substance (unknown at the time) in the context of alcohol consumption. He presented within the first two hours of the onset of an acute confusional state with bradycardia, diaphoresis, and arterial hypertension, associated with metabolic acidosis. He received two ampules of atropine for the management of the cholinergic toxicodrome and bradycardia, and was given activated charcoal for gastric lavage. About four hours after the ingestion, he presented altered level of consciousness and dyspnoea, and was intubated orotracheally and transferred to a referral center.

The ingested substance was initially unknown, and the diagnosis was intoxication of unknown origin, probably related to sedatives and alcohol. On arrival at the health center, seven hours after ingestion, the patient had a blood pressure of 103/69 mm Hg, a heart rate of 84 beats per minute, an oxygen saturation of 93% with respiratory support, and a Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS) score of (-) 4 points. Treatment with intravenous fluids was ordered. Laboratory results showed a white blood cell count of 16,030 per mm3 with neutrophilia, a haemoglobin of 15 g/dl and creatinine of 0.77 mg/dl; the electrocardiogram, the ionogram, the coagulation times and the liver function tests were normal. A skull tomography was taken with normal results.

On the second day of ingestion, he continued to require respiratory support and the vasopressor agent norepinephrine, and had increased acute phase reactants, hypernatremia (152 mmol/L) and hypocalcemia (0.75 mmol/L), with worsening oxygenation indices, so a chest tomography was performed that recorded findings suggestive of bronchial aspiration in the lower right lobe, so administration of ampicillin-sulbactam was initiated.

On the fourth day of evolution, he had a fever of 38.8 °C, arterial hypertension, myoclonus and elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK) (6,520 U/L); 24 hours later, the fever persisted, so the antibiotic treatment was modified. In addition, he continued to have altered consciousness, despite the suspension of sedation and analgesia; he had an electroencephalogram that showed changes due to encephalopathy without epileptiform activity.

At seven days, the patient had persistent autonomic dysfunction, fever up to 39.0 °C, lead-tube rigidity and phlegm on both sides of the face and arms; although not sedated, he was still lethargic, which was associated with leukocytosis (10,110 per mm3) and persistent elevation of CPK, despite the use of crystalloids and mannitol. Therefore, it was decided to initiate the administration of bromocriptine at a dose of 5 mg orally every 8 hours, progressively increased to 30 mg per day; 48 hours later there was improvement of the neurological status, without new fever peaks, so the extubation was successful.

When the family was questioned again, the patient was found to have ingested a pesticide. Serum cholinesterases were requested and found to be less than 1500 U/L (reference value: 7000 to 19000 U/L) and erythrocyte cholinesterase was reported as 157 UPH/h (reference value: 91 to 164 UPH/h). No oximes, fresh frozen plasma or lipid emulsions were administered. After recovery of neurological status, the patient confirmed intentional ingestion of the organophosphate insecticide chlorpyrifos (O,O-diethyl-O-3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridinyl phosphorothioate) used in agriculture. The patient was discharged without sequelae 16 days after the ingestion of the pesticide.
