A 56-year-old nonsmoking female presented with cough and chest tightness for 20 days with no past medical history. Vital signs were stable except diminished left lung sounds were noted in chest auscultation. She was then found to have a large left-sided pleural effusion in CT scan . Pleurocentisis revealed a clear fluid with yellow supernatant. The laboratory analysis of the fluid revealed the following: total protein, 41 g/L (serum protein, 67 g/L) and WBC count 3700 cells/ml (13% polymorphs and 87% lymphocytes). No organisms were seen on Gram stain, and no acid-fast bacilli ware seen on auramine stain. Cultures of the pleural effusion specimens and tumor markers were also negative. No malignant cells were seen, only mesothelial cells and lymphocytes. An enhanced CT scan performed one week later indicated a 6.2 cm × 4 cm oval-shaped lesion with significant enhancement, with maximum enhanced CT value approximately 125Hu . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 6.2 cm × 4 cm well-defined, oval-shaped lesion with suspected invasion of intervertebral foramen, placed in the left costovertebral space . Before operation, it was diagnosed as neurogenic tumor.
Complete resection was performed by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). On direct visualization, there was a lesion in the posterior mediastinum close to left paravertebral region with moderate hardness, not adhering to the surrounding spine, mediastinum or chest. The capsule was complete and the boundary was clear. Thoracoscopic resection was performed successfully, and the estimated intraoperative bleeding was 200 ml. The size of lesion was approximately 6 cm × 5 cm × 3.5 cm and was sent for routine pathology.
Histopathology revealed a cavernous hemangioma composed of varying size and dilated cavernous sinuses, with an inner wall lined with vascular endothelium . In addition, makers including CD34, CD31 and SMA positive , Ki-67 staining was positive (2%). The patient’s post-operative recovery was uneventful and discharged from hospital on the third day after surgery. No recurrence was not noted at 14 month follow-up.