A 48-year-old woman presented with crushing chest pain at rest with an elevated troponin I of 2.72 μg/L (normal <0.04 μg/L) and a normal electrocardiogram (ECG). Her background history includes 30 pack years of cigarette smoking, obesity, gastric banding, fibromyalgia, and depression/anxiety. On examination, her heart rate was 70 b.p.m., her blood pressure was 127/82 mmHg, and her oxygen saturation was 98%. Cardiac and pulmonary auscultations were normal. She was given loading doses of aspirin and ticagrelor. She had a coronary angiogram which showed first diagonal artery (D1) and right marginal branch (RM) occlusion with an angiographic appearance that is consistent with SCAD. It did not resolve with intracoronary nitrate. We performed a computed tomography aortogram to look for fibromuscular dysplasia in the carotid, renal, and iliac arteries and they were absent. She was medically managed on aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg daily, and metoprolol 25 mg twice daily.
She represented 2 months later with similar symptoms with a troponin elevation of 2500 ng/L (normal <18 ng/L) and a normal ECG. She had another coronary angiogram which showed healing SCAD in the D1 and RM, but a new SCAD in the first obtuse marginal artery (OM1) . She was managed conservatively on the same medications.
She represented 4 months later complaining of angina every 2 days with a normal troponin and ECG. This time her coronary angiogram showed healed SCAD in OM1 and RM, but the recurrence of SCAD in D1. Given that she had recurrent events despite medical therapy, we decided to proceed with PCI. After cautious wiring and confirmation of guidewire placement in the true lumen with selective coronary contrast injection, we deployed a 2.25 × 15 mm Resolute Onyx (Medtronic, CA, USA) in D1, with excellent final result . She remained on the same medications. She presented with an atypical chest pain 10 months later and her coronary angiogram showed complete healing of all coronary arteries and a patent stent in D1. She has remained symptom free.