We report the case of a 2 years and-5-month-old boy admitted in our clinic for fever with the onset 3 days before admission associating abdominal pain and diarrhea within the last 24 hours. The anamnesis did not reveal any possible exposure to COVID-19 infections or other chronic underlying pathologies.
The clinical exam at the time of admission revealed influenced general status, bilateral palpebral edema and conjunctivitis, mucocutaneous signs of dehydration, abdominal tenderness at palpation. The patient weighed 15 kilograms.
The laboratory test performed on the day of admission pointed out lymphopenia (1560/mm3), thrombocytopenia (108x103/mm3), anemia (hemoglobin – Hb 10.9 g/dL), elevated C-reactive protein – CRP (162 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (50 mm/h) and ferritin levels (389.3 ng/mL), hyponatremia (132 mmol/ L), hypopotassemia (3.94 mmol/L), hypertriglyceridemia (476.3 mg/dL), elevated D-dimer (>5 μg/ml), increased troponin (16.6 ng/L) and NT-proBNP (19,831 pg/ml). The rapid urine exam was negative. The chest X-ray, abdominal ultrasound and echocardiography showed no pathological findings. The blood and urine culture were negative. Corroborating the previously mentioned findings we raised the suspicion of pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome possibly associated to COVID-19. We performed a RT-PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 infection, but it was negative. Nevertheless, the serology (IgG anti-SARS-CoV-2) for this infection was positive. Thus, established the diagnosis of PIMS-TS.
We initiated intravenous immunoglobulin in a dose of 2 g/kg/day associated with empirical antibiotic (ceftriaxone), anticoagulation therapy (low-molecular weight heparin) and symptomatic drugs (antipyretics, antiemetics, and antidiarrheics). In spite of this therapeutic approach, the fever persisted for the following 36 hours with no clinical improvement. Moreover, the laboratory test performed on the 3rd day of admission showed an increase of the CRP value (216.65 mg/L), and the persistence of elevated NT-proBNP (9,884.2 pg/mL) and D-dimer (1,198 ng/mL), associating also hypoalbuminemia (2.45 g/dL). Therefore, we initiated intravenous methylprednisolone (10 mg/kg/day) for 3 days followed by slow tapering and substitutive treatment with human albumin. We also repeated the echocardiography and we found minimal pericardial effusion, slight dilation of the left cavities (left ventricle - LV z score: 1.6, LV sphericity index: 1.66), regional wall motion abnormalities with dyskinesia of the inferior and infero-septal basal segments of the LV. Moreover, the LV systolic dysfunction was affected, with LV ejection fraction of 40%, with mild mitral regurgitation ; but no coronary impairment. Thus, following pediatric cardiologist’s recommendation, we associated angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (Lisinopril), Spironolactone and Hydrochlorothiazide. The serial echocardiography performed during the following days of admission revealed the resorption of the pericardial effusion, with improvement of LV function, correlated with decreased serum levels of NT-proBNP (123.1 pg/mL) and troponin (5.2 pg/mL).
The patient was discharged on the 11th day of admission without any complaints and most of the laboratory parameters within normal ranges, except of D-dimer. We recommended the continuation of anticoagulant therapy for another week, as well as Lisinopril, Spironolactone and Hydrochlorothiazide for the following 2 weeks.