A 65-year-old-man was admitted in the emergency department for seizures. His medical history included diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension, and smoking. Four months before admission, a chest X-Ray performed because of a persistent cough revealed a lung mass. The lung biopsy yielded a squamous non-small-cell lung cancer with 80% expression of PD-L1. Extended evaluation including a brain CT , thoracic CT, abdominal MRI and whole-body PET-scan showed a unique hepatic metastasis. Following consultation with the institutional multidisciplinary team in charge of lung cancer, the patient was treated with intravenous pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1 antibody), started 3 months before admission, as a single-drug regimen, 200 mg every three weeks, with no tolerability or adherence issues.
On admission, the patient was afebrile, and clinical examination was normal. Routine biochemical and hematology tests were normal, with blood leukocytes count of 7.8 G/l, and serum C reactive protein at 1.1 mg/l. The electroencephalogram performed 12 h after seizures was normal. Brain CT scan found a focal hypodense lesion in the right frontal lobe, further characterized by brain MRI as an intracranial round-shaped lesion with a maximal diameter of 18 mm, low signal intensity on T1-weighted and intermediate signal intensity on T2-weighted images, associated with perilesional edema and wall enhancement on T1-weighted gadolinium-enhanced images , suggestive of brain abscess, while brain metastasis could not be ruled out. The patient was transferred to the neurosurgical department for a total removal of the lesion (excision with craniotomy), both for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Per-operative macroscopic findings were also suggestive of brain abscess, and empirical antimicrobial therapy was started after surgery with a combination of intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole. Microscopic examination revealed numerous filamentous-branching Gram-positive rods. Cultures yielded Nocardia farcinica, identified by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Antibiotic treatment was modified to meropenem 1 g every 8 h associated with cotrimoxazole 1600 mg/400 mg every 8 h and folinic acid. Body-CT did not show any other localization of nocardiosis, while the mass tumor had decreased by 80% after the sixth cycle of pembrolizumab. Drug susceptibility testing found a meropenem MIC of 32 mg/L, while linezolid MIC was 4 mg/L, and cotrimoxazole MIC was 0.5 mg/L. Meropenem was replaced by linezolid 600 mg every 12 h, in combination with cotrimoxazole. Following the diagnosis, additional risk factors for cerebral nocardiosis were ruled out.
After 2 months, the patient was asymptomatic, except for asthenia. Antibiotics were well tolerated. He did not receive additional dose of pembrolizumab. At 10 weeks of treatment, he developed thrombocytopenia due to linezolid. He died 3 months after the diagnosis of cerebral nocardiosis, because of a major upper-gastrointestinal bleeding probably related to a peptic ulcer disease and thrombocytopenia.