A 67 year-old male had a single-car, rollover MVC. At the scene, emergency medical response personnel noted that he was alert, oriented and could move all extremities vigorously. No focal neurological deficit was noticed. He complained of facial pain which was attributed to a minor right-temple-area laceration. However, his most significant complaint was posterior neck pain. He was fitted with a cervical field-collar and transported to the local hospital. X-rays taken at that time revealed traumatic C5-C6 retrolisthesis. A cranial CT showed no intracranial abnormality with the absence of bleeding or traumatic injury. A cervical spine CT revealed subluxation at C5-C6 and a comminuted fracture of the left lateral mass of C6 with disruption of the transverse foramen. Lack of spine treatment capability prompted the patient's transfer to a regional medical center by life flight four hours later. Upon arrival, a neurosurgical evaluation noticed development of neurological deficits. Bilateral upper extremity weakness was described as 4-/5 in the left biceps and 3+/5 in the right biceps. Unfortunately, no other neurological examination details were available. Then, three hours later, the patient's neurological exam drastically changed. Complete absence of motor function in the upper and lower extremities was described. Additionally, he became apneic and hypotensive requiring cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Intubation and a major resuscitative event restored hemodynamic stability and thus enabled another transfer to our Level 1, Regional Trauma Center. Upon arrival to our institution, he was intubated, and found to have asymmetric pupils, minimal corneal reflex, and minimal cough reflex. These findings were consistent with significant brainstem injury. A repeat cranial CT, repeat cervical spine CT, and a head-neck CT angiogram were obtained. These images revealed dramatically worsened subluxation at C5-C6 compared to initial, outside imaging studies. Further imaging data revealed complete occlusion of bilateral VA , although reconstitution from anterior circulatory flow was present. Filling defects within the reconstituted vertebral arteries and basilar artery were concerning for dissection and/or thrombus. A repeat head CT obtained 24 hours later demonstrated extensive brain stem infarction . The patient was subsequently diagnosed with brain death. With consent from the patient's family, the patient's care was then withdrawn.