A female in her late 20s was initially diagnosed with neurofibromatosis type 1 in childhood. There was a known inheritance pattern in the patient’s family, and she carried a pathogenic germline heterozygous NF1-mutation at c.6494 C > G, p.(Ser2165*). Clinically, she presented with café au-lait spots, fold lentiges, and multiple subcutaneous tumors. Besides the classical presentation of neurofibromatosis and menstrual pain attributed to the two uterine leiomyomas, the patient was previously healthy. She had been clinically followed up for NF1 up to the age of 18 years, but these follow-ups had ceased.
The patient was referred to our hospital for multiple painful subcutaneous tumors, the largest of which was in the inner thigh, measuring up to 4 cm. Surgery was scheduled for the removal of the lesions. During the surgery, while under general anesthesia, she experienced a high systolic blood pressure of up to 200 mmHg and wide-complex tachycardia of up to 150 beats per minute. Skin erythema was also observed. Anesthesia was intensified and the symptoms subsided. Surgery was completed as planned, and 12 tumors were subjected to pathological examination. These were diagnosed as benign conventional neurofibromas according to World Health Organization (WHO) criteria .
After the surgery, she underwent cardiac MRI, where no structural abnormalities were found. However, there was a large heterogeneous mass, which in the subsequent abdominal MRI was confirmed to be a left adrenal mass measuring 7.4 × 6.3 × 4.4 centimeters. Hormonal testing revealed elevated metanephrine (1.2 nmol/L) and normetanephrine (18.0 nmol/L) levels, raising suspicion of pheochromocytoma. The patient was started on phenoxybenzamine and surgery was scheduled. Preoperative abdominal computed tomography revealed a 6 × 3 × 2.7 cm cystic and solid tumor within the right gluteus minimus muscle. Retrospectively, according to abdominal CT, this tumor had existed already 7 months before, with no growth in this time. Open surgery for the adrenal tumor was commenced, and the left adrenal gland containing the tumor was removed. The tumor was interpreted by a pathologist as a pheochromocytoma according to the WHO criteria .
Otherwise uneventful post-surgery recovery was hindered by the Covid-19-infection, during which thoracic radiography was performed. This revealed a 1,4 cm diameter left upper lobe tumor, which was confirmed by pulmonary CT. These findings were followed by 68Ga-DOTANOC PET-CT, which showed above-background uptake in both lung (SUVmax 6,2) and gluteal (SUVmax 5,0) tumors. The gluteal tumor was radiologically suspected to be a neurofibroma or malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and core needle biopsy was performed. Core needle biopsy was difficult to interpret, but the pathologist suspected a high-grade sarcoma. The final diagnosis was not obtained from the biopsy. Biopsy findings prompted clinicians to suspect lung metastasis. Subsequently, the gluteal tumor was surgically resected, and a right upper lung lobectomy was performed separately. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the patient underwent hysterectomy for histopathologically confirmed leiomyomas. The patient is disease-free after 15 months after diagnosis.
The cut surface of the adrenal tumor showed a well-circumscribed hemorrhagic tumor. The adrenal tumor is composed of plump epithelioid cells with an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and nested “Zellballen” growth pattern. The nuclei showed moderate variation in size, clumped chromatin, and small conspicuous nucleoli. Marked intratumoral hemorrhage was observed. The tumor cells stained positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin and weakly and heterogeneously stained with S100. In addition, occasional S100 positive sustentacular cells were identified, rimming the tumor cell nests .
The intragluteal tumor was well circumscribed and had a fibrous pseudocapsule. The cut surface revealed a gray-tan tumor with small cystic spaces. Histological examination revealed a predominantly solid tumor with frequent cystic growth. The tumor was composed of partly spindly hyperchromatic mononuclear cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasms. Large pleomorphic and multinucleated cells rimmed cystic spaces. Variable numbers of lymphocytes and histiocytic cells were observed intermixed with the tumor cells, and focal aggregates of foam cell histiocytes were also observed at the edge of the tumor. No tumor necrosis was observed. The tumor was completely resected with < 0,1 cm marginal resection margins without the accompanying fascia .
Tumor cells were strongly and diffusely positive for desmin and patchy positivity for SMA was seen. The core needle biopsy sample showed weak MyoD1 positivity in scattered cells; however, the surgical sample was completely negative for MyoD1 despite repeated staining from another block. This discrepancy may be due to inadequate fixation. The large multinucleated cells palisading around the cystic spaces were strongly and diffusely positive for p53, whereas the cells in the solid areas showed a wild-type expression pattern. CD68 and CD163 showed an abundant population of histiocytic cells intermixed with tumor cells . Ki-67 was low at 5%. Mitotic figures were inconspicuous in 2/50 high-power fields (11,8 mm2) at 40x magnification. All other markers, including S100, pancytokeratin, caldesmon, pancytokeratin AE1/AE3, ALK-1, SMMHC, calponin, MUC4, GFAP, SOX10, Melan A, and HMB45, were negative. H3K27me3 showed normal nuclear expression. Thus, an inflammatory rhabdoid tumor was diagnosed according to WHO criteria .
The IRMT was subjected to further diagnostic analyses. RNA was extracted from paraffin slides, and a sequencing library was constructed using the Archer FusionPlex Sarcoma v2 and Archer FusionPlex CTL panels. The panels identified both novel and unknown fusions with 63 and 17 predetermined genes, respectively. The final libraries were sequenced using Ion Torrent semiconductor sequencing. The Archer Analysis software was used to interpret the results. No gene fusions were detected.
Comparative genomic hybridization was performed using the OGT Consortium Cancer + SNP 180k microarray. The relative copy number changes were read using a laser scanner and analyzed using Cytosure Interpret-software (Hg 19). This result showed 30–40% of the cells had a hyperhaploid karyotype, with chromosomes 5, 20, and 22 having a relatively higher copy number corresponding to a normal disomic karyotype .
The lung tumor was well-circumscribed and histologically composed of nodular aggregates of epithelioid to stellated cells within the basophilic myxoid stroma. Entrapped non-atypical respiratory epithelial cells were frequently observed between the nodules. Occasional intermixed mature adipocytes were also observed. No mature terminally differentiated chondroid component was observed in this case. Immunohistochemical findings showed that the stellate cells were strongly and diffusely S100-positive, supporting their chondroid background. Pancytokeratin AE1/AE3, CD34, and EMA were negative. Occasional scattered cells showing smooth muscle differentiation (SMA + and desmin+) were observed among the stellate cells. Ki67 proliferation was very low < 1–2%. The entrapped epithelial strands showed strong positivity for TTF1 and scattered p63-positivity. Pulmonary hamartoma was diagnosed according to the WHO criteria .