A 17-year-old Han Chinese female presented to the psychiatric outpatient clinic with a one-week history of dizziness and feeling sluggish. These symptoms were impairing her ability to attend school regularly. Her psychiatric history was significant for a recent hospitalization three months prior for bipolar disorder with psychotic features (auditory hallucinations). The patient met the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition criteria for bipolar I disorder based on the documented presentation of manic episode as well as prior major depressive episodes over the preceding three months. During admission, she was started on lithium carbonate 500 mg twice daily and paliperidone 9 mg (450 mg Chlorpromazine, equivalent dose) once daily for treatment. Two months later, the paliperidone was down titrated to 6 mg (300 mg Chlorpromazine, equivalent dose) once daily. However, one week before her outpatient visit, she started to experience frequent dizziness, chest tightness, and feeling sluggish. She denied any other personal or family medical conditions, smoking, alcohol use, or illicit drug use. However, it was noted these were based on self-report only, and additional clinical documentation was unavailable to confirm past medical conditions. Prior to the initiation of lithium and paliperidone, she had no history of thyroid disease, bradycardia, or other cardiac issues.
On physical examination, her heart rate was bradycardic at 41 beats per minute, and her blood pressure was 95/57 mmHg. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus bradycardia and sinus arrest . Her serum electrolytes, including calcium, potassium, and myocardial enzymes, were within normal limits . However, thyroid function tests showed an elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 9.08 mIU/L (reference range 0.51–4.94 mIU/L), decreased total thyroxine (TT4) of 45.05 nmol/L (reference range 58.1–140.6 nmol/L), and decreased free thyroxine (FT4) of 10.94 pmol/L (reference range 11.5–22.7 pmol/L) . Her thyroid abnormalities were considered subclinical in nature since overt symptomatic manifestations were not charted in the available history. She and her guardian denied any personal or family history of cardiac or thyroid diseases, and she was not taking any other medicines known to cause heart block. Although her serum lithium level was not measured due to unavailability of the assay at our hospital, her serum paliperidone level was within the therapeutic range . Based on her medication history and clinical presentation, the combination of lithium and paliperidone was suspected as the likely cause of her hypothyroidism, bradycardia, and sinus arrest.
This was further supported when her thyroid function normalized 20 days after stopping these medications, without levothyroxine replacement . Bradycardia and sinus dysfunction were documented to have resolved within the same timeframe as thyroid function stabilization, with a restoration of normal sinus rhythm to 64 beats per minute occurring 20 days after medication cessation. This aligned timing provides evidence that the cardiac issues were likely attributable to drug-induced sinus node effects rather than idiopathic pathology. The half-lives of lithium and paliperidone are 18 hours and 23 hours, respectively, which explains the timing of the resolution of her subclinical hypothyroidism and sinus node dysfunction 20 days after discontinuing these medicines. Then, she was switched to olanzapine 2.5 mg once daily for her psychiatric disorder. Pacemaker implantation was not pursued because her sinus rhythm recovered with drug withdrawal.