A 37-year-old female complained of dizziness. She had started experiencing dizziness 3 years ago, following the infertility treatment that she had received. She experienced dizziness following an injection of human menopausal gonadotropin administered by a gynecologist and a visit psychologist. In addition to her dizziness, she also suffered from insomnia, tinnitus, and anxiety. Therefore, she was referred to a psychologist. However, the treatment of tranquilizers such as benzodiazepines and antidepressants such as serotonin selective re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) failed to cure the dizziness and only slightly improved her insomnia. She was therefore referred to our department for further examination and treatment. She expressed her dizziness as an event wherein she experienced frequent paroxysmal earthquakes occurring within seconds. The frequency of such episodes had recently increased to once every 5 minutes. She felt stable while doing her household tasks and she had never fallen. Audio-vestibular examination, including pure tone audiometry, posturography, and head MRI, revealed no abnormal findings. Her blood examination findings were normal; there was no spontaneous or evoked nystagmus. However, the peripheral part of her hand and foot often became pale due to poor peripheral circulation, an observation similar to Raynaud's phenomenon. She also experienced chronic headache and insomnia, whereby she woke up every 2 hours during the night. The results of the psychological examination were as follows: Self-rating Depression Scale (SDS), 47; Japanese version of the Cornell Medical Index (CMI), III; Manifest Anxiety Scale (MAS), 27; and Maudsley Obsessional-Compulsive Inventory (MOCI ), 9. MAS indicated a high level of anxiety. We deduced that her dizziness was due to psychosomatic reasons together with poor peripheral circulation. We prescribed setiptiline maleate and an additional herbal medicine, which is known to improve peripheral circulation. Within 2 weeks her symptoms slightly improved and the level of dizziness reduced to less than one third. However she didn't want to keep taking these drugs, since she want to have a baby. No abnormality was reported in any physical examination, including posturography. We diagnosed the patient's condition as phobic postural vertigo. Although she often experienced palpitations, cardiological examination reported no abnormal findings. These results indicate the existence of autonomic dysfunction due to psychological stress, including anxiety. We decided to focus on treating the patient's anxiety and the supposed autonomic dysfunction. After 1 month following the patient's first visit, AT was introduced by a clinical psychologist so as to ease her mental stress. The psychotherapy consisted of one 45-minute session every 3 weeks. The first session began with a brief introduction to the general background information about the cognitive approach, after which the patient was instructed how to perform AT. Thereafter, the patient performed AT in a relaxed sitting position on a chair for 10 minutes 3 times a day. No self-monitoring was advised. The patient was instructed to carry out slow and deep abdominal breathing at the beginning of AT and regular breathing during AT. She diligently and regularly continued this AT routine 3 times a day at her home, according to a written timetable. She learned all 6 standard formulas of AT in 6 psychotherapy sessions. Astonishingly, after the introduction of AT, her mood stabilized and her dizziness, insomnia, and headache disappeared in a few weeks. The dose of clotiazepam was reduced to 5 mg once a day. No additional treatment was administered. At 6- and 9-month follow-ups, the patient was free from dizziness, insomnia, and headache.