A 47-year-old man (height of 175.8 cm and weight of 74.8 kg) complained of a tingling sensation in his leg. He had a history of hypertension and asthma in the previous two years, and history of sinus surgery for sinusitis in the previous one year. Ten days before admission, the patient had a tingling sensation in his left leg, from the posterior thigh to the foot. His spinal radiography findings were unspecified. Therefore, the patient was suspected as having a disc herniation, and observation was decided while continuing the medical treatment. Four days before admission, the patient had a tingling sensation that progressed in both legs. The symptoms did not improve, and motor weakness progressed below the ankle. In the physical examination at admission, motor power was grade 5 in the hip flexor and knee extensor in both lower extremities. However, it was grade 0 in the ankle dorsiflexor, and first toe extensor and flexor, and grades 4 and 0 in the ankle plantar flexor on the right and left sides, respectively. Sensory loss was not found in the L1 - L4 dermatomes, yet was 50% on the right side and 0% on the left side for the L5 and S1 dermatomes. He also had a heating sensation in his left foot and no knee-jerk reaction. He showed a weight loss of 6 kg during the last month, and the signal intensity of the bone marrow on L-spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was diffusively reduced to be less than or equal to the disc. These findings indicated a hematologic disease and the possibility of malignancy with little preserved fat marrow. Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse wall thickening of the gallbladder with some irregularity. However, the bone marrow biopsy slides showed a generally hyper-cellular (50% to 60%) marrow for the patient’s age, with small hypo-cellular regions (0% to 20%). On aspirate smears, the eosinophil counts were markedly increased, with expanded eosinophil myelocytes and metamyelocytes. The results of the pulmonary function tests showed an obstructive pattern, such as a forced vital capacity of 54%, a forced expiratory volume in one second of 46%, and forced expiratory flow between 25% and 70% of 33% of the predicted values. The findings from a nerve conduction study suggested multiple mono-neuropathies. In addition, his laboratory findings showed peripheral eosinophilia and positivity for myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (MPO-ANCA; ). Therefore, CSS was strongly suspected, and steroid and cyclophosphamide therapies were started after nerve biopsy under spinal anesthesia. At that time, the symptoms were progressing to the left wrist drop and both legs. However, nerve biopsy results were consistent with demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. The patient underwent cholecystectomy under general anesthesia to exclude gallbladder cancer, suspected on the basis of CT findings, and pathological confirmation was possible with a gallbladder specimen .