A 37-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with visual impairment and photophobia. He had noticed a black line in the visual field of his left eye 3 days ago. Physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. The patient had a body mass index (BMI) of 37 and a 31 pack-year smoking history. He was previously diagnosed with arterial hypertension and started taking candesartan 8 mg b.i.d. approximately 5 years prior without attending any regular check-ups. On admission, his blood pressure was 243/149 mmHg, which was lowered immediately using amlodipine and intravenous urapidil. Other vital signs were within normal ranges, and the patient denied further neurological or cardiovascular symptoms. Examination of the heart, lungs, abdomen, and fluid status was unremarkable. Emergency fundoscopy showed a large subretinal bleeding near the left macula and bilateral Roth and cotton wool spots consistent with hypertensive retinopathy. The patient was admitted to the cardiology department for further evaluation and management of malignant hypertension.
Resting electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with left anterior fascicular block and t-wave inversions in I, aVL, V5, and V6. There were no signs of intracranial bleeding or stroke on computed tomography scan of the brain. Laboratory testing revealed hyperlipidaemia [low-density lipoprotein 177 mg/dL (normal range <115 mg/dL)], elevated HbA1c (6.7%) (normal range <5.5%), and leucocytosis (12.9 G/L) (normal range 3.9–10.2 G/L) . Inpatient 24 h blood pressure monitoring values were still substantially increased (24 h mean 181/128 mmHg, reverse dipping profile, no side difference) . Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mildly reduced left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction without regional wall motion abnormalities and LV hypertrophy (interventricular septum thickness 20 mm, posterior LV wall thickness 23 mm) without obstruction of the LV outflow tract or systolic anterior movement phenomenon, in summary consistent with hypertensive cardiomyopathy. Contrast-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed these findings but showed no signs of myocardial oedema, infiltrative cardiomyopathy, or specific distribution of late gadolinium enhancement ( and ).
Based on the patient’s age, severely elevated blood pressure, and presence of hypertension-mediated organ damage, evaluation of common causes of secondary hypertension was initiated according to the current European Society of Cardiology/European Society of Hypertension guidelines. Renal artery duplex sonography did not show signs of relevant renovascular disease. Regular serum creatinine, plasma metanephrine, and 24 h urinary cortisol excluded parenchymal kidney disease, phaeochromocytoma, and Cushing’s disease, respectively. Plasma aldosterone–renin ratio, plasma parathyroid hormone levels, and thyroid function were normal, as well. The patient was discharged with optimized anti-hypertensive and heart failure medication including candesartan (16 mg b.i.d.), amlodipine (5 mg b.i.d.), bisoprolol (2.5 mg b.i.d.), doxazosin (4 mg b.i.d.), and spironolactone (25 mg q.d.), as well as metformin (500 mg q.d.) and atorvastatin (40 mg q.d.) . He was advised for smoking cessation, life-style modification, and ambulatory polygraphy for evaluation of obstructive sleep apnoea.
After 11 days, the patient’s clinical condition worsened. He reported daily episodes of fever up to 38.0°C, night sweats, and fatigue and was re-admitted. The patient denied dyspnoea, chest pain, or symptoms of infection. Inflammatory markers were elevated [C-reactive protein 8.2 mg/dL (normal range <0.5 mg/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 88 mm/h (normal range <15 mm/h), and leucocytes 12.3 G/L (normal range 3.9–10.2 G/L)]. Transoesophageal echocardiography was performed, which did not show evidence of vegetation formation. Blood culture samples remained sterile. Laboratory screening showed negative anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmatic antibodies, and rheumatoid factor. An 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission computed tomography (18F-FDG PET-CT) scan was performed, which identified areas of abnormal tracer uptake in both common carotid arteries [target-to-blood pool ratio (TBR): 1.3] as well as the brachiocephalic trunk (TBR: 1.3) and subclavian arteries ( and ). There was no relevant involvement of the pulmonary artery or the aorta itself other than areas adjacent to the origins of affected supra-aortic vessels ( and ). There were no signs of active coronary lesions. The diagnosis of TA was substantiated using vascular sonography, which showed typical homogenous hyperechoic wall thickening of the left carotid (2.6 mm) and left subclavian artery (2.4 mm). Furthermore, extended ophthalmological evaluation showed ocular manifestations consistent with Takayasu retinopathy. Conclusively, the patient fulfilled three major and three minor criteria according to the 1995 diagnostic algorithm by Sharma et al.
We began treatment of active severe TA with retinal involvement using 1000 mg intravenous methylprednisolone q.d. for 3 days, following 250 mg q.d. for 4 days, and switched to oral application with 100 mg q.d. for another 14 days . The patient temporarily required additional insulin treatment for blood glucose control [max 346 mg/dL (normal range <100 mg/dL)], which was terminated after steroid dose adjustment. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan yielded a minimal T-value of −1.4, indicating osteopenia. We decided to start glucocorticoid-sparing therapy using adalimumab 40 mg every 14 days. This allowed for gradual reduction of prednisolone dose to 10 mg per day, followed by further tapering. The patient’s discharge medication otherwise included candesartan (16 mg b.i.d.), amlodipine (5 mg b.i.d.), bisoprolol (2.5 mg b.i.d.), doxazosin (8 mg b.i.d.), eplerenone (25 mg q.d.), pantoprazole (40 mg q.d.), metformin (1000 mg b.i.d.), cholecalciferol (1000 units q.d.), and atorvastatin (40 mg q.d.).
Eight weeks after discharge, the patient reported feeling overall well. His blood pressure had stabilized allowing for discontinuation of doxazosin. He was cleared for ophthalmic surgery and underwent pars plana vitrectomy and pan-retinal endolaser photocoagulation of his left eye, which significantly improved his vision. The patient was scheduled for multidisciplinary follow-up appointments, including specialist consultation in rheumatology, cardiology, diabetology, angiology, and ophthalmology.