A 23-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of recurrent abdominal pain for 7 years, amenorrhea and dyspareunia. The patient’s mental state and movement ability was normal. She had a history of fracture of both legs and skin injury of pubic caruncle caused by trauma about 20 years ago.
Gynecological examination showed the patient had a single orifice on the urogenital region located where the urethra would be expected. There is a normally located anal perineal orifice. When forced urination, urine flowed out of the single orifice on the urogenital region. The urethral catheter was inserted about 70 mm through the single orifice, and no urine flowed out.
Pelvic CT scan showed a large calculus and a urethral catheter in the vagina . Pelvic MRI scan demonstrated the urethra and the vagina merged into a common channel about 3.45 cm long , and a large calculus about 7.8 cm × 6.8 cm × 7.7 cm in size lodging in the upper vagina, the uterus was moved upward ; a urethral catheter entered the vagina through the opening on the urogenital region; both ovaries and bladder were normal and no other congenital malformation was noted . Transabdominal sonography imaging revealed a vaginal stone, and normal two kidneys, the bladder, uterus, cervix, and adnexa.
Under general anesthesia, entering the urogenital tract through the median perineum approach and a 2-cm incision was performed . A hard grayish-yellow abnormal mass was observed in the vaginal cavity , and there was no adhesion to the surrounding mucosa. The tissue around the calculus was carefully separated and the calculus was completely removed.
During the exploration after lithotomy, the common channel formed by vagina and urethra was detected, and the orifice of urethra was about 3 cm from the anterior vault of the vagina. The urethral catheter was inserted about 20 mm through the orifice of urethra, the urine flow was observed. Therefore, the estimated length of the urethra was about 2 cm. Hysteroscopic insertion of the vagina revealed thin endometrium and normal cervix, no other abnormality was found. The patient was diagnosed with a vaginal stone, urogenital sinus anomaly and thin endometrium.
Vaginal reconstruction (vaginoplasty) and urethra reconstruction (urethroplasty) were performed. The mucosa near the urethral orifice was taken and wrapped by 20 fr Foley’s catheter, forming a urethra about 4 cm and neourethral meatus. The vaginal mucosa was pulled down and intermittently sutured with the perineal skin to form a vagina about 8 cm that could hold two fingers.
After the operation, the patient received the treatment of estrogen and progesterone, and menarche appeared 20 days later. One month after the operation, the patient recovered well, and could urinate by himself. After 8 months of follow-up, the patient had normal menstruation and urination. The patient is married and ready to conceive.