A 19-year-old Hispanic female with a past medical history of acne, asthma, and extensive psychosocial distress but no psychiatric diagnoses, presented to the ED with complaints of an episode of lightheadedness, generalized weakness, diaphoresis, diarrhea, and vomiting. Previously, she presented to the hospital with similar complaints two other times; however, she was not seen by our team until the third visit. On this first visit she stated that she used the blood glucose monitor of her girlfriend/roommate, who is a type 1 diabetic, and that her blood sugar reading was 53 mg/dL and later rose to 80 mg/dL after she ate two sandwiches and some chocolate. Upon arriving to the ED, the patient’s symptoms had improved. Vital signs obtained at the time of triage were: blood pressure (BP) 98/65 mmHg, heart rate 81 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate 18 breaths per min, oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 100% on room air, and an oral temperature of 37 °C (98.6 °F). The patient reported no pertinent past surgical history. She stated that she was allergic to pineapples and that she does not take any medications. In addition, she did not report any tobacco or alcohol use. Initial examination revealed a well-developed, asymptomatic, obese young female in no acute distress. Her blood glucose according to the glucose monitor was 60 mg/dL, which was confirmed with lab draw. Physical exam and labs were unremarkable, and the patient was discharged after being given intravenous (IV) 0.9% sodium chloride (NaCl) for volume restoration, ondansetron for her nausea and vomiting, further directions on diet for hypoglycemia (i.e. adding protein to each meal and eating small frequent meals), and instructions on follow-up with her primary care provider (PCP) for recommendation on further testing for the cause of her hypoglycemic episode and GI symptoms.
The next day, the patient arrived via emergency medical services (EMS) to the ED after she was found unresponsive. She stated that she was not feeling too well due to a virus and became very lightheaded and passed out. Her blood sugar was 46 mg/dL at home prior to administration of half an ampule of dextrose (D50W). Her family mentioned the patient has a history of her blood sugar dropping rather frequently and that they are unsure what to do for this problem. Vital signs obtained at the time of triage were: BP 122/75 mmHg, heart rate 100 bpm, respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, SpO2 of 100% on room air, and an oral temperature of 36.7 °C (98 °F). Physical exam and other labs were unremarkable, and the patient was discharged after being given instructions once again on following-up with a PCP.
Three weeks after her initial presentation, she was rushed to the ED via EMS after being found unresponsive at work with a blood glucose level of 23 mg/dL. She was given 1 ampule of IV D50W by EMS at the scene and her blood sugar rose to 172 mg/dL. Upon arrival to the ED, her blood sugar had dropped back down to 61 mg/dL; and she was noted to again have symptoms of dizziness and decreased alertness with her hypoglycemia. Vital signs obtained at the time of triage were: BP 135/78 mmHg, heart rate 108 bpm, respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, SpO2 of 100% on room air, and an oral temperature of 36.4 °C (97.6 °F). She was given one half of an ampule of D50W IV because of her symptoms of dizziness and evidence of decreased alertness with a decreased blood glucose level, which was suspected to still be dropping. She responded to this treatment with improvement of dizziness and alertness but later had a second hypoglycemic episode in the ED. At this time she was treated with a full ampule of D50W IV and was started on dextrose 5% with 0.45% NaCl (D5 half-normal). Despite a brief improvement a few minutes after starting D5 half-normal, she had a third episode of hypoglycemia in the ED and was treated with another ampule of D50W IV and her IV changed to dextrose 10% in water (D10W) at 100 cm3 (cc’s) an hour. Despite this change, her blood glucose further dropped to 105 mg/dL from 140 mg/dL, so her D10W was increased to 150 cc’s an hour. Detailed glucose readings throughout this time are reported in Table . Her girlfriend/roommate was asked to leave the patient to rest, in order to help determine whether the patient, her roommate, or both might be involved in giving insulin to cause the abrupt hypoglycemic episodes. The patient was weak, confused, profusely sweating with chills, short of breath, nauseated, had heart palpitations, and an altered mental status during all of her hypoglycemic episodes. Of note, once alert, the patient told the charge nurse that her PCP had found a mass in her pancreas that was responsible for her hypoglycemic episodes. Due to the critical nature of her recurrent hypoglycemic episodes in the ED, the patient was admitted to the ICU, where she became more responsive. An electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm, normal axis and intervals, and no acute changes in ST-segment or T wave morphology. The laboratory findings from all three ED visits are reported in Table .
Standard drug screen was done to rule out any symptoms from toxicity; however the results were negative. To determine if factitious use of insulin was the cause for the patient’s presentation, further tests were performed: hemoglobin A1C of 5.1%, C-peptide level of 9.9 ng/mL, free insulin level of 370 mIU/L and a total insulin level of 377 mIU/L.
To rule out any neurological causes, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the head without IV contrast was performed and revealed no evidence of intracranial findings or suspicious intracranial mass. To rule out any pancreatic masses, CT of the abdomen was obtained and showed a 1.8 cm collapsing cyst in the right ovary and trace fluid in the pelvis, which is likely physiological . Otherwise, no acute intra-abdominal or intra-pelvic process was seen.
The patient was interviewed at length by the ED hospital team in the ICU the following day, and the diagnosis of factitious disorder was suggested. The encounter revealed that the patient is an undocumented immigrant from Honduras, who has been in the US since she was 14 years old. She used to reside with foster parents. However, she recently graduated from being a minor and is currently living at a halfway house with four other women. She works full-time at a thrift store. She is unaware of her family history. She states that she was heavily involved with illicit drug use in the past but does not smoke or drink alcohol anymore. When confronted with evidence about no mass found on imaging, the patient did not deny injecting insulin. She had significant knowledge about insulin administration as well as the amount of units her girlfriend/roommate currently injects for her type 1 diabetes management. She mentioned that she frequently checks her blood sugar at home, where her readings range from 30s – 100 s mg/dL. The patient reported missing several meals throughout the day due to time restraints and work. Her caregiver called the hospital to let the hospital staff know that the patient had been taking her girlfriend/roommate’s insulin resulting in her previous ED visits. She has also asked for insulin needles and may have taken insulin to gain attention.