A 64-year-old male presented with left upper quadrant pain of 1 week duration. The pain was worse when standing and relieved on lying down. On physical examination, no palpable abdominal mass was found. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a 6.7 × 4.4 × 3.3 cm, heterogeneously enhancing circular mass in the left retroperitoneum . The enhanced scan showed uneven enhancement. The fat space around the mass was blurred and the left perirenal fascia was thickened. No lesion was seen in either of the kidneys. Moreover, there were no congenital renal abnormalities such as horseshoe kidney or ectopic kidney. The patient has a 2-year history of hypertension with the highest recorded blood pressure of 160/130mmHg and the patient reports taking regular medications. Based on clinical examination and radiological assessment, a clinical diagnosis of ectopic pheochromocytoma was made. Subsequently, tumor resection was performed through transperitoneal approach. After resecting the tumor, the resected specimens were immediately fixed in 10% formalin.
On gross examination of a 10 cm well-delineated mass , the section was grayish-white, solid, and hard. Microscopically, the mass had a partial envelope, with a few residual lymphatic follicles at the border . Most of the structure was destroyed by tumor cells. The tumor was mainly composed of hornlike tubules and tubular papillary structures, covered by a single layer of epithelium . Fibroconnective tissue hyperplasia is seen in the interstitium, with an infiltration of lymphocytes and neutrophils. The tumor is accompanied by mass necrosis . At higher magnification, tumor cells were found to be cuboid, columnar and shoe-shaped, with deeply stained nuclei, protrusion nucleoli, and pathological mitosis . No normal renal tissue was seen. The initial diagnosis was metastatic lymph node malignancy, and the differential diagnosis included renal collecting duct carcinoma, papillary renal cell carcinoma, medullary carcinoma, high-grade urothelial carcinoma, among others. An immunohistochemical study was performed, using the DaKo EnVision method. The tumor cells indicated a strong reactivity for CK7, CK19, CK18, PAX8, and EMA. To further exclude other tumor entities, we also stained for Melan-A, Inhibin-a, OCT3/4, Syn, CgA, which were all negative. The Ki-67 index focally reached to 30–40% of tumor cells . As no identifiable normal renal tissue was found, the possibility of this mass developing in a supernumerary kidney, was ruled out. Thus, combined with morphological and immunohistochemical evaluation, the final pathological diagnosis was metastatic collecting duct carcinoma of lymph nodes. No further nephrectomy was performed because the patient had no significant detectable masses, cysts or other abnormalities, in either kidney on enhanced CT. The patient was subsequently discharged and close follow-up was recommended.
Three months later, the patient underwent abdominal CT examination in the outpatient department and was surprised to find a mass occupying shadow about 2.5 cm in size at the left renal hilum. Furthermore, multiple nodules of different sizes were observed retroperitoneally, with the largest lesion of 2.7 × 2.2 cm . The diagnosis was considered to be renal malignancies with retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis. The oncologist recommended radiation therapy and chemotherapy. At that time, the patient was extremely thin and lived in a rural area, making it difficult to travel back and forth. Therefore, the patient refused treatment. Five months later, the patient underwent another CT review in the outpatient department, which revealed a soft tissue mass with a diameter of 3.6 cm in the lower part of the left kidney and multiple soft tissue shadows in the renal portal area, which was considered to be renal malignant tumor with metastasis . Again, the patient refused treatment. Currently, the patient is still alive, 11 months after being diagnosed with collecting duct cancer.