A 74-year-old lady presented to our emergency department following 3 days’ history of watery diarrhoea and feeling generally unwell. She had been ‘off legs’ for 3 days and was not improving hence called the GP for a home visit. She was referred to the hospital as a case of severe sepsis for medical admission and pre-alerted into Resus by paramedics. She denied any cough, cold, or urinary symptoms. She had a past medical history of hypertension and CKD and was on Ramipril and Atorvastatin. She was at reasonably normal baseline health and 3 days back started with watery diarrhoea. There was no history of recent travel and no vomiting or per rectal bleed. On examination, she looked unwell, still responding to verbal commands, hypotensive at 80/50 mmHg, and tachycardic at 110 beats per minute with a temperature of 38.5 °C. She was hypoxic on air, with saturations of 90% on high flow oxygen. She had evidence of peripheral cyanosis and delayed capillary refill time. Her chest was clear and abdomen was soft, with no guarding or rigidity. Her Glasgow coma scale was 14 (E3V5M6). Her venous blood gas revealed metabolic acidosis with a lactate of 14.
With a working diagnosis of severe sepsis of unknown source, she was started on broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics and fluids. As there was no improvement in her haemodynamic status, a referral to the intensive care team was made for inotropic support.
While all of these were being done, she was noticed to have a tender bruise on her leg; however, she denied any trauma or fall. On examination, she had a large area of blackish discolouration and vesicle formation on the posteromedial aspect of the left thigh , which was tender on palpation. The area looked suspicious of necrotising fasciitis. Her antibiotics were changed as per the microbiology advice to Tazocin and Clindamycin. A urinary catheter was inserted to monitor her fluid balance. An urgent referral to the surgical and orthopaedic team was made for definitive management of surgical debridement. Her initial blood results showed a white cell count of 13.1 and neutrophilia at 11.7. She had a CRP of 439, CPK of 4187 and an AKI stage 3 with urea at 15.2, creatinine of 291 and e-GFR of 13. Serum electrolytes showed a sodium of 137, potassium of 3.4 and chloride of 101.
She underwent debridement of necrosed tissue within few hours of arrival into the emergency department. She subsequently stayed in the intensive care unit and had a further debridement and above-knee amputation of the affected limb . On the second surgery, she was found to have necrotic tissue extending up to the pelvis. A subsequent pus culture report confirmed group A Beta haemolytic streptococci as the causative organism. The blood culture showed no growth, and faeces culture was negative and showed no evidence of Salmonella, Shigella, Camplylobacter or Escherichia coli. MRSA was not isolated and there was no evidence of C-difficile in the stool.
She eventually died after about 48 h of hospital stay despite an early diagnosis and prompt surgical debridement.
Although necrotising fasciitis is a rare condition, each one of us may still come across a case in our clinical practice. As a learning point from this case, we would like to highlight the importance of a thorough clinical examination of patients with sepsis with no obvious source. As in this patient, the presenting complaint was diarrhoea, which was actually a manifestation rather than a cause for sepsis and clearly had a hidden diagnosis, which could have been missed if the patient was not adequately exposed.