A Caucasian 15-year old male complained of severe acne and low back pain with inability to walk. His previous medical history was unremarkable except for the onset of acne vulgaris during his puberty. Three months before admission, he had showed a dramatic worsening of acne characterized by several cystic skin lesions with extensive ulcerating and inflammatory components, assuming a form of acne fulminans. Therefore, a course of systemic isotretinoin therapy was administered at the dose of 0.5 mg/kg/daily without any benefit. In addition, the boy developed depressive symptoms associated with insomnia and irritability. Thus, sertraline therapy was started.
Ten weeks after starting isotretinoin, the patient experienced increasing low-back pain with progressive inability to walk and restriction of daily activities. At admission to the emergency department, he was suffering and unable to walk. Physical examination revealed a decreased axial range of movement, sacroiliac pain and severe nodulocystic acne with abscesses on face, neck and thorax. Laboratory investigations revealed systemic inflammation (CPR 7.15 mg/dl [normal range < 0.5 mg/dl], ESR 84 mm/h [normal range < 30 mm/h], WBC 14,950/mmc, 70% neutrophils). All rheumatologic parameters including complement and autoantibodies were within normal range. The patient tested negative for HLA-B27 typing. Culture of the pustular lesions was positive for Staphylococcus aureus. Antibiotic therapy with clindamycin was introduced and isotretinoin was interrupted. Pelvis and hip X-ray was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed moderate bone marrow oedema and osteitis of transverse process of fifth lumbar vertebra and symmetrical sacroiliitis . The association of acne fulminans and osteitis suggested the diagnosis of SAPHO syndrome. Whole body MRI confirmed this hypothesis revealing anterior chest wall, in particular coronal views showed sternoclavicular and costoclavicular osteitis, and axial involvement, including sacroiliac joint and spine. Consequently, intravenous antibiotics were interrupted and, NSAIDs and oral rifampicin were started, in order to control the inflammatory status and the cutaneous lesions, respectively. Despite the specific treatment, the depressive disorder was persisting along with the other complaints. Nevertheless, during the following weeks osteoarticular involvement and cutaneous manifestations worsened and gluteal bilateral HS appeared. Therefore, ADA was subcutaneously administered at the dosage of 40 mg/dose every 2 weeks. After 4 weeks of treatment a progressive improvement both of cutaneous lesions and osteoarticular symptoms was reported and ADA administration interval (at the same dose of 40 mg) was extended to 4 weeks. After six months of favourable ADA treatment, the boy experimented a relapse of osteoarticular symptoms. Therefore, ADA was administered again every 2 weeks obtaining a long-lasting remission. An MRI performed 12 months later, has shown no evidence of abnormal vertebral bone marrow signal , sterno-clavear or sacroiliac effusions . After 24-months treatment with ADA, the disease maintains complete remission. In Fig. we show cutaneous lesions on the face, on the back and on the sternal region before and after ADA treatment. On the contrary, the depressive mood disorder persists and negatively affects the quality of patient’s life.