A 20-year-old female presented with a complaints of amenorrhea, left flank pain and heaviness from 1 year. There was no associated weight loss, and patient was vitally stable. Flank pain was gradual in onset and progress and diffuse in nature. On physical examination patient was of normal height and weight but systemic examination a left renal mass was palpated that felt homogeneous in nature. At presentation Patient was vitally stable and laboratory investigations ordered were also with in normal standard reference ranges expect Hb level, that was slightly towards lower normal limit. On ultrasound study a left renal mass involving the major portion of left renal tissue with homogeneous density was observed. The ultrasound also revealed a tumor like image that was occupying the whole left kidney (upper, middle, and lower borders). On further investigations computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed size of 180 mm with no invasions to renal capsule, renal vessels, or ureters or homolateral adrenal gland as shown in a and b. Infiltrative borders of tumor mass suggested as an untypically renal cell carcinoma. Therefore, radical nephrectomy was done.
During operation the renal capsule was found intact, and the renal artery was clamped, no complications were faced during operation and patient had quick and perfect recovery post operatively. Gross examination of the specimen revealed a tumor dimension of 180 × 150 × 110 mm involving the whole kidney middle upper and lower lobe as shown in . Ureters, renal vein, renal capsule, perinephric mass uninvolved by tumor. However renal sinus fat was completely replaced by tumor. Cut surface of the tumor shows multiple small cysts, filled with clear fluid.
Patient was informed about the nature of the disease and patient was prepared for radical nephrectomy after getting anaesthesia fitness. Tumor mass was removed by radical nephrectomy that was performed through transperitoneal approach as shown in and the resected specimen was preserved for microscopic and histological analysis. Microscopic and histological sections showed multi-cystic structures with variably sized simple cysts lined by hobnailed epithelium with clear cells. Septa show ovarian type fibrous stroma with variable inflammation and immature nephrogenic elements. Final histopathological diagnosis was Mixed Epithelial and Stromal Tumor (MEST) and patient was placed on strict follow up, irrespective of that the malignant transformation and recurrence history is very rare of natural history of MEST.