A 36-year-old woman presented at our hospital with a palpable mass at the external left breast quadrants in December 2011. The patient underwent breast ultrasound and breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that confirmed the presence of a nodular formation of about 5 cm. In addition, at least three lymphadenopathies with eccentric hilum were identified in the left axillary cable, and remote staging tests were negative. In January 2012, breast biopsy diagnosed an infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the breast, grade 3, estrogen receptor (ER)-positive (90%), progesterone receptor (PR)-positive (36%), HER2-positive (3+ by IHC), and MIB-1 36%. The pathological nature of lymphadenopathies was confirmed by fine-needle aspiration.
From January 2012 to April 2012, the patient received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with docetaxel (100 mg/m2) and trastuzumab (8 mg/kg loading dose, followed by 6 mg/kg) every three weeks for four cycles followed by cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2) and doxorubicin (60 mg/m2) every three weeks for four cycles. The second cycle of chemotherapy was delayed due to hypertransaminasemia grade 2 (according to common terminology criteria for adverse events (CTCAE) version 5.0), treated with glutathione and prednisone 25 mg/die for five days. Treatment with docetaxel was resumed at 25% reduced dose, reporting only grade 1 hypertransaminasemia during subsequent cycles. In August 2012, the patient underwent bilateral mastectomy and axillary node resection with a partial response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (ypT1c ypN1 Mx).
From October 2012 to April 2013, the patient continued adjuvant therapy with trastuzumab administered subcutaneously (600 mg) every three weeks to complete one year of treatment and hormone therapy with tamoxifene plus luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) inhibitor since September 2012.
In January 2014, after the finding of thickening of the subcutaneous areola, the patient underwent surgical radical removal of the nipple and left areola. The diagnosis was intraductal carcinoma of cribriform type in galactophore ducts of high-grade sec. WHO 2012 and Paget’s disease, ER 90% PgR negative.
She continued regular clinico-radiological follow-up, negative for locoregional and distance recurrence, until January 2016 when a total body contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) scan and an 18-fluor-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) confirmed the presence of bilateral pulmonary, mediastinal pathological lymph nodes and bone metastases. According to the disease stage, biomolecular tumor characteristics, and clinical conditions (PS 0 sec. ECOG), in January 2016, the patient started first-line therapy with pertuzumab plus trastuzumab and docetaxel every three weeks at standard doses. She reassumed the same regimen up to four courses and then she continued with dual HER2-blockage for a further three cycles. The CECT scan after three courses of treatment showed a partial response, but after the second cycle the patient showed grade 2 mucositis and grade 3 hypertransaminasemia, treated with glutathione and prednisone 25 mg/die for five days, and the third cycle was delayed. Antigens of hepatitis were tested and resulted negative.
In August 2016, an 18F-FDG PET/CT revealed lymph node and bone progression disease. Thus, she started second-line therapy with T-DM1 at 3.6 mg/kg every three weeks with concurrent denosumab every four weeks. From August 2016 to April 2018, she received 28 cycles. After the ninth cycle, due to the occurrence of grade 2 hypertransaminasemia, glutathione was introduced in chemotherapy regimens with the resolution of toxicity.
In April 2018, due to a lymph node and lung disease progression, the patient was enrolled in the phase III clinical trial SOPHIA (NCT02492711) and randomized to the control arm. The screening laboratory findings showed a grade 3 hypertransaminasemia that was treated with glutathione infusion. At the resolution of toxicity, since the patient had been randomized into the control arm, she began treatment with trastuzumab (8 mg/kg loading dose, followed by 6 mg/kg) and navelbine (25 mg/mq d1–8 every three weeks). The treatment was poorly tolerated with grade 4 neutropenia and grade 2 anemia after the first cycle and grade 4 neutropenia after the second cycle with 50% dose reduction and secondary prophylaxis with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Due to hematological toxicities, she continued treatment without navelbine, and she received four courses with trastuzumab.
In October 2018, a further lymph node and lung disease progression was detected, and then she started fourth line with capecitabine (1000 mg/mq bid d1–14) plus lapatinib (1250 mg once daily) every three weeks. The patient received IX cycle from November 2018 to June 2019. After the first cycle, she presented grade 1 hypertransaminasemia, which was resolved with glutathione infusion.
After a further lymph node and lung disease progression, she received fifth-line therapy with nab-paclitaxel 260 mg/m2 and trastuzumab every three weeks with primary prophylaxis with G-CSF. She received nine courses from July 2019 to December 2019, and she presented only grade 1 hypertransaminasemia.
Due to the evidence of complete response and the patient’s preference to discontinue alopecitizing chemotherapy, she continued treatment with trastuzumab alone until March 2020, when an 18F-FDG PET/CT revealed lymph node and lung relapse. Then, in April 2020, she started sixth-line therapy with gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2·d1, d8 plus trastuzumab 6 mg/kg every three weeks. After the first cycle, she presented grade 2 hypertransaminasemia and grade 2 thrombocytopenia, so she stopped the treatment; due to the occurrence of pain in the left arm (VAS 8), we prescribed oxycodone plus naloxone. At the fourth cycle, she showed grade 3 hypertransaminasemia, and we decided to reduce gemcitabine dose, but the toxicity persisted. Therefore, liver virology was tested again. Moreover, at this time point , since the new technology for DDGI had become available at our center, we evaluated her genomic polymorphisms, including genes encoding for the main drug metabolism enzymes, and simultaneously analyzed all her clinical, biochemical, and genomic data by using the new Drug-PIN system comprehensive approach ( (accessed on 31 March 2020)) In particular, for the SNP analysis, the patient’s DNA was extracted from samples of 5 mL of peripheral blood, using the automatic QIAsymphony system for the extraction of nucleic acid (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and then the latter was processed using a next-generation sequencing platform Ion Chef/Ion S5 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Due to the results of the analysis , we decided to maintain the reduced dose of gemcitabine and to introduce glutathione as part of cancer treatment from the sixth cycle of chemotherapy.
From August to December 2020, the patient received 25% reduced dose gemcitabine with four vials of glutathione, and she showed maximum grade 2 liver toxicity.
In December 2020, an 18F-FDG PET/CT evaluation revealed oligometastatic lymph node and bone progression; therefore, we decided to treat with local radiotherapy on sternal dumbbell and left later-cervical, supraclavicular, and retro-pectoral lymph nodes, maintaining the same chemotherapy regimen. Today, the treatment with gemcitabine and trastuzumab is still ongoing, and the patient has reported an overall survival (OS) of 111 months from first diagnosis and of 50 months from recurrence.