A 75-year-old woman with a diagnosis of pancreatic mass was admitted for surgery.
A 75-year-old Chinese woman was admitted because of paroxysmal exacerbation of acute abdominal pain for 1 d with no apparent cause. The pain was not responsive to changes in body position and did not radiate to the other side. The patient did not complain of nausea, sour regurgitation, or abdominal fullness but did note slight fatigue.
The patient had hypertension for the previous 10 years, which was well controlled by drug therapy.
The patient had a more than 10-year history of hypertension that was under fairly satisfactory control via medication.
Abdominal physical examination showed a flattened belly, normal borborygmus, and epigastric tenderness and rebound pain, with a negative Murphy’s sign.
Blood biochemistry tests revealed the following: Elevated blood amylase (742 U/L; chromatometry reference range: 35-135 U/L), undetectable blood lipase (chromatometry reference range: less than 79 U/L), low albumin (32.2 g/L; reference range: 40-55 g/L), low calcium (2.06 mmol/L; reference range: 2.25-2.75 mmol/L), low platelets (98 × 109/L; reference range: 100-300 × 109/L), and highly elevated CA242 (over 150 IU/mL; reference range: 0-20 IU/mL), CA50 (289.6 IU/mL; reference range: 0-20 IU/mL), and CA199 (627.4 IU/mL; reference range: 0-37 IU/mL).
A plain CT scan showed a mass in the body and tail of the pancreas, with little exudation . The morphology of the pancreas was disrupted, indicating edema, hyperemia, and fat liquefaction. The stomach appeared normal . Two days later, contrast-enhanced CT showed a cystic solid mass surrounding splenic vessels in the caudal pancreas, indicating a pancreatic malignant tumor . Multiple hepatic cysts, cholecystitis, and cholecystic polypus were also detected. The gastric antral wall was found to be thickened . Gastric endoscopy was performed 3 d later. The images showed chronic superficial and atrophic gastritis, a protruding lesion in the submucosal area of the antrum , and no Helicobacter pylori infection. Contrast MRI was performed the following day and indicated PC and uniform thickening of the antral wall . Due to the aforementioned imaging findings, we decided to perform operations to relieve PC and tried to figure out the nature of the gastric mass intraoperatively.
The gastric mass under pathological examination post operation was a gray, solid, and tough nodule measuring 2 cm × 2.2 cm × 1 cm in the pylorus. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were positive for CK8, partially positive for Ki-67, and negative for CD147. Micrography showed multiple multifocal heterotopic pancreatic acini , mucus-excreting glands such as Brunner’s glands, and undifferentiated ducts surrounded by proliferative smooth muscles in the submucosal layer, which typically indicate GA with HP. The tissue in the other slice showed undifferentiated epithelial cells covered with thickened smooth muscle, indicating GA alone , with no signs of malignancy. Regarding the 3.5 cm × 2 cm × 3 cm pancreatic mass, distinct dysplasia of the acini and cells arranged in a mass without polarity indicated cancer cells. The nuclei were deeply basophilic, with common karyokinesis, enlarged in size, and increased in number compared to those in normal tissue .