A 15-year-old girl presented with a history of progressive limping for 8 years. Another symptom was diffuse bone pain for 3 years. Family and drug histories were unremarkable. On physical examination, a large, firm, and non-tender mass was palpable in the right thyroid lobe. Left hip range of motion was limited in all directions, both actively and passively, and tenderness was present on left femoral head palpation. The rest of the physical examination was normal.
Biochemical tests were performed and initial laboratory test results were as follows: serum calcium: 10.8 mg/dL (range: 8.5 - 10.5 mg/dL); phosphorus: 2.4 mg/dL (range: 2.9 - 5.1 mg/dL); iPTH: 2876 pg/mL (range 15 - 65 pg/mL); 25-hydroxy vitamin D3: 13.76 ng/mL (range 15 - 65 ng/mL); thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH): 3.11 µIU/mL (range 0.51 - 4.34 µIU/mL); and alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 7410 IU/L (range: 180 - 1200 IU/L). While PHPT could be associated with other endocrinopathies, the complementary evaluations, such as insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and prolactin measurements were done .
The plain pelvic radiography demonstrated a left femoral neck fracture. Spine radiography displayed wedge fractures at thoracic and lumbar spine levels . Bone mineral density (BMD) showed low bone density (lumbar spine's Z-core: -3.7). According to the above-mentioned test results, including elevated PTH, borderline high serum calcium, decreased phosphorus, and elevated ALP, primary hyperparathyroidism was considered as the most probable diagnosis.
Dual-phase sestamibi scintigraphy was performed for the patient after intravenous (IV) injection of 540 MBq of 99mTc-MIBI. The early scan images (at 20 minutes) revealed high thyroid uptake in the right lobe with a suppressive effect on the left side. Increased radiotracer uptake was seen in the right lobe without proper washout on delayed images, which was higher and larger than is expected with PAs . A thyroid scan was also done two days later, after IV injection of 185 MBq of 99mTc from the anterior view to rule out a thyroid nodule. This scan revealed a focal decreased uptake in the upper pole of the right lobe, which was smaller compared with the finding of the parathyroid scan . The discrepancy between the two scans led to further investigation into the underlying pathology. Neck ultrasound revealed an enlarged right thyroid lobe compatible with intra-lobar necrosis and echogenic regions with the approximate size of 20 mm compatible with the parathyroid gland ( and ).
The patient was referred to an experienced surgeon for neck exploration and parathyroidectomy. She underwent open surgery. The parathyroid mass had infiltrated to the surrounding thyroid tissue; hence, right thyroidectomy, isthmectomy, and right inferior parathyroidectomy were performed. The remaining parathyroid glands were examined during the operation and were normal. She experienced hungry bone syndrome postoperatively, which was managed appropriately. Finally, serum calcium and iPTH levels decreased to a level of 8.7 mg/dL (8.5 - 10.5 mg/dL) and 24 pg/mL (15 - 65 pg/mL), respectively. The operative phosphorus level was 2.3 mg/dL.
Gross histopathologic examination revealed a well-defined cream-colored mass measuring 2.5 × 1.5 × 1.0 cm. IHC helped with the confirmation of diagnosis .
Histologic examination showed uniform chief cells presenting as nodules and sheet growth with proliferated blood vessels that were separated by a broad fibrous capsule from the adjacent thyroid tissue. The tumor had invaded the capsule and blood vessels. IHC staining for CD34 confirmed vascular invasion. IHC was also diffusely positive for CK in the tumor and tumor cells attached to endothelial cells. Ki67 was also positive in 2% - 3% of tumor cells. However, other markers, such as CD45, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), and Pax5 were negative (-).
Whole exome sequencing (WES) study was done for the assessment of familial hyperparathyroidism and MEN1. The genetic study demonstrated no mutation in CDC73 and menin genes. However, there was an incidental mutation in the breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) gene.
We performed an extensive search using different databases, including Medline, PubMed, Scopus, ScienceDirect, and Google Scholar to find all published cases of PC in children and adolescents. We used the following combination of keywords: parathyroid carcinoma or parathyroid cancer or parathyroid neoplasm or parathyroid malignancy, and pediatrics or child or adolescent or boy or girl. We could find 16 papers reporting 17 cases of pediatric PC from 1972. summarizes the published papers.
According to these reports, the male to female ratio was 0.6. The youngest and oldest patients were 8 and 16 years old, respectively. The most common initial presenting symptoms were related to hypercalcemia, including anorexia, vomiting, polyuria, polydipsia, fatigue, bone pain, and renal calculi. Sixty percent had a palpable neck mass. Nearly 50% had skeletal involvement, including fracture and deformity. Only three patients had experienced weight loss. Pancreatitis was a rare condition diagnosed in one case. Nearly 20% had metastasis, most common sites were lung and cervical lymph nodes, and all cases with pulmonary involvement had experienced relapse and hypercalcemia after the initial operation. The range of serum calcium and iPTH was 12 - 20.7 mg/dL and 300 - 8638 pg/mL, respectively. IHC had been reported in two cases, which were both positive for parafibromin . Three cases had deletion mutation of CDC73, and another case was negative with regard to menin gene mutation. Three patients had a positive family history of primary hyperparathyroidism. There was no predominant tumor location site at the neck.