Our patient was a 39-year-old Chinese woman who had delivered a second live full-term infant through an uncomplicated cesarean section in 2011 after a miscarriage in 2010 and a first cesarean section in 2005. In December 2014, she noticed a purple, nontender swelling appearing as an anterior abdominal wall mass around her cesarean scar. The mass was the size of a green bean and was not accompanied by any abdominal pain or abnormal vaginal bleeding. There were no notable findings in her past medical history, family history, or psychosocial history. The abdominal wall mass had progressively enlarged, which led to her presentation to a local institution. She had undergone tumor resection of the abdominal wall in June 2015, which might be interpreted as the abdominal wall endometriosis malignancy.
The patient had visited a regional tertiary hospital for a consultation regarding the pathologic diagnosis of a CC before presenting to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Her physical examination showed no abnormalities except for the scar from the local excision on the abdominal wall. Our pathologists reviewed the first excised specimen from the previous hospital and confirmed the characteristic of CC coexisting with minor ETT. Her Ki-67 proliferative index was approximately 50%. Laboratory analysis revealed normal serum levels of β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG; < 1.2 IU/L) and tumor markers, including carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA 125), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 19-9, CA 15-3, and α-fetoprotein; all of these biomarkers had consistently negative values. Positron emission tomography was performed to further determine whether other metastatic lesions existed; however, no residual tumor and suspicious malignant lesions were observed. For further evaluation, endometrial curettage was performed, the results of which revealed normal menstrual phase endometrium. Subsequently, the patient received two courses of chemotherapy with a regimen of etoposide and cisplatin (EP) over a 2-month period. During chemotherapy, her serum β-hCG levels remained negative (< 1.2 IU/L).
Subsequently, she underwent regular follow-up in the outpatient department, and a recurrent nodule was found on the same abdominal wall scar site in January 2017, approximately 17 months after the last chemotherapy. The patient was registered for admission again. Her serum β-hCG had increased to 6.17 IU/L, and two oval hypoechoic masses were visualized by ultrasonography in the subcutaneous soft tissue of the lower abdomen wall scar. Chest computed tomography (CT) and head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormality. Then she underwent a second notable mass excision by ultrasound interventional localization. In this case, the nodule was in the fat layer next to the superficial fascia. Her serum β-hCG level was decreased to 3.4 IU/L on the second postoperative day. The result of pathological examination was initially in line with CC metastasis to the abdominal wall, and the patient’s Ki-67 index was 20%. However, the patient’s pathological sections were sent to the Fudan University Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, another tertiary hospital in China, for further consultation, and the finding was ETT. Finally, the patient was encouraged to maintain close follow-up, and her serum β-hCG level had gradually decreased.
In the follow-up visits, the patient’s serum β-hCG level was elevated to the highest level of 10.68 IU/L again 4 months later , but she was still without any abdominal pain or abnormal vaginal bleeding. Furthermore, a pelvic CT scan showed several nodules on the abdominal wall midline fascia; the largest nodule was approximately 21 × 15 mm in size. The nodules had clear boundaries but were less uniform in internal echoes . Throughout the disease process, test results for tumor markers such as CA 125, CA 19-9, CEA, and HE4 were negative, and the results of routine blood sampling tests (blood cell count, liver and kidney function, coagulation function) were normal. We suggested a third resection of the mass to the patient, but she opted for a hysterectomy due to fear of malignancy and further relapse. She finally underwent exploratory laparotomy with removal of the abdominal wall lesion, subtotal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingectomy, and left ovarian cyst resection as well as right inguinal lymph node biopsy in July 2017. Intraoperative exploration revealed that the abdominal wall lesion was located on the anterior wall fascia.
Histopathological observations suggested that hyperplasia of fatty fibrous tissue was visible with cancer infiltration and necrosis around the cancer tissue, which was consistent with trophoblastic tumor, constituted primarily by major epidermoid trophoblastic tumors (approximately 90%) and the remainder by CC components (approximately 10%) on the abdominal wall lesion . Immunohistochemistry showed β-hCG (focal positive), inhibin-α (epithelial trophoblast negative, CC positive), and p63 (epidermoid trophoblast positive, CC positive) . There was no tumor involvement in other tissues, including uterine, left ovarian cyst, and the right inguinal lymph nodes, which indicated an isolated and extrauterine mixed trophoblastic tumor. On the basis of all these findings, the diagnosis was ETT accompanying CC. The patient’s postoperative recovery was uneventful. Two weeks after hysterectomy, her serum β-hCG level had returned to normal (low 1.2 IU/L). Two years later, there was no evidence of recurrence according to serum β-hCG and imaging studies.