Without significant previous medical history, a 67-year-old Caucasian man developed spinal symptoms with temporary hypesthesia and hypoalgesia in both legs. These symptoms spontaneously resolved without any specific diagnosis at that time. At the age of 73, our patient suffered from bilateral optic neuritis and he was diagnosed with MS at an outside hospital. His expanded disability status scale (EDSS) score was at that time 2.5. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies of the spinal cord revealed a diffuse cord swelling and longitudinally extensive T2 hypertensive lesions extending from C2 to T3 (see Figure depicting a T2-weighted MRI scan, which shows residual longitudinal myelitis with extensive cord atrophy). A cranial MRI scan displayed few periventricular and cerebellar lesions without contrast enhancement and without fulfilling the Barkhof criteria. Moreover, analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) presented oligoclonal bands. At that time, anti-AQP-4 antibody testing was not performed. A therapy with interferon beta 1a was started for six months and was replaced by interferon beta 1b at the discretion of the treating outside neurologist. Our patient developed two further spinal relapses during the treatment with interferon beta preparations. They were treated with corticosteroid pulses without any success and his EDSS score worsened from 2.5 to 4.0. Although a subsequent therapy with natalizumab was initiated at an outside clinic, our patient continued to present another three relapses. The first relapse occurred four months after starting natalizumab, the second after six months and the third relapse after eight months. All relapses repeatedly affected both optic nerves and the spinal cord each with increasing visual and motor impairment. Thus, our patient developed a high-grade spastic tetraparesis as well as impaired visual acuity of both eyes and his EDSS score progressed from 4.0 to 8.0. At that point, NMO was discussed after referral to our hospital and natalizumab therapy was discontinued after nine courses. After repeated cycles of plasma exchange, the disease course stabilized and a therapy with rituxan was started. Although B cells were completely depleted, our patient experienced another severe myelitis relapse upon further follow-up three months later. Consequently, an additional immunosuppressive therapy with cyclophosphamide at a dosage of 600mg/m2 was initiated. In the meantime, we performed repetitive anti-AQP-4 antibody tests in an approved external laboratory employing an immunofluorescence assay (IFA) cell-based analysis. Negative anti-AQP-4 antibody tests were obtained via IFA analyses upon first admission and then in six-monthly intervals after first contact at our hospital. It was only after 18 months that anti-AQP-4 antibodies became positive after three negative results. At that time, the anti-AQP-4-immunoglobulin (Ig)G antibody titer was 1:1000 while IgM and IgA titers were negative. There were no other autoantibodies and no signs of other autoimmune diseases or malignancy.
Under combination treatment with cyclophosphamide (13 cycles every six weeks, cumulative dosage of 8300mg/m2) followed by another cycle of rituxan, our patient developed no further relapses over an observation period of 2.5 years.