Fatigue and weight loss for more than 1 mo.
A 62-year-old male farmer was hospitalized for fatigue and weight loss for more than 1 mo, without fever or bone pain. The peripheral blood examination in a local hospital indicated severe anemia with a hemoglobin level of 54 g/L and a potentially malignant tumor from the blood system. Therefore, he was admitted to Huaihe Hospital of Henan University.
No particular previous medical history.
The patient had no history of exposure to industrial poisons or radioactive substances, and was not smoking or drinking alcohol. The family history was unremarkable.
The patient presented an anemic face; the percussion of the lungs presented a little dullness, a few moist rales were heard at the left lung base, and mild concave edema was seen in both lower extremities.
Laboratory evaluation at the Huaihe Hospital of Henan University showed a medium degree of anemia with a hemoglobin level of 61 g/L. Further blood examination indicated renal dysfunction and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-PROBNP) . The other laboratory findings, including blood coagulation functions, stool for routine, blood lipids, and blood sugar, were normal.
Serum protein electrophoresis on agarose gel suggested an elevation of α2-globulin and γ-globulin, and two slight M-spikes appeared and a band within the γ fraction (the other band within α2 fraction was obscure) was seen. To categorize the M protein, we conducted serum IFE, which consisted of antisera to IgA, IgM, IgG, κ, and λ, and the results yielded two monoclonal bands in the λ region without corresponding heavy chain bands, corresponding to the distinct elevation of serum λ FLC . Thus, we highly suspected the possibility of type IgD or IgE or FLC M protein component. Subsequently, we implemented a second serum IFE with antisera to IgD, IgE, κ, and λ. The results showed two monoclonal bands in antisera to λ but only one corresponding heavy chain band in antisera to IgD, which indicated a diagnosis of IgD-λ/λ myeloma by correlating the clinical manifestation and laboratory examinations.
BM cytomorphologic (anterior superior spine) examination found a marked increment of plasma cells, mainly immature plasma cells, which accounted for 82% of the BM nucleated cells . Flow cytometry suggested positivity of monoclonal plasma cells (70.12% of total nucleated red blood cells) with the following immunophenotype: CD38, cytoplasmic lambda, and CD229. All of the monoclonal plasma cells expressed CD229, CD38, and cytoplasmic lambda and partly expressed CD138 . Undoubtedly, BM cytomorphologic examination and flow cytometry supported the diagnosis of plasma cell myeloma. Furthermore, analysis of chromosome karyotype was as follows: 46,XY;46,Y,t(X;4)(p11.2;q21), no abnormal cloning. Gene analysis of the blood tumor mutant group was mainly normal.
Combined with the clinical, and laboratory data above, the patient was diagnosed with stage ISS III myeloma.