A 79-year-old woman with loss of appetite was transferred from another hospital. On physical examination at the first visit, no abdominal tenderness and jaundice were noted. Initial laboratory findings were unremarkable, except for a high level of carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9; 125.7 U/ml). Both serum HBs-antigen and HCV-antibody tests were negative.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a 100 × 90 mm low-contrast tumor in segments 1, 2, 3, and 4 resulting in dilated bile ducts in B2, enlarged regional lymph nodes #3 and #7 [#3 and #7, according to the General Rules for Clinical and Pathological Studies on Primary Liver Cancer], and invasion of the inferior vena cava (IVC), left portal vein (LPV), middle hepatic vein (MHV), and middle hepatic artery (MHA) .
Positron emission tomography with 18F-fluoro-D-deoxy-glucose (18F-FDG PET)/CT showed uptake by the primary liver tumor and regional lymph nodes . On imaging, the patient was diagnosed with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) with regional lymph node metastases [cT2N1M0, cStage IIIB according to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) classification system].
Radical surgical resection including combined vascular resection, reconstruction, and lymph node dissection was possible, but R0 resection is often difficult in cases of locally advanced ICC such as the present case; thus, it was not considered achievable during discussion in the multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting. It was also thought that her prognosis would be poor due to inability to achieve R0 resection. Thus, she was treated with combined chemotherapy due to the lymph node metastases. The combination chemotherapy consisted of gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) plus cisplatin (25 mg/m2) administered for 2 weeks followed by a 1-week respite, with a single course extending over 3 weeks.
After 4 courses of combination chemotherapy without adverse events, CT showed a marked reduction of the primary tumor and metastatic lymph nodes. The size of the primary tumor had decreased to 30 × 60 mm, and the invasion of the IVC, LPV, MHV, and MHA had disappeared . The lymph node enlargement also disappeared, and the CA19-9 level decreased to within the normal range (9.3 U/ml) . The patient achieved a partial response (PR) as assessed using Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumor (RECIST), and the post-chemotherapy TNM staging was ycT2N0M0 Stage II by the UICC criteria. At the MDT meeting, it was then decided that surgery could proceed. H1234-B-MHV, dissection of #1, #3, #5, and #7 lymph nodes, and pyloroplasty to prevent the delayed excretion of gastric contents due to the vagus nerve reflex associated with lymph node dissection were performed. She was discharged on postoperative day 15.
The histological examination showed scattered pigmented macrophages in the fibrotic tissue and inflammatory cell infiltration. No invasive carcinoma or epithelial carcinoma components were found. There were no viable carcinoma cells in the dissected lymph nodes . The pathological TNM staging was T0N0M0 according to the UICC criteria. In the MDT meeting, the decision was made not to proceed with adjuvant chemotherapy, for the reason that pCR had been achieved.
She remains alive with no evidence of disease 2 years after surgery without adjuvant chemotherapy.