A 12-year-old Caucasian girl came to the emergency department of our hospital. She reported abdominal pain of 48-hour clinical course located in the left iliac fossa as well as feeling nauseous. The patient reported similar clinical symptoms, which were self-limiting, the month prior. She did not present with any medical or surgical history of note, and her gynecological history revealed that she had not undergone menarche and had not yet commenced sexual relations.
Her physical examination revealed normal vital signs and no fever. We observed normal development of secondary sexual characteristics in Tanner stage 3–4. She presented with abdominal pain on deep palpation in the left iliac fossa, was free of signs of peritoneal irritation, and had no organ masses or organomegaly. Additional tests revealed mild leukocytosis (11.1 × 103/μl) with left shift (81.2% neutrophils) and negative C-reactive protein (CRP; < 0.5 mg/L). The results of basic analysis of normal urine and pregnancy tests were negative. We performed abdominal and transrectal ultrasound and visualized the patient’s uterus and ovaries of normal size, form, and echogenicity. Adjacent to the left ovary, an elongated formation of approximately 52 × 27 mm was seen, with anechoic content and negative color Doppler map, which suggested hydrosalpinx. No free fluid in the pouch of Douglas was observed .
Given the above findings, hospital admission and observation were decided. Oral analgesia with 650 mg of paracetamol every 8 hours was prescribed. After 48 hours, the patient’s symptom of abdominal pain receded. No leukocytosis with a negative CRP was observed. Given the stability of the clinical symptoms, and having ruled out the complication of hydrosalpinx, hospital admission and monthly monitoring in gynecology consultation were decided.
After 3 weeks, the patient was readmitted because of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting of several hours’ clinical course. She had presented menarche the week prior to readmission. Upon physical examination, she presented with intense pain in the left iliac fossa with signs of peritoneal irritation. Ultrasound revealed the same left para-adnexal formation and existence of a moderate amount of free fluid in the pouch of Douglas. Her blood workup had worsened, with leukocytosis (13.5 × 103/μl), left shift (83.9% neutrophils), and elevated CRP (24 mg/L). Given these findings and suspected complications, exploratory laparoscopy was indicated. During the intervention, we observed that the left fallopian tube was increased in size, with torsion on its own axis, signs suggesting ischemia and impossible detorsion. We proceeded to perform left salpingectomy . On a macroscopic level, subsequent pathologic study of the surgical specimen revealed a violet-colored tube measuring 53 × 35 × 20 mm. Microscopically, the existence of tissue with hemorrhagic infarction free of evidence of malignancy was revealed.