A 57-year-old male patient visited the Department of Oral Medicine, Kyungpook National University Dental Hospital with the chief complaint of painful ulcer on the tip of the tongue. The ulcer had developed 3–4 weeks ago without any apparent initiating event such as trauma. He described a pricking sensation and an increased soreness at the tongue tip area upon touching. The patient’s medical history revealed a diagnosis of TB over 40 years ago. He reported that complete recovery was gained at that time.
Intraoral examination revealed a round ulcer measuring approximately 0.7 cm in diameter on the tip of the tongue. The ulcer was characterized by a granulomatous center and a whitish, well-defined border with slight elevation . The base of lesion was firm in consistency on digital palpation. Extraorally, there was no evidence of lymph node involvement. A panoramic radiograph showed no evidence of bone involvement. The laboratory examinations showed that complete blood count (CBC) was within normal limits. Serologic tests for human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C also revealed negative findings. Based on the clinical examination, differential diagnosis included major aphthous ulcer, traumatic ulcer, granulomatous diseases, and infections.
Topical mouthwash with a mixture of amoxicillin 1.0 g and prednisolone 30 mg in 500 mL distilled water was used for 7 weeks with careful instruction to avoid possible stimuli, and triamcinolone acetonide 5 mg was also injected into lesion twice for 2 months. Despite subtle improvement after these conservative managements, the ulcer had not completely disappeared. Biopsy was eventually performed to rule out malignancy.
An incisional biopsy of the ulcer was carried out under local anesthesia (2% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:100,000). Histological examination revealed the presence of numerous epithelioid cells and multiple Langhans giant cells and Ziehl–Neelsen staining demonstrated acid-fast bacilli (AFB) . Based on histological findings, the oral ulcer was finally diagnosed as lingual TB.
The patient was immediately referred to a pneumologist for further examination and management. AFB stains of lesion were positive for M. tuberculosis. AFB cultures were positive for M. tuberculosis complex. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was conducted on his sputum, and analysis confirmed the presence of M. tuberculosis.. Additional blood biochemistry revealed the increased values of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (103 mm/h) and c-reactive protein (CRP) (2.54 mg/dL). An IFN-γ release assay (IGRA) using the QuantiFERON-TB Gold in-tube method was positive. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed destructive findings with consolidation and fibrothorax in right lung and formation of cavitary lesion with clustered centrilobular micronodules in left lung apex .
After about 2 months of drug therapy, the oral ulcer of patient almost disappeared , and after another 2 months, AFB culture showed no growth of M. tuberculosis in 4 weeks. The patient was followed up for 9 months without any complications .