A 40-year-old African American female presented in 2014 with complaints of a right neck mass that was first appreciated 9 months earlier. The appearance of the neck mass coincided with a constellation of symptoms: frequent severe headaches, periods of lightheadedness, vertigo and tinnitus, hoarseness, dysphagia, blurred vision and tearing of the right eye. On physical examination, a non-pulsatile, non-tender mass was palpated, deep to the right sternocleidomastoid muscle. The patient underwent CT neck imaging, which revealed a 6.1 × 4.0 × 4.1 cm right neck mass extending to the base of the skull and encompassing the internal and external carotid artery . Upon further evaluation, the tumor was felt to be a Shamblin II lesion because there was some carotid arterial attachment, but the tumor did not entirely encase the carotid arteries, so the tumor was deemed as reasonable for resection. A cerebral arteriogram showed no intracranial arterial vascular abnormality, so an extracranial embolization was performed. Transcervical resection of the right carotid body tumor was performed the following day, and pathology showed a paraganglioma measuring 4.9 cm with areas of infarct and multiple vessels with intravascular thrombi, consistent with prior embolization procedure. The transcervical resection of the right carotid body paraganglioma was a gross total resection, but a microscopic surgical margin assessment on the surgical pathology was not performed. Following surgery, the patient continued to remain symptomatic with headaches, right neck and ear soreness, Horner’s syndrome symptoms, and right vocal cord paralysis. She received right vocal fold injection medialization. Over time, the patient reported improvement in most of her symptoms.
The patient was routinely followed in office and via imaging. MRI in 2017 showed a small mass measuring about 1 cm in the vicinity of the carotid bifurcation, but it was unclear if this was recurrent disease, so the decision was made to continue to observe the mass. In 2018, a subsequent MRI showed interval enlargement of the mass from 1.4 × 1 × 1.2 cm to 2.5 × 1.7 × 2.4 cm. Due to the disease progression, the patient received Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy of 25 Gy in 5 fractions to the presumed recurrent right paraganglioma in 2018. For the next two years, the patient’s imaging and clinical symptoms remained stable. In 2021, the patient re-presented with six months of new onset thoracic radiculopathy and weight loss, and one month of progressive bilateral lower extremity weakness, dysmetria, and paresthesias and numbness from the umbilicus down. Upon physical examination, the patient's strength was 4 + /5 in her bilateral lower extremities, she had decreased sensation to light touch and pin-prick from her naval to her distal bilateral lower extremities, she had intact sensation to light perineal touch, her bilateral patellar reflexes were 2 + , and her bilateral ankle reflexes had single beat clonus. She had a mildly ataxic gait with dysmetria on heel to toe walk and heel walk. While her finger to nose testing was intact, her heel to shin testing revealed dysmetria. During rectal examination, the patient demonstrated brisk voluntary anal contraction. MRI of the T spine showed a spinal mass arising from the posterior elements at T6-T7 with at least Bilsky grade 2 posterior to anterior cord compression as well as a mass in the T11 vertebral body . This compressive pathology localized to the patient’s acute symptoms, and it was determined that she would require surgical intervention. She underwent T6-T7 laminectomy, T5-T7 tumor resection, and T5-T9 posterior fixation in 2021 with pathology showing metastatic paraganglioma . She subsequently completed radiation therapy of 30 Gy in 10 fractions to the thoracic spine from T4 to T11 to encompass both the surgical field as well as the T11 metastasis in 2021.
Following completion of radiation therapy to the thoracic spine, restaging DOTATATE PET in mid-2021 showed multifocal uptake in the right carotid body surgical bed as well as uptake in T4, T11, and the right iliac. Genetic evaluation showed no evidence of pathogenic mutations. The patient was evaluated for 131Iodine-Iobenguane but she was not felt to be a candidate. The patient was started on systemic therapy with sunitinib complicated by mucositis. The patient’s sunitinib dose was decreased to help alleviate the mucositis. Interval DOTATATE PET in late 2021 showed decreased size and uptake of the right neck masses and osseous metastases consistent with treatment response. The patient reported 2–3 months of dull, burning right hip pain. An MRI was obtained showing a well marginated lesion within the right iliac bone in the area of PET avidity consistent with metastatic disease. The right iliac lesion was treated with 8 Gy of radiation therapy in a single fraction for right hip pain attributed to bony metastatic disease. DOTATATE PET in mid 2022 showed two areas of focal uptake in the right carotid body surgical bed, small volume mild uptake in the C5 and T11 vertebral bodies and the right iliac, and a left adrenal nodule without PET uptake. Therefore, the patient’s systemic therapy was switched to capecitabine and temozolomide. At the time of her last follow up in 2022—a total of 13 months since completing thoracic spinal surgery and radiotherapy and 4 months since completing palliative right hip radiotherapy—the patient was ambulatory, her previously reported neurologic deficits had resolved, and she had no right hip pain. Upon physical examination at last follow up, the patient's strength was 5/5 throughout, her sensation was normal to light touch, and her reflexes were 2 + throughout. She ambulated independently with intact heel to toe walking, heel walking, and toe walking.