A 60-year-old white female was referred to the nephrology clinic for further evaluation for unexplained rise in the creatinine (Cr) level to 1.4 mg/dL during her routine hematology visit from the baseline of 0.9 mg/dL. She was diagnosed with Polyneuropathy, Organomegaly, Endocrinopathy, Monoclonal plasma cell disorder, Skin changes (POEMS) syndrome approximately 1 year prior due to the presence of sciatica, hypothyroidism, monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), and onychomycosis, with regular hematology visits afterwards. Her serum protein electrophoresis around 2 years prior showed m-spike of 1.0 g/dL with immunofixation electrophoresis demonstrated the presence of monoclonal IgG having kappa light chain restriction (kappa free light chain: 2.12 mg/dL, lambda free light chain: 2.01 mg/dL, kappa/lambda free light chain ratio: 1.05). Complementary bone marrow biopsy indicated mildly increased plasma cell (5%-7%) with kappa light chain predominance, in favor of MGUS.

She was diagnosed with HTN approximately 3 years before her referral. Despite having few episodes of high blood pressure, her HTN status was well controlled. Patient has been receiving allopurinol, aspirin, losartan, hydrochlorothiazide, levothyroxine, metoprolol, and prednisone (20 mg daily). The latter was prescribed by the patient’s hematologist due to suspected vasculitis approximately 1 year after the nephrology visit, and the patient continues to take it. She did not report long-standing use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; however, she mentioned intermittent consumption (approximately 500 mg weekly) over the past couple of years, with normal Cr levels. She had no family or personal history of kidney diseases. The patient denied any active smoking. However, she reported long-standing exposure to passive cigarette smoking because of living with a heavy smoking family member and working as a bartender for more than 30 years. At her first nephrology visit, her blood pressure, pulse rate, and body mass index were 97/64 mm Hg, 59 beats/minute, and 19.32 kg/m2, respectively, and there was no rash on physical examination. She was not diabetic (hemoglobin A1c [HbA1c]: 5.4%). At the time of the nephrology consultation request, her Cr level was 1.4 mg/dL (blood pressure: 101/65 mm Hg), a value that had also been observed 2 months earlier. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease stage 3B at the nephrology visit (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR]: 43 mL/min/1.73 m2), with the increase in serum Cr to 1.8 mg/dL 1 week after her first nephrology visit. One month later, complementary tests showed a similar Cr value (1.8 mg/dL), and urinalysis results were in favor of nephritic range proteinuria, hematuria, and pyuria with moderate bacteriuria and negative nitrite without any urinary symptoms. Autoimmune and infectious markers (antinuclear Ab, anti-ds DNA Ab, anti-smith Ab, anti-SSA and SSB Abs, anti-SCL70 Ab, anti-Jo1 Ab, anti-centromere Ab, cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic Ab [C-ANCA], perinuclear ANCA [P-ANCA], hepatitis B virus [HBV]) were negative. Kidney ultrasound was unremarkable.

The patient underwent kidney biopsy, and the results of hematoxylin and eosin, periodic acid-Schiff, Jones silver, and Masson trichrome staining revealed diffuse and focal nodular mesangial expansion without hypercellularity and moderate arteriosclerosis. Out of 49 glomeruli, 18 (37%) showed signs of diffuse glomerulosclerosis and 3 (10%) showed segmental sclerosis. DNAJB9 immunohistochemical staining and immunofluorescent studies (IgA, IgG, IgM, C1q, kappa, and lambda light chains) as well as Congo red staining were negative. On electron microscopy, mesangial matrix expansion was confirmed with the additional finding of scattered embedded distinct curved fibrils ranging from 7 to 12 nm in diameter. The patient was finally diagnosed with ING in the context of HTN and passive smoking. During follow-up and after kidney biopsy, the patient’s blood pressure became uncontrolled, reaching a peak of 183/93 mm Hg. Several first-line antihypertensive regimens failed to control her blood pressure, and she was subsequently prescribed carvedilol, clonidine, and hydralazine. A duplex kidney ultrasound revealed left renal artery stenosis, and she was referred for appropriate management. Regarding her hematological condition, her most recent serum protein electrophoresis showed an M-spike of 0.8 g/dL, with immunofixation electrophoresis confirming the presence of monoclonal IgG with kappa light chain restriction (kappa free light chain: 4.51 mg/dL, lambda free light chain: 2.86 mg/dL, kappa/lambda free light chain ratio: 1.58). The patient remains under regular follow-up with a stable condition. At her most recent nephrology visit, 12 months later, the patient reported no symptoms, and her blood pressure reduced to 144/78 mm Hg. Table 1 shows the most recent patient’s laboratory data approximately 12 months after her first nephrology visit.