A 60-year-old man presented to the hospital with back pain and was subsequently diagnosed with uncomplicated Stanford type B acute aortic dissection. He was hospitalized and given conservative treatment; however, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan at that time showed a 55-mm aortic root dilatation . Furthermore, transthoracic echocardiogram revealed severe aortic regurgitation (AR), and the patient was diagnosed with annuloaortic ectasia . Its vena contracta was 6 mm, and the pressure halt time was 430 ms. Holodiastolic flow reversal was also detected in the abdominal aorta. Cusp degeneration and mitral valve insufficiency were not observed. After discharge, false lumen stability was confirmed on follow-up CT; thus, elective surgery for the aortic root was scheduled. The patient’s other significant past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidemia, hyperuricemia, sleep apnea, and vasospastic angina, which developed 11 months before. He was 183-cm tall and weighed 83.0 kg and had no specific family history.
During surgery, cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established via cannulation to the ascending aorta and the right atrium using a 24 Fr curved-tip dispersion aortic cannula and a 34/46 Fr two-stage venous cannula, respectively. In addition, an antegrade cardioplegia (CP) cannula was cannulated to the proximal ascending aorta, and then cardiac arrest was induced with antegrade CP after cross-clamping of the ascending aorta. Aside from a small calcification at the nadir of the annulus of the right coronary cusp, aortic valve degeneration such as cusp size discrepancy, cusp thickening, or cusp fenestration was not observed; thus, the David procedure was initially performed. However, intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram revealed eccentric AR jet due to right coronary cusp falling toward the left ventricle. Therefore, valve sparing was abandoned, and the Bentall procedure using a mechanical valve was selected. The antegrade CP cannulation site was resected and replaced with vascular prosthesis. Smooth CPB weaning was achieved, and the procedure was completed without any problems. The operation and CPB times were 416 and 308 min, respectively.
The postoperative course was not complicated, and the patient had never complained of chest pain after the operation. However, a routine contrast-enhanced CT scan at postoperative day (POD) 14 showed new Stanford type A aortic dissection . It was thought to be caused by intraoperative aortic cannulation for CPB as the entry was just below the felt pledget used for aortic cannulation site closure. The postoperative dissection was conservatively treated as the aortic root had already been replaced, and no symptoms, or malperfusion was observed. The patient was carefully observed with continuing hospitalization, and the resting level was gradually eased. Follow-up CT at POD 29 showed no enlargement of the ascending aorta, and the patient was discharged without other complications at POD 34.
Although he had no family history of cardiovascular diseases, including aortic dissection, or aortic aneurysm, connective tissue disease was suspected due to his own history of aortic root dilatation and recurrent aortic dissection; thus, a genetic test was conducted (tested genes: FBN1, FBN2, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFB2, TGFB3, SMAD2, SMAD3, ACTA2, COL3A1, EFEMP2, FLNA, MYH11, MYLK, SLC2A10). Among the tested genes, unreported heterozygous 8-base duplication mutation in the SMAD3 MH2 domain (c.742_749dup, p. Gln252ThrfsTer7) and likely benign heterozygous missense mutation in FBN2 (c.3518C > G, p. Thr1173Ser) were detected . The SMAD3 mutation seemed to be pathogenic because it causes frameshift, and premature termination codon can be formed. When the oropharynx was examined, a bifid uvula was found . Although the patient had no history of musculoskeletal disease, such as osteoarthritis, he was diagnosed with LDS type III based on the diagnostic criterion .
The aortic diameter was unchanged on follow-up CT at 6 months after surgery ; thus, observation was continued. If aortic arch enlargement is seen in the future, surgical treatment such as total arch replacement with frozen elephant trunk will be planned.