A 35-year-old woman (gravida 1, para 1; uneventful pregnancy with history of first delivery at 32 years of age) was referred to our cardiac emergency department for the management of heart failure due to PPCM. The patient had a benign medical history before the current delivery of twin pregnancy. Her blood pressure had been within the normal range throughout the pregnancy, ranging from 111/64 to 129/75 mmHg in the absence of antihypertensive agents, and she had not developed proteinuria during the pregnancy. She was admitted to the obstetric hospital for the management of her pregnancy at 32 weeks of gestation. On admission, she was asymptomatic. However, chest radiography showed cardiac enlargement [cardiothoracic ratio (CTR), 54%], and transthoracic echocardiography showed a slightly dilated cardiac chamber and preserved LV function [LV end-diastolic dimension (LVDd)/LV end-systolic dimension (LVDs), 51/34 mm; LVEF calculated using Teichholz’s formula, 54%]. Her plasma B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was elevated at 138 pg/mL. At 35 weeks of gestation, she unexpectedly gained body weight, and chest radiography showed further cardiac enlargement (CTR, 58%) and left pleural effusion. Her LV dimensions and BNP level also showed slight increases (LVDd/LVDs, 54/36 mm; BNP level, 154 pg/mL), while the LVEF was still preserved (62%). Although her ratio of mitral valve inflow velocity to left ventricle wall tissue velocity was within normal range (E/e': 9.4), the trans-tricuspid pressure gradient was mildly elevated (34 mmHg), suggesting a certain degree of diastolic dysfunction had caused her pleural effusion. Her electrocardiogram did not change during pregnancy.

She subsequently underwent usual vaginal delivery, and healthy twin neonates were born at 38 weeks. Immediately after delivery, progressive malaise and dyspnea developed. Chest radiography revealed pulmonary congestion and increased bilateral pleural effusion. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a severely reduced LV systolic function and increased LV dimensions. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with heart failure, and PPCM was suspected as the underlying etiology. The patient was referred to our tertiary medical center for further management.

On referral to our hospital, the patient’s pulse rate was 103 beats/minute, her blood pressure was 150/97 mmHg, respiratory rate was 29 breaths/minute, and room air oxygen saturation was 94%, with a New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class III. Her BNP level was elevated at 2,696 pg/mL. Chest radiography showed further cardiac enlargement (CTR, 64%) and pulmonary congestion. On transthoracic echocardiography, LVDd/LVDs was 58/53 mm, and LV wall motion exhibited severely reduced contraction, with an LVEF of 24% and only mild mitral regurgitation.

Emergency right heart catheterization indicated progressive heart failure with a high pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (25 mmHg), high pulmonary arterial pressure (40/23/30 mmHg), normal right atrial pressure (2 mmHg), and normal cardiac index (4.6 L/min/m2). We then detected an increased heart rate (from 95 to 138 beats/minute) and a gradual decrease in her cardiac index (down to 2.8 L/min/m2). Considering her low stroke volume index (20 mL/m2), we initially administered inotropes, but her heart failure continued to worsen. Thus, intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) was used for circulatory support. Cabergorine, which is a potent dopamine receptor agonist, was prescribed at a dose of 1 mg for the suppression of lactation, due to the high metabolic demands of lactation and breastfeeding. Bromocriptine was not administered for the treatment of PPCM because the available data were insufficient to recommend its routine use. Her hemodynamic parameters improved with these multidisciplinary treatments. Her heart failure gradually improved, allowing for the removal of IABP 9 days after the insertion and the discontinuation of inotropes 15 days after infusion.

Her hemodynamic state remained stable after weaning from inotrope therapy, and she was transferred to the ward with the following medications: 1.25 mg/day enalapril, 5 mg/day carvedilol, 20 mg/day furosemide, and 25 mg/day spironolactone. Pre-discharge laboratory tests, chest radiography, and transthoracic echocardiography showed significant improvements: CTR, 50%; LVDd/LVDs, 49/40 mm; and LVEF, 42%. Her plasma BNP level normalized to 10.2 pg/mL. During hospitalization, we excluded other. An endomyocardial biopsy performed one month after the onset of PPCM revealed no infiltrative disorders and showed that the interstitial fibrosis and interstitial edema were mild, without inflammatory cell infiltration, myocardial necrosis, or degeneration. We therefore diagnosed the patient as having PPCM. She was discharged 45 days after admission with an NYHA class I. Six months later, her BNP level decreased to 9.3 pg/mL, CTR decreased to 49%, LVDd/LVDs decreased to 44/29 mm, and LVEF improved to 53%.