Female patient, 13 years old, from Cajamarca (Peru's highlands) and from Lima, with no relevant pathological or surgical history.

She consulted in the emergency department due to diffuse and intermittent abdominal pain of 1 month evolution, which subsided with oral analgesics, associated with weight loss. One week prior to admission, the patient developed intermittent fever, nausea and vomiting after eating and a progressive increase in the intensity of abdominal pain.

On admission, the abdominal physical examination did not reveal air-bubble sounds; superficial palpation revealed pain that increased in the left hypochondrium, where the spleen was palpated 3 cm below the left costal margin. Deep palpation revealed pain that increased in the mesogastrium. Laboratory studies reported anemia with a hemoglobin value of 10.1 g/dL (VN: 12-16); neutrophil count of 7.85 x 103/uL (VN: 1.8-8), platelets of 371 x 103/uL (VN: 150-350), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 4,242 U/L (VN: 240-435) and a sedimentation rate of 35 mm/h (VN: 0-20). Serology for hepatitis B and C, HIV, syphilis and Koch bacillus (BK) in sputum and faeces was negative.

In the presence of suspected surgical acute abdomen, an abdominal tomography was performed, which showed two areas with intussusception, one at the ileo-ileal level and another at the mesenterio-ileal level, and a spleen of normal size for the age, but with the presence of a solid mass of 34 x 41 x 43 mm in size, with soft parts density, in addition to a hypodens mass of 30 x 42 x 77 mm in size, with probable ganglion conglomerate at the level of the splenic hilum.

Following the CT scan, laboratory tests were expanded and a B2 microglobulin value of 2.79 mg/L (normal range: 0.8-2.2) and a positive viral load for EBV of 227 copies/ml were observed. Tumour markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen and alpha-fetoprotein, as well as TORCH IgM serology (Toxoplasma, Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, Herpes) were negative; immunoglobulins remained within the appropriate ranges.

A percutaneous ultrasound-guided biopsy of the splenic mass was performed. The histopathological analysis revealed a lymphoid proliferation of medium-sized, monotonous cells with round nuclei, clumped chromatin, interspersed with histiocytes and staining bodies (so-called "starry sky" appearance). Immunohistochemical markers (BCL6+, CD10+, BCL2-, TdT-, CD30-, LMP1 (EBV)-, CD21-, Ki close to 100%, cMYC+, MUM1-, CD5-, CD3-) were analyzed and were consistent with the final diagnosis of Burkitt's lymphoma.

Follow-up tests: bone marrow biopsy and flow cytometry of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were negative for marrow and central nervous system (CNS) infiltration. However, cytospin analysis of CSF was positive for the presence of lymphoid neoplasm, which was classified as clinical stage IV by Murphy.

Before the beginning of systemic therapy, the patient presented a negative evolution related to the intussusception, for which an exploratory laparotomy was performed. During the procedure, an ileo-ileal intussusception was found 70 cm from the Treitz angle, with an invaginated area of 20 cm, in addition to multiple areas of thickening of the wall of thin loops, which in the context of the patient were attributed to infiltration by the lymphoma diagnosed by the biopsy of the tumor in the spleen. The intussusception was disinvaginated. In the postoperative period, total parenteral nutrition support was used and the antibiotic coverage was expanded to meropenem, vancomycin and caspofungin, due to persistence of fever and elevation of inflammatory parameters.

With clinical improvement, the patient initiated chemotherapy according to institutional protocol based on the BFM-NHL95 scheme for risk group R4 for detection of malignant neoplasia by cytomorphology of the cerebrospinal fluid. Ultrasound checks were performed to rule out the appearance of new foci of intussusception. After completing the first cycle of chemotherapy, no new foci of intussusception were detected by ultrasound; consequently, the patient tolerated oral diet, so total parenteral nutrition was suspended. Studies were performed to rule out CNS infections due to the appearance of post chemotherapy headaches, with negative viral loads. In addition, flow cytometry was repeated and was negative; while cytospin showed a positive result for lymphoid neoplasia.

A positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) was performed after her first cycle of treatment, which showed the disappearance of intussusception foci and the absence of hypermetabolic foci in intestinal walls, in the splenic lesion and at the CNS level. After 2 years of follow-up, the patient is asymptomatic, with a PET-CT negative for lymphoproliferative disease.
