A 3-year-old girl was referred to the neurogenetics clinic, National Research Center, Egypt because of the delayed milestones of development and unusual facies. She was the offspring of a non-consanguineous marriage with no similarly affected family members. The pregnancy and delivery histories were uneventful, however small head and dysmorphic facies were noted at birth. Delayed milestones and failure to gain weight were noted since early life. Seizures were developed at the age of 9 months as myoclonic and the focal seizures were fairly controlled on a combination of valproate and levetiracetam. Evaluation of the motor and mental developmental milestones was remarkably delayed; she could only sit supported, had impaired cognitive functions with obvious autistic features, had the inability to maintain holding objects, and didn’t acquire any speech skills. Her main anthropometric measurements revealed head circumference 40 cm (−6 SD), length 79 cm (−3.6 SD) and weight 7.200 kg (−3 SD). Clinical examination showed dysmorphic facies including, round face with full cheek, narrow forehead, thick bow shaped eyebrows, hypertelorism, long smooth philtrum, downturned corners of the mouth, low set ears, retro-micrognathia and short neck . She had bilateral simian creases, vascular markings on the palm, tapering fingers, and clitoromegaly on genital assessment. Neurological evaluation showed hypotonia with elicited reflexes. Table shows a comparison of the main clinical presentation, involving cytobands, size of 1q deletion, smallest region of overlap (SRO) in the previously reported patients with pure 1q43q44 submicroscopic deletion and our patient.
Electroencephalogram showed frontotemporal epileptogenic focus. CT brain displayed abnormal gyral pattern, hypogenesis of corpus callosum and bilateral deep Sylvian fissure . Echocardiogram, fundus examination, abdominal and renal ultrasonography revealed no abnormalities. Psychomotor assessment using Stanford Binet International Scale method showed profound retardation.
This study was carried out in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the National Research Centre Ethical Research Committee.. Informed consent was obtained from the parents for genetic testing and publication of this case report.