A 43-year-old, previously healthy Caucasian female presented to her general practitioner with a few-months history of left knee pain. She had also noticed a left-sided supraclavicular fossa (SCF) mass. She had no significant medical history, never smoked, with moderate alcohol intake. A maternal grandmother had endometrial cancer aged 65 years.
An ultrasound-guided core biopsy of the suspicious SCF mass was urgently arranged. Review by an expert soft tissue pathologist revealed grade 2 leiomyosarcoma, with immunohistochemistry positive for desmin, smooth muscle actin and h-caldesmon. CT and PET-CT imaging showed extensive metastatic disease, with no clear primary site. There were widespread cutaneous, subcutaneous, soft tissue, lung, liver, right adrenal and peritoneal metastases. A lytic lesion involving the left femoral head was identified as at risk for pathological fracture and a likely cause of the patient’s longstanding left knee pain. She initially underwent urgent prophylactic stabilisation of the left femur, followed by radiotherapy.
She commenced first-line palliative doxorubicin chemotherapy. The patient was noted to have a mild erythematous maculopapular rash on her face and upper chest in sun-exposed areas at her pre-treatment consultation. This developed several days following femoral surgery and persisted for a few weeks. No drug, environmental or infective triggers were identified. The rash was treated with topical hydrocortisone 1% and emollient cream (diprobase), and resolved during cycle one of doxorubicin with a sustained remission throughout chemotherapy. She did not report any muscle weakness or pain during this time. Six cycles of doxorubicin were well tolerated, with one episode of febrile neutropenia requiring a 25% dose reduction. Imaging assessment at the end of chemotherapy showed overall stable metastatic disease by RECIST 1.1 criteria , with a minor reduction in some metastatic deposits noted mid-treatment.
Two months later, the patient presented acutely unwell to her local hospital with a new-onset rash in a shawl-like distribution (upper chest, neck and arms), with flagellate erythema and associated periorbital oedema and proximal limb weakness. The patient denied breathing or swallowing difficulty. On examination periungual erythema and Gottron’s papules were noted, without visible dilated capillary nailfold loops. There was reduced proximal power in both upper and lower limb (3–4/5), but no neck or truncal weakness. Vital signs found she was tachycardic and febrile. Routine blood tests on admission showed c-reactive protein < 4 and mildly raised white cell count 11.4 (normal range 4–11 × 109L). Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was mildly raised at 61 (normal 10–49 U/L) with unremarkable renal function. Blood cultures grew Staphylococcus hominis and she was treated with intravenous antibiotics and appropriate medical management.
Rheumatology and dermatology review led to the diagnosis of dermatomyositis, likely paraneoplastic, in the context of known metastatic leiomyosarcoma. Investigation supporting this included; raised creatinine kinase (CK) and erythrocyte sediment rate at 695 (normal range 25–200 U/L) and 32 (normal range 0–27 mm/h) respectively. Autoantibody screen negative for ENA, dsDNA, anti-CCP, with normal complement levels and weakly positive ANA (1:160). Myositis antibody panel was positive for transcription intermediary factor-1 gamma (TIF1γ) antibodies alone, whilst anti-Jo1 and anti-Mi2 antibody negative. In addition to intramuscular metastatic disease, MRI femur showed mild increased signal within the muscles compatible with myositis. An echocardiogram confirmed normal cardiac function. Electromyography (EMG) found myopathic changes of moderate degree in lower and upper limbs, worse in the lower limbs with proximal predominance. The findings were in keeping with a diagnosis of proximal myopathy. Right chest punch biopsy histology was consistent with dermatomyositis. Muscle biopsy was not performed, given the potential risk of metastatic disease seeding.
Treatment was commenced with a weaning course of prednisolone (initial dose 40 mg daily) and topical clobetasol 0.05% with clinical improvement in both weakness and rash over several months. Diagnosis of paraneoplastic dermatomyositis triggered re-evaluation of the patient’s leiomyosarcoma with CT imaging, which showed multifocal progression. Second-line chemotherapy with trabectedin was commenced following recovery from the acute admission and once the dermatomyositis was controlled with steroid therapy. Systemic anti-cancer therapy was again associated with mild improvement in dermatomyositis symptoms.