We describe the case of a 63-year-old man, Caucasian, affected by non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy who did not drink alcohol, did not smoke tobacco, and did not have diabetes. He had an implantable cardioverter defibrillator implanted, in New York Heart Association (NYHA) IV class, and left bundle branch block (LBBB; QRS duration of 145 ms). He was referred for CRT-D upgrade, awaiting cardiac transplantation, despite optimal medical therapy: b-Blockade, loop-diuretic, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, K-sparing agent, and ivabradine. Standard clinical imaging protocol revealed a dilated left ventricle with an end-systolic volume (ESV) of 380 ml, an ejection fraction (EF) of 4.8% as measured by the modified Simpson’s method, and severe FMR, assessed by qualitative estimation with two-dimensional color flow Doppler approach, showing a very large central jet and reaching the posterior wall of the left atrium.

He underwent the implant of a CRT-D device with a quadripolar left ventricular (LV) lead placed in the posterolateral branch of the coronary sinus. After recording the right ventricle (RV)-to-LV electrical delay at each of the four LV rings, we chose the A1 unipolar vector for LV pacing (greatest electrical delay 80 ms).

At 13-day post-implant follow-up, he showed worsening heart failure (HF) symptoms and only A2 unipolar LV vector configuration, with interventricular (VV) interval of 0 ms, was suitable for simultaneous biventricular activation.

Echo-PIV was then used, during the acute study with contrast agent bubbles, to evaluate the orientation and relative magnitude of blood-induced intraventricular forces in correspondence of different pacing settings.

Without pacing stimulation (CRT OFF) the intraventricular flow was dominated by rotation without evident inflow–outflow dynamics. As a result the intraventricular forces were predominantly transverse and not aligned along the LV axis as quantified by the large value of their mean angle φ (φ = 55.6°, this angle ranges from 0°, when forces are aligned with the LV axis, to 90°). A first setting option (CRT ON, VV delay 0 ms) changed the orientation of intraventricular forces reducing the angle (φ = 45°), and increasing the delay (CRT ON, VV delay − 30 ms) improved the alignment reducing the angle (φ = 40.3°). Eventually, the sequential biventricular activation with delay − 50 ms provided the best alignment of intraventricular forces (φ = 38.8°).

No reduction of FMR by three-dimensional FVCD, during the same acute study with shutdown versus reactivation of device.

The data acquisition time, by three-chamber apical view, for each three-dimensional color Doppler data set was approximately 5 seconds, and it took less than 3 minutes to analyze the average regurgitation volume, with automated anatomy detection of the LV endocardial border, mitral annulus (MA), LV outflow (LVOT), and placement of three-dimensional hemispheric flow sampling planes in the MA and LVOT. The software of three-dimensional FVCD computed the flow volumes as the area under the curve of both the MA and LVOT flow in three cardiac cycles, and FMR volume was calculated by subtracting LVOT stroke volume from MA stroke volume.

Results at 6-month follow-up

Our patient showed an improvement of NYHA class (III versus IV) and LV EF (26.6% versus 4.8%). Significant reduction of ESV (288 ml versus 380 ml) and persistent improvement of diastolic function were obtained. The regularized function is noticeable. At follow-up, a significant reduction of FMR (mean value regurgitant volume, 42.2 ml versus 65.3 ml) was estimated.

The intraventricular forces estimated by echo-PIV were still partially dominated by the longitudinal path of pressure gradient with φ = 43.1°.