A 17-year-old patient presented to the emergency department in November 2019 following the sudden onset of low back pain when he stood up. His main medical history included bilateral hearing loss since 2017, chronic gastritis with Helicobacter pylori treated with antibiotics in February 2019, and recent episodes of “red urine”. There was no traumatic background and the pain was inflammatory, without irradiation to the lower limbs. On clinical examination, there was a significant bilateral paravertebral contracture, without pain triggered by palpation of the spinal nerves. The pain was relieved only by analgesics of level 3.
The biochemical profile showed a CRP initially at 68 mg/L, increasing to 202 mg/L, with a hyperleucocytosis of neutrophils (14 G/L), as well as an increase in CPK to 66 336 IU/L (N < 192 IU/L). The infectious and autoimmune profiles, including the DOT myositis, were negative. In view of the inflammatory and hyperalgesic nature of the lower back pain, a spinal MRI was performed, showing a myofasciitis necrotizing affecting the erector spinae, iliocostalis lumborum, longissimus thoracis, transverse spinae and quadratus lumborum bilaterally extended in relation to L1 to S3. A biopsy of the paraspinal muscles showed complete myocyte necrosis, associated with a recent infarction, without further specificity. After rest, the patient described a clear improvement in his lower back pain, but the CPK remained elevated, between 1116 and 1752 IU/L, on the control biological tests the following months. The control MRI at 3 months found areas of sequellae necrosis at the level of the erector spinae muscles in particular. When reviewing the patient's history, there were difficulties in playing sports since childhood, in a context of significant muscular fatigue. There was no phenomenon of second breath. The etiological profile was then completed with a non-ischemic forearm stress test that did not find an elevation of lactate acidemia, at 0.70 mmol/L before a stress and a maximum of 1.18 mmol/L after a stress. In view of this result suggestive of GSD 5, a molecular study of the PYGM gene showed the presence of two variants in a heterozygous state: the c.1963G>A (p.Glu655Lys) class 5 variant that has already been described in the literature and whose various prediction tools are in favour of its pathogenicity, and the c.2178-1G>A class 4 variant that has never been described but that affects a consensus splicing site and is very likely pathogenic. These results were in favour of the diagnosis of GSD 5. After three years of follow-up, the patient did not present a new access of lower back pain but remained limited to practising a sport.
