A 62-year-old male with a history of 3 vessel coronary disease and prior coronary artery surgery was admitted with an inferior STEMI and cardiogenic shock, 6 hours after the onset of symptoms. Twelve months earlier, the patient had undergone a failed attempt of anterograde CTO RCA PCI, followed by an arterial bypass graft placement using a LITA graft to the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and a RITA graft sequentially to the obtuse marginal branch of the left circumflex and the RCA arteries.

The patient was diagnosed with an acute thrombotic occlusion of the RITA graft at its ostium and a patent LITA to the LAD artery. The posterior-descending artery (PDA) was also occluded. The patient was in refractory cardiogenic shock and was placed on ECMO. Concerns were raised that antegrade interventions through the RITA graft could result in distal thrombus embolization and acute revascularization was attempted using an antegrade approach from the native LCx into the RITA graft segment to the PDA and then a retrograde approach through the native RCA CTO.

The procedure was successful after the retrograde crossing of the remaining RITA graft (between the obtuse marginal and the PDA), retrograde dissection re-entry technique, externalization, rotational atherectomy of the lesion, and implantation of 3 drug-eluting stents.

The clinical evolution of the patient was favorable after the intervention and at 12 months follow-up.

Past Medical History
The patient had a history of diabetes, dyslipidemia, mild renal insufficiency and left ventricular systolic dysfunction with a LVEF of 45%.

Acute Presentation
The patient presented to the emergency department in cardiogenic shock with a blood pressure of 77/50 mm Hg and a pulse rate of 102 beats per minute. The patient was in a poor overall condition, the skin was pale, cool and diaphoretic.

An initial electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed 2 mm ST elevations in the inferior leads and ST segment depression in leads V1-2. These findings are consistent with inferior and posterior injury.

An echocardiogram obtained on initial presentation documented severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction with limited basal inferior akinesia, severe hypokinesia in the anterior and inferolateral wall, and an LVEF of 20%. There was evidence of moderate mitral regurgitation, right ventricular dilatation, and systolic dysfunction.

Urgent coronary angiography was performed and the patient was started on ECMO immediately because of cardiogenic shock status despite pharmacological support. An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was not preferred as a first choice regarding the stage D cardiogenic shock and the need for optimal perfusion in this acute coronary syndrome. A potential higher risk of mortality in acute settings could be related to the limited hemodynamic benefit of the IABP in comparison to other mechanical devices.7–9

The patient was documented to have a CTO of the RCA and an occluded proximal LAD after the origin of the first diagonal branch. The LITA graft to the LAD was patent, and there was an acute ostial occlusion of the RITA graft. The ostial circumflex showed 80% lesion and the segment of the RITA graft between the left circumflex and the PDA artery was widely patent but with an occlusion in the native PDA vessel related probably to thrombotic embolization.


Management
Flow to the distal PDA and the posterolateral artery (PL) was absent and attempts were made to establish the reperfusion of these vessels.

The RCA was chronically occluded and revascularization was attempted by bilateral sheathless distal radial artery access with 7Fr guiding catheters. Knowing that the anterograde true to true lumen approach had previously failed we performed an anterograde knuckle with Fielder XTR (Asahi Intecc, Japan) supported by 7Fr TrapLiner (Teleflex Medical Incorporated, US) and Corsair Pro 135cm (Asahi Intecc, Japan). The retrograde Sion (Asahi Intecc, Japan) wire supported by a Corsair Pro 150 cm microcatheter was able to pass through the remaining anastomosis between the RITA and the obtuse marginal to the distal anastomosis with the PDA. The guideliner reverse CART was successful after the retrograde Gaia 3 wire crossed and the externalization was made using an RG3 wire (Asahi Intecc, Japan).

Due to the severity and the extension of calcium the balloon failed to open and we performed a rotational atherectomy after crossing the CTO with an anterograde microcatheter on the RG3 and exchanging it with an extra support Rota Wire.


The procedure was successful after implantation of 3 drug-eluting stents. The first stent was placed from the distal RCA to PDA using a provisional technique. The second stent was placed on the mid part of the RCA by overlapping with the first one and the third one on the proximal part of the RCA. The intervention was completed within 2 hours and 40 minutes.

Follow-Up
After 12 months of clinical follow-up the patient had mild NYHA II (New York Heart Association) dyspnea without angina.

The echocardiography revealed an improvement of ventricular function (40% EF).