A 54-year-old man, heavy smoker without underlying disease, was admitted to the local hospital due to progressive weakness of the lower extremities for 1 month. He had no history any injury. Three months earlier, he experienced low back pain radiating to both legs, predominantly affecting the left side. Furthermore, difficulty in urination and constipation were observed 1 week before admission. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbosacral and thoracic spine revealed abnormal hyperintense T2 signal, representing spinal cord congestion, extending from the conus medullaris to the level of T7. There was abnormal tortuous and dilated flow void, running from the level of L5 to T12 along anterior surface of the spinal cord . A preliminary diagnosis was SDAVF. The patient was transferred to our institute and admitted for further investigation. The neurological examination revealed the evidence of spastic paraparesis (muscle strength 4/5), the lack of pinprick sensation below L2 level, hyperreflexia, and presence of Babinski sign in the lower extremities.
Spinal angiography demonstrated the fistula at the level of L2 below the conus medullaris, which is supplied by the PSA originating from the left L1 segmental artery with cranial drainage through the paralleling dilated vein into perimedullary vein. Without selective catheterization into both internal iliac arteries, lower aorta and bilateral common iliac arteries angiography reveals no more supply to the fistula . The ASA arose from the left T6 intercostal artery without supplying to the fistula. Initially, we interpreted that this fistula was filum terminale AVF (FTAVF) which is fed by the ASA supplying from the PSA via the vasa corona. Due to small and long distance of the feeder, the patient underwent surgical treatment. On prone position, total laminectomy of L2 and partial laminectomy of L3 were carried out. After durotomy, the filum terminale (FT) was identified and no fistula or abnormal vessels on it. The fistula is located on the left cauda equina nerve root supplied by the proximal radicular artery with cranial drainage through the enlarged radicular vein. Another enlarged arterialized radicular vein running parallel to another cauda equina nerve root is observed with unknown origin . To avoid nerve root injury by heat, the dilated proximal draining vein near the fistula on the cauda equina nerve root was clipped with small silver clips without using bipolar coagulation. Another radicular vein was left for further investigation. After the operation, the patient showed mild improvement of his symptoms. He could walk with the aid of a walker. He was discharged home 7 days later due to his requesting to do some personal issues at home.
Follow-up MRI and contrast-enhanced MR angiography (MRA) of the thoracolumbar spine, obtained 3 weeks after the operation, revealed mild regression of spinal cord congestion, and remaining of intradural flow void from L5 to L2. Another SDAVF was found at left S1 neural foramen supplied by the left lateral sacral artery (LSA) originating from the left internal iliac artery with venous drainage into perimedullary veins through the dilated and tortuous radicular vein, probably corresponding with another dilated arterialized radicular vein found during the operation [ and ]. Comparing between preoperative the left L1 segmental artery angiography and postoperative contrast-enhanced MRA, there was the same venous drainage pattern, representing sharing the common medullary venous channel . Spinal angiography and probable embolization in the same setting were scheduled for another week. Few days before hospitalization for further treatment, the patient developed loss of consciousness at home and was sent to the emergency department of the local hospital and intubated promptly. Few minutes later, the patient had a cardiac arrest. Immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed unsuccessfully. Without an autopsy, the cause of death was still unknown.