A 71-year-old woman was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus at 56 years of age. She had a history of hyperthyroidism due to Basedow disease when she was 52 years of age. After three years of anti-thyroid therapy, her hyperthyroidism went into remission. She received oral drugs after being diagnosed with diabetes mellitus at 56 years of age.
Seven months later, blood examination revealed an elevated level of anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody (869 U/ml). She then received insulin injection therapy for type 1 diabetes mellitus. Her glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level was approximately 8%, and she had no history of ketosis or ketoacidosis.
She was treated with insulin glulisine (13 units/day, pre-breakfast 4 units, pre-lunch 4 units, pre-dinner 5 units), insulin degludec (pre-dinner 3 units), and a SGLT-2 inhibitor, ipragliflozin (25 mg/day). Her fasting blood glucose levels in the morning before COVID-19 vaccination ranged from 93 to 169 mg/dl. Her HbA1c levels at approximately three months and one month before admission were 8.3% and 8.1%, respectively. She received the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 (BNT162b2) vaccine (Pfizer, Inc; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania) three days prior to admission. Immediately after COVID-19 vaccination, she developed nausea and fatigue, and her water and dietary intake decreased. From the next day, the patient showed impaired consciousness, which made it impossible for her to inject insulin or take SGLT-2 inhibitor. Her symptoms worsened, and she was taken to the emergency room of Tokyo Medical University Hachioji Medical Center, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan.
On arrival, she had tachycardia and tachypnea, and her Glasgow Coma Scale was 12 (E3V4M5). A laboratory evaluation showed severe acidosis, ketonuria, ketonemia . Chest X-ray, electrocardiography, abdominal computed tomography, and urinary sediments showed no abnormalities. Thus, an infectious disease was unlikely. The patient was diagnosed with ketoacidosis. Immediately after admission, continuous intravenous insulin, Ringer’s solution, and glucose infusion were initiated in the intensive care unit.
With the above combined treatment, her ketoacidosis gradually improved . On admission, the plasma glucose, HbA1c, and glycated albumin levels were 944 mg/dL, 8.0%, and 27.7%, respectively. She tested positive for anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody, but was negative for insulinoma associated antigen-2 antibody and insulin autoantibody . Serum C-peptide and urinary C-peptide were undetectable. After her ketoacidosis improved, intensive insulin therapy without SGLT-2 inhibitor was resumed. Serum C-peptide was also below the limit of detection in a glucagon load test . When the patient was discharged, she was treated with insulin glulisine (17 units/day, pre-breakfast 7 units, pre-lunch 6 units, pre-dinner 4 units) and insulin degludec (pre-dinner 4 units).
The patient was a 52-year-old woman who received insulin infusion therapy with multiple daily injections after being diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus at 47 years of age. At the time of the diagnosis, she was admitted to another facility due to diabetic ketosis. She noticed thirst and >10 kg body weight loss in comparison to 6 months before her admission. A blood examination showed an elevated HbA1c level (15.5%), an elevated anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody level (1230 U/ml), and an elevated islet antigen 2 antibody level (or*insulinoma-associated protein-2 antibody) (>41 U/mL). The urinary c-peptide level (45 µg/day) indicated that her insulin secretory capacity remained. She was diagnosed with latent autoimmune diabetes in adults and insulin treatment was continued.
She was treated by a family doctor with insulin aspart (25 units/day, pre-breakfast 11 units, pre-lunch 8 units, pre-dinner 6 units) and insulin degludec (before sleeping 12 units). However, the transition of her HbA1c level was poor (10-11%). Her fasting blood glucose levels in the morning before COVID-19 vaccination ranged from 106 to 262 mg/dl. She received her second vaccination the day before admission. For both vaccinations, she received the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 (BNT162b2) vaccine (Pfizer, Inc; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania). She had a drinking habit and consumed approximately 20 g of alcohol on the night before vaccination.
Immediately after the second COVID-19 vaccination, she had symptoms of nausea, palpitation and respiratory distress. Her symptoms worsened, she could not inject insulin or eat from noon on that day. The following day she was taken to the emergency room of Tokyo Medical University Hachioji Medical Center, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan.
On arrival, she had tachycardia and tachypnea, but her consciousness was clear (E4V5M6). A laboratory evaluation showed severe acidosis, ketonuria, and ketonemia . The patient was diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis. Immediately after admission, continuous intravenous insulin, Ringer's solution, and glucose infusion were initiated in the intensive care unit. With these combined treatments, her ketoacidosis gradually improved . On admission, her plasma glucose and HbA1c values were 494 mg/dL and 11.6%, respectively . Serum C-peptide and the urinary C-peptide were slightly detected. Her thyroid hormone levels were normal. After her ketoacidosis improved, intensive insulin therapy was resumed.
When the patient was discharged, she was treated with insulin glulisine (27 units/day, pre-breakfast 11 units, pre-lunch 8 units, pre-dinner 8 units) and insulin degludec (before sleeping 13 units).