In April 2006, a 75-year old man who had been successfully treated for colon cancer 13 years ago, thyroid cancer 12 years ago, and was receiving endocrine therapy for prostate cancer from last year was transferred to our hospital for a fracture of his left proximal femur. The chest radiograph showed a solid mass in the hilum of left lung, and the thallium scintigram demonstrated abnormal uptake at the left proximal thigh and the hilum of left lung. In addition, the screening of tumor markers revealed extremely high level of CEA (1250 ng/ml), slightly high level of NSE (16.6 ng/ml) and SCC (2.2 ng/ml), and low level of thyroglobulin (0.3 ng/ml) and PSA (0.009 ng/ml). Thus the fracture was considered to be a bone metastasis from his fourth primary pulmonary cancer. Physical examination showed no hyperpigmentation of his all body surface. Laboratory investigation revealed serum sodium of 134 mmol/l, potassium 4.7 mmol/l, and plasma glucose 110 mg/dl, with normal renal and liver function.
He uneventfully underwent local excision and proximal femur replacement with a mega-prosthesis under general anesthesia. The bone tumor was pathologically diagnosed to be moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Later, the immunohistochemical examination revealed that cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) were distinctly detected but cytokeratin 20 (CK20) never expressed. Recently, Chhieng et al. described that an adenocarcinoma was likely a primary lung tumor when it was of the CK7 positive/CK20 negative and TTF-1 positive phenotype . Thus, the bone tumor was finally diagnosed to be a metastatic lung cancer.
The estimated intraoperative blood loss was 400 ml. The patient was extubated as usual, but the level of awakening was very poor. Postoperative laboratory examination demonstrated anemia and severe hyponatremia (126 mmol/l), but showed normokalemia (4.3 mmol/l) and normoglycemia (92 mg/dl). Despite the transfusion of blood and the administration of normal saline, the patient subsequently became hypotensive (SBP 60–70 mmHg), tachycardic, hypoxic, febrile (40.5°C) and confused. Re-intubation was required for respiratory distress. A chest radiograph showed diffuse pulmonary edema. We initially suspected this condition of acute pulmonary emboli. Immediately, the patient underwent CT examination from head to abdomen. Enhanced chest CT revealed a left hilar mass suggesting a primary lung cancer but no pulmonary embolus. A ventilation/perfusion scan performed on the next day showed no perfusion defect and confirmed definitely no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Concomitant brain and abdominal CT scan also demonstrated a low density area in the parietal lobe of the left brain and massively enlarged bilateral adrenal glands consistent with metastases . After the CT evaluation, we finally diagnosed adrenal crisis due to extensive destruction of adrenal tissue caused by metastases. Blood was drawn at 8:00 on the first postoperative day for serum cortisol levels that were found to be 2.0 μg/dl on the third postoperative day. Betamethasone (2 mg) was given to the patient at first, and switched to hydrocortisone, 100 mg administered intravenously every 8 hours. Dramatic improvement occurred in the subsequent hours following administration of hydrocortisone. The fever and hypotension promptly subsided and hyponatremia instantly disappeared. The patient recovered his consciousness and could be successfully extubated. On postoperative day 3, he was started on early remobilization by physical therapy. On postoperative day 7, the patient could sit down on the edge of a bed without assistance, followed by transfer exercise to a wheelchair. Although he could not undergo a CT-guided biopsy of the adrenal gland due to the flat refusal of his family, the following CT examination on postoperative day 35 demonstrated that bilateral adrenal glands neither decreased in size nor showed atrophic change, suggesting that adrenal enlargement was mainly caused by metastasis rather than hemorrhagic complication. The patient was transferred to the related hospital for further rehabilitation on postoperative day 39.