We report the case of a 46-year-old female non-smoker without medical history of interest, who had been working in a cosmetics packaging company for 20 years. She had undergone daily exposure to several substances including a red azo dye known as Sudan red.
Over the past 15 years, the patient had experienced dyspnea, dry cough, occasional wheezing, facial edema, rhinitis and conjunctivitis. These symptoms had worsened in the last 3 years; she had frequently required emergency-room assistance for acute episodes of bronchospasm and had been admitted to hospital on four times. The patient’s symptoms responded to inhaled long acting beta-2 agonist and inhaled corticosteroids, and were clearly work-related since they improved on weekends, during vacations, and after she finally left her job.
Physical examination and chest radiograph were normal. Blood tests showed eosinophilia (500 cells/mm3) and increased total serum IgE (846 KU/L). Lung function study revealed an obstructive ventilatory pattern with a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 3.14 L (91%), a forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 2.12 L (76%) and FEV1/FVC of 67%. Methacholine challenge test was positive, with a PC20 of 0.85 mg/mL and a fractional exhaled nitric oxide test (FENO) of 47.2 ppb.
With a suspected diagnosis of OA, the patient underwent a specific inhalation challenge (SIC) with the azoic dye, in accordance with the recommendations in the European Respiratory Society guidelines . The patient was exposed to a mixture of 2 g of “Sudan Red” and 100 g of lactose powder, tipped from one tray to another 30 cm away from her face for 10 min; she continued treatment with inhaled long acting beta-2 agonist and inhaled corticosteroids due to the persistence of bronchospasm. During the procedure, she suffered dyspnea and cough, and experienced a dual positive response with a fall in FEV1 of 22% in the first 20 min and another of 33% approximately 10 h after the exposure. No significant changes in FEV1 were observed in response to a control challenge of lactose powder alone conducted on a separate day .
Induced sputum samples were obtained previously and in the 24 h following the procedure, with a rise in the percentage of eosinophils from 10 to 65%. Methacholine and FENO tests did not present significant variations from the results obtained prior to the SIC. The diagnosis of OA due to Sudan Red was established, and the patient was advised to avoid the causal agent.