A 64-year old woman presented with neurogenic claudication and a maximum walking distance of 50 m. She described a radiating pain from the gluteal region to the lateral legs on both sides with a predominance for the left side, with a symptom onset approximately 1 year ago. Physical examination revealed intact motor function and decreased deep tendon reflexes on the left side. Medical history consisted of a discectomy L5/S1 on the right side 13 years ago. MRI revealed a lumbar spinal stenosis at the level of L4/5 . Patient underwent a standard microsurgical decompression L4/5 on the left side, including an over the top undercutting to the right side. During surgery, no dural tear was noted. On the first postoperative day she was mobilised and described significant improvement of the preoperative pain.
Two days later, during a turning movement in bed, she experienced a sudden sciatica radiating in her left leg. The intense pain was not responding to any analgesics and was only tolerated in a standing position leaning on the right leg. After frustrating attempts to stay in the horizontal position despite intravenous opioid administration, she was put under general anaesthesia for an MRI scan. The imaging revealed no hematoma or significant intraspinal compression. However, an unclear facet joint effusion L4/5 on the left side was apparent, which was not present preoperatively . The decision for exploratory revision surgery was therefore manly based on her clinical presentation as at this point the meaning of this effusion was unclear. In early stages of revision surgery cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage was noted and after careful dissection, a nerve root herniation through a small lateral dural tear with entrapment in the facet joint gap was discovered . The herniated root was repositioned and the dural defect was repaired using stitches in a watertight fashion and a sealant matrix. Postoperatively the patient’s symptoms disappeared, she was mobilised after 2 days using a lumbar brace and the further clinical course was uneventful. As she did not develop any further clinical signs of potential segmental instability, fusion surgery was not deemed necessary.