A 70-year-old Japanese man with melena that began five days before admission was admitted to our hospital. He complained of abdominal discomfort and epigastralgia. Five years before, he had undergone a right upper lobectomy for lung cancer (T1b N0 M0 Stage IA). Physical examination revealed no abnormal findings associated with the abdomen except a surgical scar on the right side of his chest. Evaluation of laboratory data on admission revealed that his hemoglobin level was 7.0 g/dL and hematocrit value was 23.1%. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a distinctly protruding lesion (diameter: 5 cm) at the lesser curvature of the middle third of the gastric body . The surface of the tumor bled easily on contact with the endoscope. Microscopic examination of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained biopsy specimens of the lesion revealed sheets of spindle cells. Immunohistochemical studies showed that the tumor cells were positive for S-100 and negative for c-kit, CD34, and smooth muscle actin. The MIB-1 index was 48.5%. Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a gastric malignant schwannoma. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a thickened posterior wall of the gastric body . There was no evidence of lymph node swelling surrounding the stomach or metastatic liver tumors.
He underwent a distal gastrectomy with regional lymph node dissection. Macroscopically, the elevated lesion was approximately 6 × 5 cm in diameter and located at the lesser curvature of the gastric body . The covering mucosa was ulcerated. The tumor was located mainly in the proper muscle layer. There was no lymph node involvement and the surgical margin was negative for tumor cells. Microscopic examination of the resected and H&E-stained specimens showed a spindle cell neoplasm arranged in a palisade manner that was consistent with a schwannoma . Mitosis was scattered with 10 mitoses per 50 high-power fields. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein and negative for c-kit and smooth muscle actin . These histopathological and immunohistochemical findings are consistent with a gastric malignant schwannoma.
His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged from our hospital on day 12 after surgery. However, abdominal CT performed three months after surgery revealed multiple liver metastases and ascites .. He died five months after surgery without undergoing any additional treatment.