A 29-year-old lady was diagnosed with metastatic NPC with cervical nodal, lung and bone metastases in December 2014. Her disease progressed despite multiple lines of chemotherapy including gemcitabine and cisplatin (3 cycles from December 2014 to March 2015)cisplatin plus 5-fluorouracil (1 cycle in April 2015) which was changed to docetaxel plus cisplatin because of 5-fluorouracil allergy (3 cycles from April 2015 to June 2015), gemcitabine and carboplatin (6 cycles from November 2015 to March 2016) capecitabine (6 cycles from April 2016 to August 2016), and metronomic cyclophosphamide (from August 2016 to September 2016). Radical chemoradiation with cisplatin was given to her progressive neck nodes in July 2015. Her lung metastases later further progressed resulting in mild dyspnea and her plasma Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) rose from 4919 to 119,125 copies/ml . Pembrolizumab, an anti-PD-1 inhibitor was considered owing to very limited further treatment options. Her archived neck lymph node specimens sent for PD-L1 expression with immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor proportion score was 100 and the combined positive score was 101, indicating that a promising response to ICI was expected. She denied any past medical history of tuberculosis. She then received pembrolizumab at 2 mg/kg every three weeks since September 2016. Her dyspnea and lung metastases improved and reduced in number dramatically after only two cycles of pembrolizumab, accompanied by a slump of EBV DNA to 83 copies/ml . She experienced mild irAEs with hypocortisolism and hypothyroidism which were effectively managed with hormone replacement therapy. In May 2018, she presented with a sudden onset of severe, colicky and localized right lower abdominal pain, projectile vomiting and bloody diarrhea with mucus, and persistent fever (temperature > 38.6 degrees Celsius). Initially immune-related enteritis/colitis was suspected and pembrolizumab was suspended. Positron emission tomography with integrated computed tomography (PET-CT) of the abdomen showed terminal ileitis with multiple enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes Colonoscopy was performed and the inflamed terminal ileum was biopsied, which exhibited multiple caseating granulomas with Langerhan cells, compatible with tuberculous ileitis (microscopic images captured by Nikon model DS-FI3 attached to Nikon Eclipse Ni microscope viewed by Application DS-L4 Viewer Software Ver1.2.0) . Otherwise, the pathology did not show any features of inflammatory bowel disease or immune-related enteritis. Though Ziehl–Neelsen stain did not identify any acid-fast bacilli, polymerase chain reaction test for TB of the ileal biopsy and interferon gamma release assay (IGRA) with QuantiFERON TB Gold Plus were both strongly positive. She immediately received anti-TB medication including rifampicin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide and isoniazid for 1 year following our microbiologist’s suggestion. Her terminal ileitis and the enlarged mesenteric lymphadenitis resolved in the follow-up PET-CT scan 9 months later. Colonoscopy performed 15 months after the last one confirmed complete resolution of her ileitis .
However, her lung metastases worsened again 7 months after anti-TB treatment , concurrent with an elevated plasma EBV DNA of 2826 copies/ml following pembrolizumab interruption. In light of her current progressive metastases and the prior extraordinary response to pembrolizumab, she was re-challenged with pembrolizumab in December 2018 together with her anti-TB treatment. PET-CT scan 5 months later showed promising tumour shrinkage . She is still receiving pembrolizumab with no evidence of TB relapse or other irAE.