A 62-year-old male with several risk factors (hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, and smoking) complained of occasional chest discomfort for a few months. Finally, he was referred to the emergency department for evaluation of severe retrosternal pain accompanied with shortness of breath. His physical examination was unremarkable (blood pressure 149/99 Hg, heart rate 69/min, saturation of arterial blood without added oxygen was 97%), but electrocardiogram revealed pronounced ST-segment elevations in anterior leads .
He was immediately taken to catheterization laboratory. Angiography suggested a diffuse CAD; surprisingly, the left anterior descending artery (LAD)—a presumed culprit—showed only a moderate obstruction of the mid-vessel with well-preserved blood flow (, , ). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) was performed to address disparities between electrocardiographic and angiographic findings. The impression of diffuse CAD was confirmed since no ‘healthy’ arterial structure was seen within the examined LAD ; indeed, the intimal thickness throughout the vessel exceeded 600 µm. The massive plaque burden comprised mostly fibrous plaques. The culprit lesion with a minimal diameter 1.77 mm, minimal luminal area 2.46 mm2, per cent diameter stenosis 44%, and per cent area stenosis 66% appeared in the mid-LAD. Importantly, the hallmark of an unstable lesion such as a thin-cap fibroatheroma, plaque rupture, and thrombus was clearly seen .
Having recognized the high-risk features of the culprit, a decision was made to proceed with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and a 2.75 × 22 mm drug-eluting stent was placed across the lesion. Stent apposition was considered adequate, minor malapposition was corrected with a larger non-compliant balloon, no edge dissections were observed, and the blood flow remained normal.
The high-sensitivity troponin T peaked the same day at 27 ng [upper limit of normal (ULN), 14 ng/L), Q-waves did not develop, and myocardial contractility seemed unaffected (ejection fraction, 57%). The hospital course was uncomplicated, and he was discharged on daily doses of aspirin 100 mg, ticagrelor 180 mg, nebivolol 2.5 mg, perindopril 2 mg, and rosuvastatin 20 mg.
The patient resumed his previous activities, took medication regularly, and the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol decreased to 1.4 mmol/L. However, the chest discomfort persisted while riding his bicycle. Typical symptoms were provoked at high exercise workload (13.5 metabolic equivalents) with ST-segment depressions (0.35 mV) in lateral precordial leads.
He was readmitted to the hospital for invasive coronary evaluation. On angiography, the stented segment remained patent and there was no progression at other coronary sites. However, fractional flow reserve (FFR) after 200 µg intracoronary adenosine was impaired in LAD [0.72, lower limit of normal (LLN), 0.80] as compared with the left circumflex artery (0.96). Moreover, the resting full-cycle ratio (RFR) was decreased to 0.82 (LLN, 0.90); the pullback from the distal LAD showed a continuous gradient without a step-up at the stent level . The procedure was terminated without further intervention.
The patient was instructed to pursue his physical activities and carry on with his previous medications along with ranolazine 325 mg b.i.d. and trimetazidine 35 mg b.i.d. Three months later, his clinical condition remained stable.