We present the case of a 28-year-old Hispanic female born with severe Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve. She was initially palliated with right ventricular plication, tricuspid valve repair, and atrial septal defect closure at 5 years of age. She subsequently underwent placement of a 25 mm Hancock™ valve in the tricuspid position and creation of a superior cavopulmonary anastomosis. She developed a high-grade heart block for which an epicardial dual-chamber pacemaker was placed, also at 5 years of age. There was no history of atrial arrhythmia. Her surgical intervention culminated in tricuspid valve removal with patch occlusion of the right ventricle and a fenestrated extracardiac Fontan at 12 years of age. Due to hypoxia, her fenestration was occluded at 25 years of age with a 6 mm Amplatzer™ Septal Occluder via cardiac catheterization, with resulting improvement in oxygen saturations by ∼15% .
The patient presented to an outside emergency department with 5 days of chest pain, progressive dyspnoea, and fatigue. On the day of presentation, she had become short of breath with minimal exertion. She denied recent illnesses or travel. The patient was hypoxic on arrival at the outside facility with an oxygen saturation of 78%, which improved to 88% on 4 L of oxygen by nasal cannulation. On physical exam, she was tachypnoeic but comfortable appearing without accessory muscle use. She had a well-healed median sternotomy scar. Pulmonary auscultation demonstrates clear lung fields with good airflow. Her cardiac exam was notable for a single S1 and S2, and non-pulsatile jugular venous distension consistent with her known Fontan physiology. The remainder of her exam was benign. An electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus tachycardia at a rate of 117 b.p.m. and a right bundle branch block that was pre-existing . Her laboratory evaluation demonstrated a haemoglobin of 14.8 g/dL (normal range, 11.5–16.0), haematocrit of 45.3% (37–47), and platelets of 203 K/μL (130–400). There was no evidence of infectious processes. Her international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.15 (≤1). Brain natriuretic peptide and troponin were not elevated. A helical chest computed tomographic angiography (CTA) was obtained and interpreted as showing a submassive pulmonary embolism (PE) with no contrast filling the proximal branch pulmonary arteries.
Her non-cardiac history included hypothyroidism and polycystic ovarian syndrome, for which she took levothyroxine and metformin, respectively. She also had a history of COVID-19 infection, 11 months prior to her presentation, which did not require treatment. The patient had a history of miscarriages with unknown aetiology. She was on rivaroxaban, a direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) for chronic thromboprophylaxis in the setting of her Fontan physiology. She had recently become pregnant but unfortunately experienced another miscarriage; in this setting, she had discontinued and not reinitiated her anticoagulation.
The differential diagnosis for hypoxia in a patient with a Fontan includes the presence of a Fontan fenestration, venovenous collateral vessels, pulmonary arteriovenous malformations, PE, acute pulmonary processes such as infection, and anaemia.
The patient was haemodynamically stable and was started on an infusion of unfractionated heparin and transferred to our facility for further management. On exam, she was well-appearing and remained short of breath with hypoxia, though she was able to speak in full sentences. Her lungs were clear bilaterally. Her cardiac examination demonstrated a regular rate and rhythm, a single S1 and single S2, and no murmurs or gallop. Her capillary refill was <3 s, and she had no oedema. A D-dimer was obtained and was elevated at 8.48 μg/mL fibrinogen equvalent units (FEU). We reviewed the CTA . She underwent cardiac catheterization to better elucidate the cause of her shortness of breath and desaturation. Her Fontan pressure was noted to be elevated at 21 mmHg (previously 14 mmHg 2 years prior). Angiography demonstrated a large thrombus in the right lower pulmonary artery branch, with additional thrombi in the subsegmental branches ( and ). The proximal right pulmonary artery and the entire left pulmonary artery were free of thrombi.
Following confirmation of the right lower pulmonary artery emboli in the setting of elevated Fontan pressures and significant symptomatic hypoxia, it was decided that the patient would benefit from embolectomy. Using the transcatheter Penumbra Indigo™ Aspiration System, the larger right lower pulmonary artery branch segment and three additional subsegmental branches were addressed. A significant clot was removed , and post-aspiration angiography demonstrated resolution of the filling defect ( and ).
The patient tolerated the procedure well. Following the procedure, she was restarted on rivaroxaban and her heparin drip was discontinued. She was weaned off supplemental oxygen and discharged home 2 days post-procedure with an oxygen saturation of 92% on room air.
The patient remains well in follow-up. An outpatient thrombophilia workup was obtained and was negative for antiphospholipid syndrome, factor V Leiden, rheumatologic pathology, or other known causes. Given her Fontan physiology and PE, she was instructed to continue life-long anticoagulation and has remained free of further thrombo-embolic events since admission. She continues to be followed by adult congenital cardiology. In follow-up, at 1 year after the event, she has remained well. She remained on full-dose anticoagulation, which has been well tolerated without bleeding complications or recurrent thrombo-embolic events.