A 21-year-old woman presented to the allergology clinic because of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and itching of the skin each time after she ingested a chicken egg; symptoms had been present for 1 year. She also reported that two months before her visit there was an episode when 10 min after eating a raw chicken egg (in steak tartare) she started to experience severe abdominal pain, nausea, and severe itching of the skin all over her body; and she noticed hives with itchy wheals on her abdomen, chest, and lower limbs accompanied by facial redness as well as feeling of weakness and anxiety. The patient provoked vomiting and took an antihistamine drug in the form of a tablet, the name of which she could not remember. Within an hour, the symptoms resolved completely. Since then, the patient has eliminated chicken eggs from her diet. Her history revealed that she is a second-year psychology student, has an active lifestyle, practices yoga, does not use stimulants, and is interested in healthy nutrition. There is no history of allergic disease in the patient’s family. The patient had no history of chronic diseases and did not take any medications chronically. She had a history of diarrhea and spitting in infancy; at the age of 3 months she was diagnosed with cow's milk protein allergy, and thus was given milk replacer with a high degree of protein hydrolysis up to the age of 12 months. Currently, the patient fully tolerates dairy products. Due to her mother’s concerns, the diet was extended to other foods quite late, after the age of 12 months. In the 12th month of life, chicken egg yolk was introduced, which was well-tolerated; however, introduction of chicken egg white caused redness of the skin around the mouth accompanied by diarrhea. Until the age of 5, the patient did not consume any egg protein, and in the following years its consumption was heavily limited. Only at the age of 20, due to the patient’s belief about the high nutritional and health value of chicken eggs, she introduced this product into her diet in a large amount. It should be noted that initially the patient did not link her complaints with the consumption of eggs, and because of recurrent diarrhea and abdominal pain, she underwent full gastroenterological workup (including gastroscopy and colonoscopy), which ruled out gastrointestinal disorders.