A 28 year-old male was found to have a slightly increased serum creatinine (1.7 mg/dl) during the admission to ER because of abdominal pain. Since both his past medical history and an abdominal ultrasound performed on admission were unremarkable he was discharged with the indication to see a Nephrologist. At the Nephrology outpatient clinic, because of the reduced eGFR and of the presence of proteinuria (300 mg/24 h), an hospitalization for further investigations was planned.

While waiting for the admission, a couple of weeks later, the patient was admitted to the emergency room in another hospital for abdominal pain and dyspnea. On admittance the ECG tracing performed showed sinus rhythm with diffuse repolarization abnormalities. Further exams revealed an increase of troponin (54 ng/ml) and transaminases levels (GOT 50 U/L; GPT 125 U/L) and a cardiac ultrasound showed a severe left ventricular dysfunction with right heart failure. Patient was thus admitted to the coronary intensive care unit. During his hospital stay the possibility of acute myocarditis was excluded because of the absence of a recent viral syndrome and the negativity of IgM antibodies against the viruses most commonly affecting the cardiovascular system and because of the low inflammatory indexes. An abdominal ultrasound demonstrated abdominal and pleural effusions, regular size and morphology of spleen and liver, no pancreatic changes; both kidneys had normal size but showed irregular margins and a reduced thickness of the cortex, no hydronephrosis nor stones were observed. A magnetic resonance demonstrated an increased volume of the cardiac chambers with a severe reduction of the function of both ventricles (EF20%), however no signs of reduced myocardial perfusion, valvular defects or other tissue changes such as inflammation, fibrosis or edema could be demonstrated. A chest CT scan confirmed the presence of pleural effusion and showed parenchymal atelectasias mainly involving the lower lobes of the lungs. The patient was discharged after 11 days on diuretics (furosemide 100 mg/daily), B-blocker (carvedilol 37.5 mg/daily), acetyl salicylic acid (Aspirin 100 mg/day) and an Ace inhibitor (Ramipril 5 mg/day) with a diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy and severe left ventricular dysfunction complicated with cardiogenic shock and anasarca. Few days later an EKG ergometric test revealed no areas of inducible ischemia. A further admission to the Cardiology Unit to define the effect of treatment was performed a week later. Cardiac ultrasound confirmed the left ventricular dysfunction (EF 23%), a coronary angiography was negative and a right chamber catheterism and endomyocardic biopsy demonstrated no specific lesion nor inflammatory infiltrate. The patient was then admitted to our Nephrology Unit, as planned, to evaluate the cause of the chronic kidney disease. On admission the patient appeared healthy and well oriented, his blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg, heart rate 56 bpm, physical examination was unremarkable except for a 1/6 intensity systolic heart murmur better audible on mitral valve area. ECG tracing showed sinus bradycardia. Laboratory studies revealed an increased serum creatinine (1.87 mg/dl), eGFR 48 ml/min/1.73 m2, hypercalcemia (serum calcium 11.5 mg/dl), hemoglobin 15.1 g/dl, sodium 135 mEq/L, potassium 4.37 mEq/L, phosphate 3.1 mg/dl, serum albumin 4.07 g/dl. The patient denied use of vitamin D analogs thus in consideration of the unexplained hypercalcemia other exams were performed. Thyroid hormones, calcitonin, vitamin D, serum ACE, phosphate and calcium urinary excretion rate were all within the normal range. PTH was lower than 3 pg/ml. To rule out multiple myeloma serum protein electrophoresis, serum and urine immunofixation, and spine and skull x-ray were performed and did not show any pathological changes.

Renal biopsy was finally performed without complications and the patient was discharged after 24 h. While waiting for the renal biopsy pathology report, medications were not modified, but for an increase of the dose of furosemide because of the hypercalcemia. The renal biopsy contained eight glomeruli none of which was globally or partially sclerotic and no pathological changes were observed at glomerular level, vessels were also unremarkable. Tubulointerstitium was the only affected compartment with a moderate to severe inflammatory infiltrate, some calcium crystals in the tubular lumen and two granulomas with multinucleated giant cells. No necrosis could be observed within the granulomas. A diagnosis of granulomatous interstitial nephritis due to sarcoidosis was made.

When the patient was called to discuss his kidney biopsy, his serum creatinine had further increased (3.5 mg /dl), eGFR 22 ml/min/1.73 m2 and so had his serum calcium (13.3 mg/dl), serum albumin 4.06 g/dl. For this reason, he was hospitalized again and treated with pulse methylprednisolone (250 mg/day for three days) and then with maintenance dose prednisone (50 mg/day). Serum creatinine decreased in a few days and so did his serum calcium. Since the episode of acute kidney injury the patient has been followed at our unit and at the unit of Cardiology. Renal function returned to normal (serum creatinine 1.1 mg/dl, eGFR 91 ml/min/1.73 m2) and heart function markedly improved over the following two years (EF 49% vs 37% vs 32% vs 23%). The diuretic and cardiologic therapy was significantly reduced to only 25 mg of furosemide and a small dose of beta blocker. The steroid was gradually tapered to 5 mg/day of prednisone for one year and then stopped.