A 73-year-old female complained of back pain and weakness in lower limbs for 2 weeks. 3 months ago, after a minor trauma, she got back pain without weakness in lower limbs. Radiography including lateral radiographs and MRI performed at a local hospital. Initially, she was diagnosed with a L1 compression fracture and accepted conservative treatment. After an asymptomatic period, she complained progressive pain at the fracture position with weakness of both lower limbs and was referred to our hospital with suspicion of Kümmell’s disease. The back pain evaluated by visual analog scale (VAS) scale was 9. According to American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) grading criteria, the neurological function was rated as ASIA C. Sagittal MR images showed a fluid-containing IVC with high-signal intensity on T2-weighted images and STIR MR sequences at L1 and sagittal reconstruction CT scan showed a linear radiolucent IVC, accompanying spinal cord compression. The biochemical workup revealed no abnormal indications of infection (including C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and T-SPOT). Furthermore, the patient denied the history of cancer or tuberculosis and she also denied hypothermia, night sweats and weakness.
Before surgery, we obtained the informed consent of the patient and her family to perform the operation. The patients were placed in a prone position under general anesthesia with somatosensory-evoked potentials and motor-evoked potentials for spinal cord monitoring. After the lesion was positioned with the C-arm, a standard posterior midline approach with subperiosteal stripping was used to expose the spinous processes, lamina, and facet joints. Considering the presence of osteoporosis in elder female patient, we performed a long segment pedicle screw fixation (Cox Spinal Screw-Rod System, Fule Science & Technology, Beijing, China) from T10-L3 to avoid implant failure . Then, a complete laminectomy-facetectomy was performed to decompress and fully visualize the dural sac. A temporary stabilizing rod was fixed on one side of the pedicle screws. On the contralateral side, the facet joints of the diseased vertebra were removed to reveal the pedicle. Then, the pedicle and vertebral body, including the superior and inferior disk, were piecemeal removed by rongeurs, osteotomes, or curettes. To our surprise, caseous necrosis and inflammatory granulation could be seen in the surgically resected lesions. The specimens were sent for pathologic examination. After osteotomy and debridement in anterior column at L1, we used a ‘off-the-shelf’ (OTS) three-dimensional (3D) printed artificial vertebral body instead of various materials, such as bone grafts, mesh cages, or expandable titanium cages, to reconstruct sagittal alignment . Based on preoperative 3D reconstruction of CT and MRI images, the artificial prosthesis was designed in conformity with the expected defects that may occur after the affected vertebral body resection.
Pathological examinations reported caseous necrosis tissue, epithelioid granuloma existed with the hyperplasia tissue and the acid-fast bacillus was also found .
After surgery, the patient was treated with quadruple anti-tuberculous chemotherapy and hepatoprotective drug for 12 months and required to wear a brace for at least 3 months. Two weeks after surgery, the patient could walk and discharge from the hospital. Three months after surgery, the VAS scores decreased from preoperative 9 to 1 and the neurological function recovered to ASIA E. No internal fixation failure and recurrence of tuberculosis occur at last follow-up .