A 63-year-old male presented complaints of weakness in bilateral lower limbs left more than right, paraesthesia in bilateral lower limbs and difficulty in walking from past 5 months. On examination, patient was found to have increased tone in bilateral lower limbs and power of 4/5(MRC grading) in bilateral lower limbs. Patient also had reduced touch and pain sensation below eighth thoracic dermatome level. Bladder function and sphincter control were preserved.
MRI demonstrated a T1 hypointense and T2 hyperintense and contrasts enhancing intradural extramedullary lesion at eighth thoracic level. Contrast MRI of the brain revealed a 4.2 × 3.6 × 3.5 cm lesion in the trigonal area of the left lateral ventricle. The lesion was T1 hypointense and heterogeneously contrasts enhancing .
Patient, due to his symptoms of the spinal lesion underwent excision of the spinal lesion. D7 and D8 laminectomy was performed. Tumor was dorsal placed and total excision along with attached dura was performed. Dural defect was closed and wound closed with a drain in situ. Patient’s spasticity and gait improved in the postoperative period. Patient complained of headache in the postoperative period and hence MRI brain was performed. The cranial lesion was planned for a second stage surgery since patient did not exhibit any symptom for the same.
On follow-up patient presented to us with two episodes of seizures, 2 months after the spinal surgery and patient was admitted for excision of the cranial component. The left parietal craniotomy was performed and trigone was approached through the keens point. Excision was performed and patient had an uneventful postoperative course.
Microscopic examination of the spinal tumor showed a meningothelial neoplasm having transitional morphology. The cells were moderately pleomorphic and were arranged in fascicles, whorls, and lobules with few psammoma bodies. The tumor had mitotic activity reaching upto 4/10hpf and a Ki-67 labeling index of 12–15%. Due to the increased mitotic count, this tumor was classified as atypical meningioma, the WHO Grade II .
Resected tissue from the trigone showed a meningothelial neoplasm exhibiting transitional morphology with few psammoma bodies, lymphocytic, and foamy macrophage infiltration. The cells were arranged in fascicles and whorls and had moderate nuclear pleomorphism, mitotic activity of 1–2/10hpf and Ki-67 labeling index of 4–5%. There was no evidence of brain parenchymal invasion. These features were of a transitional meningioma, the WHO Grade I.