A 59-year-old man with no related medical history presented to the emergency room with chest pain and syncope. On admission, he showed signs of hypovolemic shock with paleness, sweating, low blood pressure (BP) of 62/36 mmHg, poor peripheral perfusion, and acutely deteriorating anemia (blood level of 12.3 d/dL on first check and 9.5 d/dL on the second) check; he was alert at this time.
Electrocardiography and chest radiography showed no significant findings. After fluid resuscitation, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed that the middle and distal third of the splenic artery were fully replaced by an aneurysm (10 cm in maximum diameter), with active contrast extravasation into the aneurysm. It was packed into the posterior wall of the stomach. The stomach showed significant expansion with mud fluid . Subsequently, we suspected a splenic artery pseudoaneurysm that had ruptured into the stomach. A nasogastric tube was inserted to aid in the prevention of vomiting and aspiration because we suspected UGI bleeding. Bright red blood (300 mL) was drawn using the tube. At that time, he lost consciousness showing a rapid drop in BP of 54/37 mmHg, HR70 again. In total, 4 units of red blood cells (RBCs) and 2 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) were administered, and while preparing to move the patient to the operating room, the systolic BP stabilized to > 100 mmHg. Laparotomy was performed immediately. The aneurysm was located in the distal part of the splenic artery, adhering to the body of the pancreas. Its wall densely adhered to the posterior wall of the stomach covered with necrotic slough around that was the ruptured root of the splenic aneurysm to the stomach . The pancreas was mobilized along with the splenic artery from the retroperitoneum, and a tape was passed around the body of the pancreas to enable bleeding control and the ligation of the splenic artery. After dissecting the body–tail of the pancreas, we performed a distal splenopancreatectomy including the aneurysm and partial gastric resection . The total durations required for the surgery and general anesthesia were 212 min and 292 min, respectively. The intraoperative fluid balance was + 440 mL with an estimated blood loss of 1950 mL, including gastric clots and the urine output of 340 mL. Intraoperatively, 6 units of RBCs and 2 units of FFP were transfused.
The postoperative vitals of the patient stabilized immediately and his general condition improved quickly. He was discharged from the hospital on the 42nd postoperative day, after waiting for decrease in the pancreatic fistula output and the removal of the drainage tube. The pathology of the resected specimen showed a splenic artery aneurysmal sac eroding into the gastric mucosa. The surrounding gastric mucosa did not show any malignant evidence, but exhibited the destruction of the elastic fibers of the vessel wall, suggesting pseudoaneurysm of the splenic artery.