A 45-year-old Japanese man visited our clinic in September 1996 complaining of decreased vision in his left eye. His vision was decreased to 20/200, and ophthalmoscopy showed a retinal detachment involving the macula and a retinoschisis that extended from the optic disc pit through the macula in the left eye . Glial tissue was seen at the optic disc pit but a retinal tear was not seen. Fluorescein angiography showed hypofluorescence of the optic disc pit, and multiple hyperfluorescent spots in the area of the macular lesion , but with no dye leakage. In the late phase, the optic disc pit and glial tissue became hyperfluorescent with mild dye leakage. He was diagnosed with optic disc pit maculopathy and vitrectomy was recommended.
After obtaining informed consent, vitrectomy was performed. A posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) was created by suction with a vitreous cutter until the 'fish-strike sign' was no longer seen. However, the vitreous cortex remained firmly attached at the optic disc pit. Neither condensed vitreous strands nor a residual Cloquet's canal was observed. It was decided intra-operatively that the glial tissue at the edge of the optic pit should be removed in order to remove the vitreous traction completely. Tapered forceps with a fine tip were used to avoid contact with the neural tissue at the edges of the optic pit. During this procedure, it was noted that the glial tissue was firmly attached to the temporal wall of the optic pit. An excavated space at the bottom of the optic pit was then clearly observed after removal of the tissue.
The vitrectomy was completed with a 14% octafluoropropane (C3F8) gas tamponade, and the patient was instructed to maintain a face-down position for a week. Under these conditions, the retinal detachment and retinoschisis gradually decreased, and the retinal detachment and retinoschisis were absent six months postoperatively . Vision improved to 20/20 without any visual field defects (Goldmann perimetry).
The patient's vision deteriorated to 20/40 owing to a nuclear sclerosis cataract two years after the vitrectomy, and the lens was extracted. Vision has remained 20/20 for 10 years without any recurrence of the retinal detachment or retinoschisis. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) at this time did not detect a retinal detachment or retinoschisis, but two channels were seen running from the vitreous cavity to the longitudinal space of the optic nerve, possibly the subarachnoid space and the intraretinal space. The exit of these channels to the vitreous cavity was closed .