A 68-year-old Peruvian man had been suffering from lumbar pain for several days. His CT scan revealed a mass compressing his right ureter and iliac vessels. He underwent exploratory laparotomy with radical resection of a retroperitoneal tumor (10 cm × 8.3 cm × 8 cm), as well as ileocecectomy and ileocecal anastomosis. Pathological analysis showed that the tumor was a DDL (T2 N0 M0, FNCLCC grade 2, stage IIIA, <50% necrosis, R0). This diagnosis was corroborated by immunohistochemistry markers (ie, the positivity of D33 and NSE and negativity of h-CD and S100). One month after the surgery (for details of the disease course, see ), his initial postoperative scan showed the absence of disease. However, 2 months later (3 months after the surgery), his new CT scan revealed a 1.6 cm × 2.3 cm mass anterior to the right iliac vessels (first recurrence). He received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin plus ifosfamide (6 cycles). Then he underwent resection of the retroperitoneal tumor (R0) and right ureterectomy. The patient further received 3 cycles of doxorubicin plus ifosfamide postoperatively. Eight months after chemotherapy (11 months after the second surgery), a control imaging revealed 2 anterior psoas masses measuring 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm and 1.3 cm × 1 cm (second recurrence). The biopsy of one of the lesions revealed a malignant spindle cell neoplasm compatible with DDL. Two months later, the CT scan showed that the masses had enlarged to 3.0 cm × 1.9 cm and 2.1 cm × 1.6 cm. However, CT scans and a chest x-ray revealed no evidence of metastatic disease. The patient underwent a third surgery wherein the 2 masses and a right pelvic mass were resected entirely (R0). At this point, the patient sought for different treatment options involving an integrative approach. Three months later, he came to the Centro Médico Antroposófico (CMA) and became our patient.
The recommended treatment was subcutaneous injections of VAE obtained from the host tree ash (AbnobaVISCUM® Fraxini); the injections were given thrice per week in increasing doses. The application of VAE Fraxini in the periumbilical area started at 0.2 mg; after 6 months, the dose was increased to 2 mg, which was then maintained for 7 months. The subcutaneous VAE injections occasionally induced self-limited local erythema and swelling of the skin around the application site, which could be tolerated by the patient. Nine months after the VAE treatment was initiated (12 months after the third surgery), a retroperitoneal mass measuring 4.1 cm × 3.0 cm was noticed (third recurrence). After 5 more months, the dose of VAE was increased to 20 mg thrice per week. Three months later, the patient underwent resection (fourth surgery) of a right iliac fossa tumor (a mass measuring 4.7 cm × 3.5 cm with a moderate amount of surrounding fibroadipose tissue) and a right juxtarenal psoas tumor (a well-encapsulated, focal fibro-fatty soft tissue measuring 8.7 cm × 6.5 cm with central areas of probable necrosis). Both tumors were DDLs (FNCLCC grade 3, pT2b). The patient had a negative margin resection (R0) for the larger sarcoma, and the other exhibited focal involvement by the tumor. A cholecystectomy (mild chronic cholecystitis and cholelithiasis) and appendectomy were also performed, and both organs were negative for tumor. Additionally, he received 12 cycles of three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy post-surgery.
As a result of the previous surgeries, which involved a partial right ureter resection with psoas bladder hitch, the patient developed obstructive renal failure as evidenced by the right ureteral obstruction and abnormal serum creatinine levels. The patient then underwent a right percutaneous nephrostomy with stent placement.
Throughout this time, the patient continued to receive VAE Fraxini. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging was performed periodically post-surgery. Three-month breaks without VAE Fraxini application were set twice per year after obtaining the first negative follow-up magnetic resonance imaging result. The frequency of subcutaneous VAE Fraxini application was reduced to twice per week from month 54 on. The patient reached a recurrence-free interval of 69 months; however, the magnetic resonance imaging performed on month 86 of VAE Fraxini treatment showed a mass in the right iliac fossa. The tumor measuring 8.1 cm × 4.8 cm (FNCLCC grade 3, pT2b) was resected. The tumor showed areas of well-differentiated liposarcoma, which were mixed with areas of intermediate to highly dedifferentiated myxoid fibrosarcoma and high-grade undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. The tumor was relatively well-circumscribed and mostly surrounded by fibroconnective and fibroadipose tissues of variable thickness. However, the resection margins were involved by the sarcoma. One month after the surgery, the VAE treatment was resumed. The patient started receiving intravenous infusion of 100 mg VAE obtained from pine as host tree (Helixor® P); the injections were administered in 500 mL of standard saline solution over 2 hours thrice a week. The dose was increased by 100 mg per application until 400 mg was reached which was maintained until 12 applications were completed. Then, the patient was subjected again to subcutaneous injection with 20 mg VAE Fraxini thrice per week. Five months after the surgery, multiple abdominal and retroperitoneal nodular tumor implants were detected, and their number and size increased within the following 9 months. For 2 weeks, the patient received intravenous infusion of VAE (Helixor® P, maximum dose: 400 mg) followed by subcutaneous infusion of 20 mg VAE Fraxini. One of the implants caused urinary tract obstruction, and the patient developed renal and abdominal pain, which was treated with buprenorphine 20 mg/25 cm2 transdermal patches and with anthroposophic remedies (Wala® Solum Inject, Wala® Plexus coeliacus D15, Wala® Bryonia/Stannum, Weleda® Formica comp injections, thrice per week). Weleda® Equisetum sulfuratum tostum D3 was applied (thrice a day) to support the urinary function. When the pain was relieved and controlled, intravenous infusions of VAE were resumed. He also received 1 cycle of eribulin (1.65 mg IV infusion). In month 103 of the VAE treatment, the patient underwent pleurodesis due to pleural effusion; however, he died 2 weeks later. Altogether, the patient received a total of 103 months (8.6 years) of VAE treatment and achieved 10.5 years of survival.
Within approximately 2 years during which the first 3 surgeries were performed, the patient’s weight decreased from 84 kg to 71 kg. Since the VAE treatment started, the patient’s quality of life progressively improved as seen in his increased appetite, resulting in weight gain (up to 77 kg) during the low-dose VAE treatment. After the fourth surgery, his weight was 70 kg to 74 kg. After the fifth surgery, his weight decreased to 66 kg and then increased again to 70 kg . The ideal body weight based on his height (172 cm), gender, and age is 54.7 kg to 74.0 kg.
The patient was married and had 3 grown-up children. He had a history of tobacco use, but he quit after being diagnosed with DDL. He consumed alcoholic beverages occasionally. His medical history included diphtheria and hemorrhoidectomy. His father died of leukemia, and his paternal uncle had an unknown cancer of the lower extremity. Further medications included allopurinol tablets for high blood uric acid level and a combination preparation of hydrocodone 10 mg and bitartrate and acetaminophen 500 mg tablets for left lumbar region pain. The patient stopped taking these medications on month 18 of VAE treatment.