The patient was a woman in her 80s who had previously been diagnosed with primary biliary cirrhosis and decompensated cirrhosis, classified as class B (Child–Pugh score was 9). At her outpatient visit, which was 23 days prior to her surgery, her serum potassium levels were 6.1 mEq/L; however, there was no evidence of abnormalities on her electrocardiogram. She was prescribed SZC at an initial dosage of 10 g three times a day for 3 days, followed by 5 g three times a day for 25 days to treat her hyperkalemia. Telmisartan 20 mg tablet was discontinued. The patient began to take SZC as instructed after receiving the medication on the same day. The concomitant medications she was receiving were: vonoprazan 10 mg, azosemide 30 mg, tolvaptan 7.5 mg, ursodeoxycholic acid 300 mg, polaprezinc 75 mg, LIVACT granules (L-isoleucine, L-leucine, and L-valine granules), and Aminoleban EN powder. However, we could not pay attention to the safety management regarding the changes in potassium levels associated with the consumption of SZC.

The ammonia level of the patient was 24 µg/dL, which was within the normal range, approximately 1 year before admission. Furthermore, there were no problems with communication during subsequent outpatient visits, because of which the ammonia level was not measured. At the time of admission, her ammonia level was 37 µg/dL. During the course of hospitalization, her ammonia levels were measured several times and ranged between 31 and 45 µg/dL, with no evidence of abnormalities. She had been taking her medication as prescribed until her hospitalization. The patient was assisted by family members and regularly took the SZC for approximately 23 days.

The day before surgery, after having dinner at around 7 to 8 p.m., the patient experienced abdominal pain and nausea at around 10:30 p.m., and she had to be rushed to our hospital. A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, and an axial view of the scan revealed free intraperitoneal gas and ascites in the upper abdominal space. A high-intensity fecal mass was identified inside the colon and outside the intestinal tract at the pelvic level. Subsequent laboratory analysis identified several irregularities, including a potassium level of 1.9 mEq/L, blood urea nitrogen level of 27.5 mg/dL, creatinine of 1.22 mg/dL, hemoglobin level of 8.8 g/dL, and white blood cell count of 8100/µL. However, the C-reactive protein level was 0.20 mg/dL. The estimated glomerular filtration rate was 32.0 mL/min/1.73m2. Emergency surgery was performed the day following her admission (defined as Day 0). Several serous ascites and free intraperitoneal gas were observed in the epigastrium due to cirrhosis. Ascites-like watery stools were observed from the left lower abdominal quadrant to the pouch of Douglas, and hard stools were observed outside the intestinal tract in the lower abdominal quadrant. Hartmann’s operation with drainage was performed for repairing the sigmoid colon perforation. The postoperative X-ray images revealed accumulation of SZC in the feces. The perforation size of the resected specimen was 13.0 mm × 7.0 mm, and macroscopic findings did not reveal necrosis or bleeding. Microscopic findings did not reveal significant inflammatory cell infiltration, ischemic changes, or neoplasia around the perforation. The patient continued to receive critical care services in the intensive care unit (ICU) after surgery.

Continuous hemodiafiltration was initiated on Day 0 due to a diagnosis of acute kidney injury (AKI), which was changed to hemodialysis (HD) on Day 7. SZC was discontinued after admission, and potassium was administered intravenously as needed. Despite the administration of multiple gastroprokinetic agents and laxatives, it took about 1 week for the hard stools containing residual SZC to be excreted. The X-ray images indicated the excretion of the residual SZC. Enteral nutrition was resumed on Day 7, and swallowing training was initiated on Day 8 following the patient’s transfer from the ICU to the medical ward. On Day 13, she developed a lacunar infarction and was treated conservatively. Her renal function improved, and HD was discontinued on Day 36. Then, on Day 51, she developed sudden circulatory failure. Cardiac catheterization revealed acute myocardial infarction caused by the obstruction of the right coronary artery. Thrombectomy and transcatheter stent placement were performed. The patient was also diagnosed with advanced rectal cancer during the hospital stay. Curative operation and stoma closure were considered inoperable because of her physical condition.

On the 95th day following surgery, despite an improvement in her condition, it was determined that a discharge to home would be difficult; hence, the patient was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation.