A 97-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department of our institution with a painful, malodorous, necrotic right submandibular mass . A solitary enlarged lymph node had been identified in this region on computed tomography two months prior. She gave no history of B-symptoms, immunodeficiency or immunosuppression.
She lived at home alone with support from a carer who visited twice daily. She did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol. Her comorbidities included dementia, congestive cardiac failure, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, a previous above-knee deep vein thrombosis and early-stage breast cancer diagnosed 17 years earlier, managed surgically and considered to be in remission. Her regular medications included bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily, ramipril 1.25 mg daily, aspirin 100 mg daily, digoxin 62.5 μg daily and periciazine 2.5 mg daily.
She was afebrile and hemodynamically normal at presentation and other than the right neck mass, her physical examination was unremarkable. Blood work showed a white cell count of 10.87 × 109/L (normal range, 4–11) with slight neutrophilia at 9.05 × 109/L (normal range, 1.8–7.5) and lymphopenia at 1.01 × 109/L (normal range, 1.5–3.5). Her hemoglobin was normal at 137 g/L, as was her platelet count of 197 × 109/L. Her potassium was measured as 3.3 mmol/L (normal range, 3.5–4.9) but all other electrolytes were within the normal range. Her creatinine measured 69 μmol/L with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 64 ml/minute/1.73 m2. Her lactate dehydrogenase was elevated at 267 U/L (normal range, 110–230) but her liver enzymes were all within the normal range.
Following non-diagnostic fine needle aspiration of the mass, core biopsy revealed DLBCL with a non-germinal center immunophenotype using the Han's algorithm, and Epstein Barr encoded ribonucleic acid (RNA) in situ hybridization positivity .
Computed tomography and 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography revealed this to be the only site of disease, consistent with stage 1A.
Given her age, frailty, performance status and multiple comorbidities, she was deemed unfit for systemic therapy and palliative radiotherapy was recommended.
She received a dose of 25 Gy delivered over five fractions on alternate days over a two-week period. Treatment was delivered using a four-beam three-dimensional conformal technique with 6-megavoltage photons and daily image guidance. The treatment incorporated the use of bolus material placed over the surface of the mass to optimize the radiation dose delivered superficially to the skin.
The patient was followed up monthly and after four months the mass completely resolved . The overlying skin on the right neck had healed to cover the previous necrotic deficit and no mass was palpable. She was asymptomatic with no observable toxicity at the latest review at four months.