A patient is a 39-year-old man with left limb pain and limited movement caused by a traffic accident for 35 days. Due to the severe abdominal injury caused by a traffic accident, the initial treatment focused on the abdominal trauma. Only tibial tubercle traction was given to the fracture of the lower extremity. The diagnosis of the injured extremity was that: complete transcervical fracture of the left femoral neck (AO/OTA31B2.3, Pauwels III), obsolete segmental fracture of the left femoral shaft (AO/OTA32C2) .
Due to difficult reduction on complete fracture, open reduction and internal fixation were carried out under general anesthesia in July 2020. The patient was placed in the supine position on the OSI full fluoroscopic traction operation bed. The left tibial tubercle bone traction was connected with the lower limb traction system. The calf was rotated internally to keep the patella perpendicular to the ground, and the femoral shaft and femoral neck fractures were initially reduced by traction. The surface projection of the proximal and distal approach was determined in front of the thigh, the junction area of the isthmus and the non-isthmus of the proximal femoral shaft was taken as the boundary, the line between the anterior superior iliac spine and the lateral edge of the patella was taken as the incision surface projection in the proximal area, and the line between the anterior superior iliac spine and the medial edge of the patella was taken as the incision surface projection in the distal area , . The location of the fracture site was determined by intraoperative C-arm fluoroscopy and marked horizontally on the body surface.
First of all, the femoral shaft fracture was reduced and fixed. The first step, according to the position of the surface projection of the proximal femoral shaft fracture line (anterolateral approach), a 6 cm longitudinal skin incision (-a) was performed, then open the subcutaneous and deep fascia to expose the rectus femoris, pull the rectus femoris to the medial side and split the vastus intermedius, directly expose the proximal fracture site, which was reduced by Weber forceps under direct vision. Through the anteromedial approach (-b), the medial muscle space of the rectus femoris exposes and splits the vastus intermedius to the distal fracture site and achieves fracture reduction in a similar way as the proximal fracture site. The third step, after the femoral neck fracture was temporarily fixed with two percutaneous Kirschner wires, the Trigen Tan Fan (Simth&Nephew Ltd., Watford, UK) was placed, and the distal locking screws were firstly inserted after the position of the nail. The fracture reduction was confirmed by C-arm fluoroscopy. The next step is to augment the fixation of the non-isthmus region of the distal femoral shaft with two Poller screws to reduce the medullary cavity and decrease the nailing swing.
After the femoral shaft fracture was fixed, the femoral neck fracture was reduced and fixed. Through the anterior approach of the proximal femur (-c), the fracture site of the femoral neck was exposed, and two cephaloscrews were placed after confirming that the reduction was satisfactory. To counteract the high vertical shear force and compressive stress, the medial anatomical buttress plate (MABP) (ZhengTian Medical Instrument Co. Ltd., Tianjin, China) was used to fix the femoral neck fracture , .
After all, fractures were fixed, C-arm fluoroscopy confirmed again that the reduction of fractures and the position of internal fixation was satisfactory. Then the incision was closed layer by layer after flushing the incision and placing the drainage tube.
Due to reliable augmentation fixation for every fracture site, the patient immediately began the functional exercise postoperatively. Then, the patient was reviewed regularly in the outpatient clinic and instructed to increase the practical training intensity gradually. The patients were followed up at 3, 7, and 17 months after the operation; the radiographic follow-up results are shown in , , respectively; the function and quality of life evaluation results are shown in . Three months after the operation, the fracture healed, and he began the entire weight-bearing exercise. Finally, the patient had a good prognosis without complications.