A 40-year-old woman was admitted for ENT, head and neck surgery emergency care with a 02-week history of fever, pharyngeal foreign body sensation, odynophagia and right-sided neck pain and swelling. She had no clear history of malignancy, central venous catheterization, coagulation disorders, cervical trauma or any foreign body ingestion, genetic and family histories were unremarkable. Physical examination revealed erythematous swelling over the right side of the neck. Nasofibroscopy showed pyriform sinus edema with purulent secretions filling the hypopharynx. Complete blood count (CBC) showed his white blood cell count was (17,000)/mm3 with predominant neutrophil, C-reactive protein was 62 mg/l. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan revealed Abnormal low attenuation within the parapharyngeal space and along the carotid space indicates cellulitis , with a vascular filling defect in the left internal jugular vein to left subclavian vein region, penetrated by a metal density foreign body (, ). On the basis of the above findings, we diagnosed the patient as having an ingested foreign body complicated by cervical cellulitis and thrombosis of the internal jugular vein.
Because of the cervical cellulitis and the presence of a foreign body, an intravenous probabilistic antibiotic therapy is initiated immediately consisting on third-generation cephalosporins 2 g/24 h, Metronidazole 500 mg/8 h and aminoglycoside 160 mg/24 h, 02 h later a qualified surgeon with 20 years of experience decided to proceed to surgery for better exposure and also effective drainage of fluid collection. Via an incision anterior to the left sternocleidomastoid muscle, the parapharyngeal space was explored and the carotid sheath was opened. A 4 cm sewing needle was found extending transversely into the right jugular vein and the sternocleidomastoid muscle at the level of the thyroid cartilage and thrombosed right internal jugular vein. After removal of the needle, unfractionated heparin was administered intravenously, then the internal jugular vein was ligated proximal and distal to the site of injury. Drainage of abscess cavities and debridement of necrotic tissues were done, and samples were sent for culture. A Penrose drain was inserted, the skin was closed with separate stitches, and systemic heparinization was ceased. The pus culture did not show any organism and the intravenous probabilistic antibiotic therapy was continued. The postoperative course was uneventful, and liquid diet was started on the 3th postoperative day. After a normal barium esophagram, the patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day and was ordered to complete 02 weeks of oral antibiotic therapy. Within a month the swelling completely disappeared, dysphagia improved, and the patient became normal. The patient is in the 12th month of her follow-up and no complications have been observed during this period.