A male in his 40s, who had been diagnosed with HIV 6 years previously, presented with a 7-month history of disseminated nodular and ulcerating lesions . Verbal informed consent was obtained from the patient. However, because the patient was lost to follow-up and attempts to contact him or his family has been unsuccessful, written consent could not be obtained. No patient-identifying details are included in this paper. The lesions worsened in the month prior to presentation and became predominantly ulcerative, with partial loss of the nose. The lesions were multiple, well-circumscribed, round to oval, hyper-pigmented ulcers with elevated borders ranging in size from 2–6 mm. The lesions were located on the face, scalp, chest, back, and upper and lower limbs. The patient reported associated generalized body pains, fatigue, night sweats, loss of appetite, loss of weight and a productive cough. Various antibiotics alone or in combinations were used without success. The patient also confessed to poor adherence to his antiretroviral therapy (ART), which consisted of abacavir, lamivudine and lopinavir/ritonavir. His HIV viral load was 149, 455 copies ml−1, and his CD4 count was 34 cells mm−3 at the time of presentation. He previously had pulmonary tuberculosis in 2009 and in 2017, which was treated successfully.
Chest X-ray showed bilateral reticulonodular infiltrates. Investigations for syphilis showed a positive haemagglutination (TPHA) test result and a non-reactive rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test. Other investigations included a serum cryptococcal antigen test, which was negative, a blood culture, which showed growth of , and a tuberculosis (TB) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Xpert MTB/Rif Ultra; Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) test performed on sputum, which did not detect complex. Multiple skin punch biopsies from the left and right cheeks, right elbow, right chest and back were taken and submitted for mycological culture and histological examination. Sputum samples were also collected and submitted for mycological, mycobacterial and general bacterial cultures. Sputum and tissue microscopy revealed no acid-fast bacilli (AFB). Mycological culture of tissues and sputum revealed colonies at 25 °C that were slow growing, moist and glabrous, with a wrinkled and folded surface. Colonies were white with an orange–brown reverse . The lactophenol cotton blue stain showed solitary and erect conidiophores arising at right angles from thin septate hyphae that tapered toward the apex. Conidia were formed in clusters on tiny denticles at the apex of the conidiophore, with their arrangement being suggestive of a flower . Conidia were ovoid, hyaline, one-celled and smooth-walled. On blood agar, incubated at 37 °C, colonies were tiny, glabrous, white to greyish and yeast-like, and consisted of spherical or oval budding yeast cells on Gram stain microscopy.
The organism was identified as S. schenckii based on macroscopic and microscopic characteristics. The identification was confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) (VITEK mass spectrometer, bioMérieux, Marcy I’Etoile, France). Histological examination showed variable epidermal ulceration, which was undermined by acute inflammation admixed with fibrin and granulation tissue. The dermis contained a dense chronic inflammatory infiltrate composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes and numerous giant cells. In addition, numerous small, round to oval, cigar-shaped fungal elements and asteroid bodies were observed. The subcutis was unremarkable. The periodic acid–Schiff–diastase (PAS-D), Alcian blue (AB), PAS and Grocott stains highlighted the fungal organisms. The Warthin–Starry stain showed no micro-organisms. immunostaining showed negative immunoreactivity.
Oral fluconazole, dosed at 400 mg per day, was initiated empirically 2 days after hospital admission. No itraconazole was available at the treating facility at that time. The patient showed minimal improvement on fluconazole. Itraconazole 200 mg 12 hourly was initiated after confirmation of sporotrichosis.
The patient made significant improvement and was discharged from the hospital after 5 weeks of itraconazole treatment. Unfortunately, he was lost to follow-up, as he did not return for scheduled appointments and attempts to reach him after discharge were unsuccessful.