A 63-year-old woman was transferred to our medical facility for the evaluation of bilateral adrenal enlargement that was incidentally discovered during an abdominal examination after cholecystectomy. The patient was hypertensive and was taking an angiotensin II receptor blocker (candesartan) and a calcium channel blocker (nifedipine); she had a blood pressure of 142/82 mmHg. The referral source tests showed hypokalemia, and the ARR was very high. Thus, we initially considered a diagnosis of PA.
However, further investigation revealed that the patient had been diagnosed with hypertension at the age of 30 years and with left hemiplegia, alongside right intracerebral capsular hemorrhage at the age of 37 years. A physical examination revealed the patient’s height as 166.2 cm, weight as 74 kg (body mass index 26.8 kg/m2), poor breast development, no beard, slightly low voice tone, no baldness, and female phenotype. The axillary and pubic hairs were poorly developed. Family history showed hypertension in both parents, but not juvenile hypertension. Her parents were non-consanguineous, and none of her siblings had disorders of sex development. She was neither married nor had a partner. Her blood pressure at the onset of the intracerebral hemorrhage was unknown, but her hypokalemia had been approximately 3.0 mmol/L for more than 5 years. Based on the information in her medical questionnaire, menarche occurred at approximately 13 years of age with regular menstrual cycles thereafter, and menopause occurred at the age of 48 years. The patient underwent blood tests for an analysis of the adrenal, gonadal, and pituitary hormones as well as the biomarkers of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system .
Blood tests showed high levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH), low levels of cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and testosterone, high ARR, and hypokalemia. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis showed bilateral adrenal gland enlargement (the adrenal glands were 46.5 ⋅ 33.2 ⋅ 30.5 mm on the left and 19.9 ⋅ 43.1 ⋅ 23.2 mm on the right), immature urethral spongiosa, prostate-like structures, immature intra-abdominal testes, and testicular veins, but no ovaries or uterus . The high FSH and LH were thought to be due to gonadal insufficiency.
Subsequently, as 17OHD was strongly suspected, further evaluation was recommended. Thereafter, a short synacthen test, karyotyping, and CYP17A1 gene analysis were performed. In the short synacthen test, the intravenous administration of synthetic ACTH (250 µg) did not markedly increase cortisol (baseline 80 nmol/L; after 60 min, 91 nmol/L) and 17-hydroxyprogesterone (baseline 4.0 nmol/L; after 60 min, 4.8 nmol/L) levels compared to the baseline levels, suggesting that the pathway catalyzed by 17α-hydroxylase was impaired.
The patient’s karyotype was 46, XY. Genetic analysis revealed heterozygous mutations in the CYP17A1 gene as follows: (1) c.157_159delTCC, p.Phe54del and (2) c.1118 A > T, p.His373Leu. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with 17OHD. We informed the patient of the diagnosis with ethical considerations. After the diagnosis, the patient stopped taking antihypertensive medication and was started on oral hydrocortisone (15 mg/day), which is the cornerstone of CAH treatment. Hydrocortisone was taken internally, 10 mg in the morning and 5 mg in the evening. After the appropriate treatment, the blood pressure and serum potassium normalized without antihypertensive therapy.