A 38-year-old man was referred to the International Hospital of Colombia (Bucaramanga) for treatment-resistant focal epilepsy associated with cognitive deficits.

The patient was the only child of the third pregnancy, born by uncomplicated vaginal delivery, with normal neurodevelopment until the age of 10 years and no history of neuroinfections, major surgeries or haematological disorders. He reported a head injury at the age of 10 years, after which he developed apparent cognitive impairment with poor school performance. One year after the injury, he had his first seizure. The seizures consisted of clonic movements in the left hemicorper, with more involvement of the upper limb and sometimes accompanied by headaches. On the EEG, interictal and ictal activity was observed in the right fronto-central region.

Laboratory studies to exclude infectious and metabolic disorders were performed and were negative. A simple computed tomography of the skull was performed and showed agenesis of the pellucidum and dysgenesis of the corpus callosum.

Subsequently, a brain MRI was performed with the protocol for epilepsy, which showed several clinically relevant findings, including confirmation of agenesis of the pellucidum, and suggestive of polymicrogyria, such as abnormal thickening and irregularity in several areas of the cerebral cortex, particularly in the frontal lobes and in both perisylvian regions. In addition, heterotopic gray matter was identified in the frontal lobes, most notably in the right, where two bands of abnormal, thickened gray matter were identified extending from the cortex to the lateral ventricle wall.

Another band of heterotopic grey matter was identified in the left fronto-insular region, parallel to the lateral ventricle. There was also a supratentorial ventriculomegaly and, although the corpus callosum was present, its apex or rostrum had an atypical appearance. The chiasm and optic nerves were hypoplastic.

It should be noted that the EEG findings correlated with areas of polymyocryria and cortical heterotopia in the right cerebral hemisphere.

Although there was a history of head trauma, in the absence of findings such as areas of gliosis or bleeding, this trauma was considered to be mild, with no structural sequelae evident in the two studies obtained. Therefore, this history was most likely not directly related to the patient's clinical manifestations.

Once the diagnosis was confirmed, in the initial control of the symptoms, and given the presence of bilateral lesions that compromised some critical areas, it was decided to provide medical treatment with a new anticonvulsive medication scheme and to carry out periodic monitoring in the institution.
