A 24-year-old Caucasian man with fever and upper quadrant abdominal pain over the previous 20 days was admitted to our hospital. Before admission, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole, followed by cefixime had been prescribed. Six years prior, the patient had been diagnosed with PSC, UC, suspected retroperitoneal fibrosis, bile sludge and splenomegaly. For this, he was prescribed ursodiol 300mg BID and mesalamine 4g per day. At that time, investigations included exploratory laparotomy and a biopsy of the perihepatic, retroperitoneal tissue which excluded malignancy. Over this six-year period, the patient presented with recurrent episodes of cholangitis, the serum level of aminotransferases remained substantially normal while there was a progressive worsening of cholestatic test results and a progressive liver enlargement along with fibrosis. Specifically, gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) increased from 141UI/L to 344UI/L and 847UI/L to 2534UI/L, respectively. Hepatic tissue stiffness, measured by FibroScan®, progressed from 12.6 to 17.3kPa. The patient was never treated with immunosuppressive therapy or corticosteroids. One month before admission, an upper endoscopy was performed which excluded esophageal varices. One week before admission, a magnetic resonance of his abdomen and bile ducts revealed further enlargement of the liver, spleen and the tissue surrounding his hepatic hilum , posterior to the pancreas head. The latter caused a compression of his second duodenal tract and a wrapping of the splenic and hepatic arteries. Beading and narrowing of the intra-hepatic and common bile ducts resulted in more extension and a narrowing of the pancreatic duct was also reported.
At admission, our patient had a fever of 38.8°C and physical examination revealed tenderness of his epigastrium and right upper hypochondrium. Results from blood tests are reported in Table . Microbiological blood and urine investigations were negative for bacteria. A chest radiograph was normal while an abdominal sonography revealed an enlarged liver, thickened choledocus, dilatation of the intra-hepatic biliary tree, splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy of the hepatic hilus. A colonoscopy showed erythema of the colonic mucosa from the rectum to the cecum, with areas of increased erythema and telangiectasia in the ascending colon. Random biopsy showed focal atrophy of the colonic mucosa with edema and chronic inflammatory infiltrates, but specific investigations for CMV were not carried out. Imipenem 500mg IV four times daily was administered. Three days later, due to our patient’s persisting fever and abdominal pain, imipenem was substituted with tigecycline 50mg IV BID. Further blood and urine cultures for bacteria were negative. Both the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein level (C-RP) remained high, whereas the white blood cell (WBC) and neutrophil counts decreased and the procalcitonin level was 0.38ng/ml. The fever persisted while the upper abdominal pain subsided slightly. Investigations for HIV, Toxoplasma gondii, CMV, measles, parotitis and hepatitis C virus (HCV) all were negative, while results for varicella zoster virus, human herpes virus, Epstein Barr, rubella, and parvo virus B19 indicated previous infection. CD4?+?T lymphocytes were 1055mm3 (20.3%) and CD3?+?T lymphocytes were 3193mm3 (67%). Mycobacterium tuberculosis interferon gamma release assay (QuantiFERON®–TB Gold, Cellestis Limited, Carnegie, Victoria, Australia) showed negative results. Twelve days after admission, teicoplanin 400mg die, gentamicin 80mg TID, metronidazole 500mg TID were prescribed, while tigecycline was stopped. Two days later, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) Cytomegalovirus (Q-CMV Real Time, Nanogen Advanced Diagnostics, Torino, Italy) was detected in the blood with ≤253 copies/mL. Three days later, this value increased to 6189 copies/mL, while 1431 copies/mL were evidenced from a urine sample, the CMV pp65-antigen (Indirect Immunofluorescence, anti-CMV pp-UL83, Argene, France) was also positive, and CMV serology indicated acute CMV infection . Our patient’s fever rose to 39.2°C and his abdominal pain extended to the right lower abdominal quadrant with radiation to the right groin and right testicle. Ultrasound suggested acute appendicitis and he underwent surgery . Histology showed inflammatory infiltrates, including lymphocytes and neutrophils, while histochemistry was positive for CMV early antigens (Monoclonal Mouse Anti-Cytomegalovirus Clone CCH2?+?DDG9, Ventana Medical System, Roche, USA) . Real time reaction and shell vial culture of the appendix tissue also were positive. Microbiological investigations for bacteria and fungi showed Peptococcus spp. and Candida albicans. Teicoplanin, gentamicin and metronidazole were administered for a total of 12 days along with intravenous ganciclovir 5mg/kg twice for 15 days. After discharge, oral valganciclovir 900mg BID was prescribed for 10 days. After this, the CMV nucleic acid in the blood and urine was negative while ESR and cholestatic liver test results remained abnormally high .