This case was a 44-year-old male patient. During his routine physical examination, an approximately 6.0 × 5.5 cm inhomogeneous echo mass was found incidentally in the right lobe of the liver by abdominal ultrasound. The patient denied any accompanying symptoms such as anorexia, abdominal distension or pain, fever, or weight loss. He had a 5-year history of hypertension and took felodipine tablets to control blood pressure. The patient had a 20-year drinking history, equivalent to about 40 g ethanol/day. He had no history of intravenous drug use, exposure to herbal medicines or health care products, or surgical and familial genetic disease. Routine blood analysis was conducted and the values for various tests—liver and kidney function, coagulation function, and tumor markers (alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9)—were within the normal range. Serological tests for hepatitis B and hepatitis C were negative. Autoantibodies related to autoimmune liver disease, thyroid function, and ceruloplasmin were within the normal range. Physical examination showed no positive disease indicators.
The patient then underwent an imaging examination. A second ultrasound revealed multiple small irregularly shaped hypoechoic masses with slightly hyperechoic septae in segment 6 of the liver (S6), and a total size of approximately 6.0 × 5.5 cm. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) showed a cystic-solid lesion with honeycomb-like enhancement in the arterial phase, in which multiple disordered unreinforced tubular columnar areas were seen. No obvious papillary structure was found. The enhanced region was slowly cleared in the portal and delayed phases. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans showed a honeycomb-like cystic-solid lesion with a tubulocystic manifestation lacking well-defined borders in S6 and no dilation of the major intrahepatic bile duct in the background liver. The cystic components were low-density and showed no enhancement in the arterial phase. The solid components, which were septa or the cystic wall, were more enhanced than the normal hepatic parenchyma in the arterial and portal phases and were consistent with normal hepatic parenchyma in the equilibrium phase. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an irregular-shaped multicystic mass with a mixed signal shadow in S6. The lesion was revealed as an irregular tubular low-density area on T1-weighted images and a high-intensity area on T2-weighted images, which were interspersed with strips of slightly higher signal shadows. The signal of the solid component of the intermediate inclusion was not high on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), while the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) signal was high, indicating that the dispersion was not limited. The solid components of the lesion were enhanced in the late arterial phase by injecting the contrast medium, gadoxetic acid disodium. In the hepatobiliary phase, the whole lesion was low signal. The mass had no obvious invasion into adjacent structures and was thought to be benign. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed intrahepatic hybrid-density cystic-solid masses that did not communicate with the bile duct. Intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts were not dilated. No definite abnormal signal shadow was found in the bile duct cavity and gallbladder. Imaging examination did not reveal any bile duct stones . To exclude liver metastatic carcinoma caused by gastrointestinal malignancies, gastroscopy and colonoscopy were performed and no obvious abnormalities were detected. Duodenal papilla was normal, and no colloidal mucus was present. Based on these results, the lesion was suspected to be MCBH but other diseases such as HMH, VMC, Caroli's disease, biliary cystadenoma, and CHFC could not yet be excluded.
Since MCBH is a localized cystic-solid lesion, it can be difficult to diagnose by needle biopsy due to limited sampling of the lesion and heterogeneous distribution of the tumor components. After communicating with the patient and his relatives, surgical resection was performed. This was an open operation. The lesion could not be observed in the liver surface. The intraoperative ultrasonic testing was performed and the lesion was located in the right posterior segment VI of liver. Anatomical resection of segment VI was performed and the resection margin was more than 1 cm to the lesion. No enlarged lymph nodes were found during the operation. The residual liver had no tumors and showed healthy texture by intraoperative ultrasound. The operation was successful, lasting about 2 h, and the intraoperative bleeding was 100 ml.
The surgical specimen revealed an approximately 6.0 × 5.5 cm nodular mass. A cystic-solid lesion with a honeycomb appearance and gray-white, medium texture, was seen in a section of the resected specimen. The lesion was composed of diffuse, cystically dilated ductal structures that were approximately 0.1–1.5 cm in diameter and surrounded by fibrous tissue. The lesion was filled with clear, colorless liquid surrounded by normal liver tissue.
Low-power microscopy displayed a relative clearance boundary in the lesion area that consisted of ductal structures, periductal glands, fibrous connective tissues, and blood vessels. Ductal structures were cystically dilated and irregularly angulated. Bile-stained materials were observed in some ducts and the peripheral bile ducts were not dilated. High-power microscopy showed that the ductal epithelium was composed of a monolayered columnar and cuboidal epithelium that was morphologically identical to biliary epithelium. Fibrous connective tissue around the ducts contained only mild lymphocytic infiltration. Normal hepatocytes were observed between the cystic ducts. There were no smooth muscle elements or ovarian-like stroma, and there were no atypical cells or papillary growth of the epithelial cells. Synchronous biliary hamartomas, nodules, steatosis, or significant fibrosis were not observed in the non-lesion liver tissue. Immunohistochemistry showed CK7 and CK19 positivity in the dilated duct epithelium and CD34 positivity in the vessels. Ki-67 antigen staining revealed the proliferative activity of individual cells .