A 52-year-old man was first diagnosed with HIV in 1991. He was maintained on antiretroviral therapy with emtricitabine-tenofovir and raltegravir. The HIV viral load was undetectable (less than 20 copies/ml) and the CD4 count of 850 cells/uL at the time of presentation. In December 2016, he presented to the emergency department with chief complaint of diplopia. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbits revealed a mass in the left orbit with involvement of the optic nerve. He was referred to ophthalmology and underwent a lateral orbitotomy and removal of the orbital mass. Pathology showed metastatic small cell carcinoma. A Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis and a Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scans were negative for any intrathoracic mass; however, there were multiple liver lesions and a large pancreatic tail mass. Given these findings his final diagnosis was extrapulmonary high-grade small cell carcinoma of the pancreas. Next Generation Sequencing of his tumor showed an intermediate tumor mutation burden with 9 mutations/megabases and deleterious alterations in TP53, MLL3, MEN1, FAT1, CDKN2A, BCORL1, BCOR, ATRX and TSC2 genes. There is currently no approved targeted therapy for any of these mutations. He was started on chemotherapy with carboplatin and etoposide. He had a partial response (PR) after 2 cycles of chemotherapy. He had disease progression after 6 cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin and etoposide. He was then started on chemotherapy with FOLFIRINOX (5-Fluorouracil, irinotecan, leucovorin and oxaliplatin) as second line therapy. He received four cycles but continued to have disease progression on imaging. He was then treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel but his disease continued to progress with clinical deterioration and significant abdominal pain. At that point, treatment with dual CPI therapy (nivolumab and ipilimumab) was pursued given the available data in refractory SCLC. Before the start of this therapy, his CD 4 count was 294 cells/uL with an undetectable HIV viral load (less than 20 copies/ml). He received Nivolumab 1 mg/Kg along with Ipilimumab 3 mg/kg every 3 weeks. After 2 doses of the combination, he developed acute kidney injury with creatinine of 4.2 mg/dl from a baseline of 1.0. The therapy was suspended and he was admitted to the hospital and a renal biopsy was performed which showed severe drug-induced acute interstitial nephritis (AIN). He was treated with high dose steroids; 500 mg of IV methylprednisolone for 3 days followed by a steroid taper. His renal function improved after 4 weeks with return of creatinine to baseline. He was then re-started on single agent Nivolumab at 1 mg/Kg and later ipilimumab at 1 mg/kg was added. The patient had significant clinical improvement soon after starting the dual CPI therapy with resolution of abdominal pain which previously required high-dose opioids. Repeat scans at 12 weeks (including MRI of the head and PET/CT scan) showed complete response (CR) as per PERCIST criteria with disappearance of all metabolically active lesions . Patient was continued on antiretroviral therapy. The HIV viral load was undetectable before starting the CPIs (< 20 copies/ml) and increased to a high of 175 copies/ml. At the same time his absolute CD4 count increased from 294 cells/uL before treatment to a high of 593 cells/uL. His CD8 count also followed the similar pattern. It was 111 cell/uL before starting treatment and reached a high of 247 cells/uL . The patient’s complete radiological response is still ongoing at the time of this report (24 weeks after the start of the dual CPI therapy).