A three-week-old Caucasian male born at term was found to have an abnormally shaped head and subsequently was referred for craniofacial surgical evaluation. The 21-year-old mother’s pregnancy course was uncomplicated; she had routine prenatal care and an uncomplicated vaginal delivery. The physical examination demonstrated bifrontal bossing, a raised and thickened sagittal suture, and an elongated anteroposterior diameter skull, consistent with scaphocephaly secondary to sagittal synostosis . Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the head confirmed synostosis of the sagittal suture, with the remaining sutures open . The parents were counseled regarding treatment options. Both open and endoscopic-assisted surgical techniques were explained. In the case of the endoscopic procedure, the need for up to 12 months of postoperative helmet therapy was emphasized. The family opted to proceed with the endoscopic approach.
At two months of age, our patient underwent an uncomplicated endoscopic-assisted strip craniectomy with excision of an 11 × 5-cm strip of bone containing the fused suture, in accordance with our described technique . He was fitted for an orthotic helmet two weeks postoperatively. The family failed to follow up with the orthotist, but presented to the craniofacial clinic eight weeks postoperatively. Our patient was noted to have occipital flattening and increased height of the posterior vault. At the time, the flattening was interpreted to be secondary to excess occipital helmet pressure, which could have been avoided by adherence to the routine monthly orthotic adjustments. Our patient was sent to the orthotist for refitting.
Our patient was lost to follow-up for the next six months. During this time the same helmet was inconsistently used, without follow-up with the craniofacial surgery team or the orthotist. According to our patient’s parent, a complicated social situation led to long periods in which the helmet use was discontinued altogether. Our patient next presented 18 months postoperatively. His head circumference was noted to be less than the first percentile for age, and his head shape was oxycephalic. The fontanelle was small, but patent and flat. Additionally, our patient was walking unsteadily and was slightly delayed regarding his language skills. A CT scan of his head showed pansynostosis . The brain parenchyma, ventricles, and cisterns were normal in appearance. Our patient underwent open cranial vault reconstruction .
Postoperatively, our patient progressed well, having a good secondary result at the one-month follow-up visit . At the six-month postoperative follow-up for the open cranial vault reconstruction, his head circumference had increased to the fifth percentile for age, and his head shape remained significantly improved . In addition, no clinical signs or symptoms of increased intracranial pressure were noted.