A 30-year-old man of Asian origin, presented to the surgery outpatient department (OPD) with non-radiating pain in the right hypochondrium and epigastrium associated with vomiting, intermittent fever with chills and rigors for 10 days. The onset was gradual with increasing weakness and deterioration of his general health. The patient was undergoing follow-up for a liver abscess (right lobe) which was diagnosed previously as an amoebic liver abscess (ALA) based on a positive amoebic serology report from a private laboratory. He was treated conservatively for this and discharged 3 months before this present episode. There was no previous history of tuberculosis (TB) or contact with any patient with TB. At the time of admission, the patient was febrile, dehydrated and looked very ill and anemic with a pulse rate of 92/minute, blood pressure 106/70 mmHg and respiratory rate of 16/minute. There was no icterus and no lymphadenopathy. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness and guarding over the intercostal spaces overlying the liver. The liver span was 16 cm. There was no splenomegaly, ascites or any other palpable mass in his abdomen. Respiratory and cardiovascular system (CVS) examination revealed no abnormality.
Chest X-ray showed no lesion suggestive of TB but revealed a right-sided subdiaphragmatic pathology as the right hemi-diaphragm was raised and the costophrenic angle was blunted. An ultrasonogram (USG) of the abdomen on the same day revealed a 5.6 × 6.8 × 8.8 cm ill-defined, heterogeneous hypo-echoic lesion reaching up to the liver surface with cystic areas in the right lobe of the liver suggestive of an abscess . His liver was enlarged with a span of 16.6 cm with no other focal lesion. No perihepatic or pleural effusion was seen. All other abdominal viscera appeared normal with no free fluid.
Routine hematology investigations showed hemoglobin 9.3 gm/dl; total leukocyte count (TLC) 22,600/mm3; differential leukocyte count (DLC): polymorphs 76, lymphocytes 20, monocytes 2, eosinophils 2; platelet count 3.76 lac; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 52 mm at the end of the first hour; blood urea 28 mg%; prothrombin time of 15 seconds with a control of 10.1 seconds; total bilirubin 1 mg%; serum alkaline phosphatase 7 IU; serum glutamic oxaloacetic acid transaminase (SGOT) 29 IU; serum glutamic pyruvate transaminase (SGPT) 39 IU; serum protein 6.6 g/dl and serum albumin 4.0 g/dl.
Pigtail catheterization was carried out under local anesthetic (LA), which drained 150 ml of cream-colored pus. The pus was sent for Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) staining, acid-fast bacilli (AFB) culture using a BACTEC TB 460 instrument, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other routine microbiological investigations (wet mount, Gram stain, pus culture for bacteria and fungi). ZN staining showed AFB and BACTEC culture confirmed the same by isolating M. tuberculosis (by para-nitro-alpha-acetylamino-beta-hydroxy-propiophenone (NAP) test). Antibiotic sensitivity was performed with the BACTEC TB 460 instrument and the isolate was sensitive to isoniazid, streptomycin, rifampicin and ethambutol. PCR assay of the aspirate was also positive for M. tuberculosis DNA. The lysozyme proteinase K extraction method was used to extract the DNA. The target for amplification was a MPB 64 gene which has a 240 bp sized amplicon. The primers used in the PCR assay were as follows:
Primer 1: 5'-TCC GCT GCC AGT CGT CTTCC-3'
Primer 2: 5'-GTC CTC GCG AGT CTA GGCCA-3'
Other routine microbiological investigations did not reveal any significant findings. Wet mount showed no trophozoites of Entamoeba histolytica or any fungal element. A routine bacteriological culture was sterile. Three consecutive early morning sputum samples were also screened for AFB and were negative. The patient was non-reactive in HIV serology. He was started on systemic antitubercular treatment (ATT) on receipt of the results from the laboratory, and this included isoniazid (300 mg once daily), rifampicin (450 mg once daily), pyrazinamide (1200 mg once daily), ethambutol (750 mg once daily) and pyridoxine (20 mg once daily). His fever subsided, and his appetite and general condition improved. He was discharged with stable vitals and asked to come for follow-up checkups after 6 weeks. At the first follow-up visit, the patient was asymptomatic, his liver size had decreased (size 3.1 × 3.8 × 5.1 cm) and a repeat USG abdomen revealed regression of the abscess.