The patient was a 53-year-old man who had a history of testicular seminoma that was removed twice, at the ages of 41 and 48 years. The patient had been experiencing disorientation and difficulty in thinking for 1 month before the visit. His Karnofsky Performance Status (KPS) at the time of the first visit was 80. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a markedly contrast-enhanced mass in the dorsal midbrain and obstructive hydrocephalus . Systemic examination, including whole-body, contrast-enhanced computed tomography, showed no obvious abnormalities. Blood samples showed a high serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor level of 624 U/ml. In addition, α-fetoprotein (3.1 ng/mL) and human chorionic gonadotropin (0.2 mIU/mL) were within normal limits. Neoplastic diseases such as PCNSL, tectal glioma, or intracranial metastasis of seminoma were considered in the differential diagnosis, and endoscopic tumor biopsy was performed with endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV). The patient was placed in a supine position under general anesthesia. The burr hole was located 11 cm from the nasion and 2 cm to the right of the midline. A Neuroport mini (Hakko Co., Nagano, Japan) was inserted into the anterior horn, and observation using a flexible endoscope (VEF-V, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) showed that the aqueduct was stenotic due to the tumor, and the posterior part of the aqueduct was swollen [-]. A biopsy of the swollen area was performed. The lesion was pale pink, soft, and had minimal bleeding after the biopsy. After thorough intraventricular lavage to prevent dissemination, a third ventriculostomy was performed using an expanding balloon catheter (Expander Balloon Catheter SI Fuji Systems, Tokyo, Japan) . Intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid cytology showed a small number of atypical cells with bifurcated nuclear irregularities. Immunohistochemical study of the specimen showed that the tumor cells were CD3 negative, CD20 positive, and CD79a positive, indicating that the tumor was B-cell lymphoma. The final histopathological diagnosis of the tumor was diffuse large B-cell lymphoma . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and no new neurological deficit occurred. He underwent three courses of high-dose methotrexate (3.5 mg/m2) and whole-brain irradiation (30 Gy in 15 fractions). His KPS was 100 when he was discharged home.