This 54-year-old Malay woman, an insurance agent, was seen at a primary care clinic in February 2021 when she was 52 years old for a routine follow-up of hypercholesterolaemia. She had been on treatment for hypercholesterolaemia since the age of 25. Initially, atorvastatin 40 mg nocte was commenced, and the dose was gradually increased to 80 mg nocte at the time of presentation. There was no history of chronic kidney disease, diabetes, or hypothyroidism to suggest a secondary cause for hypercholesterolaemia. She was a non-smoker and did not drink alcohol. She had no history of hypertension or cerebrovascular disease. The Edinburgh Claudication Questionnaire was negative for peripheral vascular disease (PVD). However, the WHO Rose Angina Questionnaire was positive. She had retrosternal chest pain during exertion, relieved within 5 min of taking glyceryl trinitrate 0.5 mg. It occurred once or twice a month. There was no radiation, shortness of breath, or any other associated symptoms. Her resting electrocardiogram was normal.
This patient was diagnosed with PCAD in 1998 at 29 years of age when she presented to a cardiology clinic complaining of exertional angina and reduced effort tolerance. She subsequently underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the left anterior descending artery. After the intervention, she received follow-up care at a primary care clinic. Unfortunately, she developed another episode of chest pain in 2015 at the age of 46. An angiogram revealed an 80% blocked left circumflex artery and obtuse marginal arteries. She was initially treated with medical therapy due to financial constraints but eventually underwent another PCI in 2018 at the age of 49 years. She then continued her follow-up concurrently in the cardiology and primary care clinics.
This patient had a strong family history of hypercholesterolaemia and PCAD. Both of her parents were treated for hypercholesterolaemia. Her father passed away at 63 due to a major adverse cardiovascular event (MACE). Her mother had coronary artery bypass grafting at 72 years old. Among her eight siblings, seven were treated for hypercholesterolaemia and had either MACE or sudden cardiac death between the ages of 43 and 56 at the time of diagnosis. She has three children who are being investigated for high cholesterol. None of her family members have had genetic testing for suspected FH. Her family pedigree chart is shown in .
On examination, she was obese, with a body mass index of 38.4 kg/m2. Her blood pressure was 104/74 mmHg. Other vital signs were normal. Bilateral grade 2 corneal arcus were observed , but the patient only noticed them at 52 years old. There was no tendon xanthoma.
The SBC, DLCN score, and FAMCAT relative risk score for this patient were deduced based on the clinical history and laboratory investigations that were extracted from her electronic medical record. The highest LDL-c level was 8.0 mmol/L, and the highest total cholesterol (TC) level was 10.7 mmol/L, recorded in October 2020. Therefore, this patient fulfilled the SBC (possible FH), DLCN (score of 8 – probable FH), and FAMCAT (relative risk score of 9.51) criteria. She was then offered and counselled for genetic testing, the gold standard for diagnosing FH. Targeted next-generation sequencing of the three FH candidate genes (LDLR, APOB, and PCSK9) was conducted. Subsequently, she was confirmed to carry a heterozygous pathogenic variant in the LDLR gene (rs769446356) located in intron 2 (noncoding area), in keeping with the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recommendation. This patient was then counselled by the primary care physician regarding the genetic diagnosis, the need to intensify her lipid-lowering medication (LLM), and to screen her first-degree relatives. The importance of adherence to lifestyle modification and pharmacotherapy was also emphasized.
This patient received long-term follow-up care from a multidisciplinary team of primary care physician, cardiologist, and lipid specialist. Despite being on atorvastatin 80 mg nocte, her LDL-c level was still high at 8.0 mmol/L, and her TC level was also high at 10.7 mmol/L. The cardiology team changed the LLM regime to a combination therapy of rosuvastatin 20 mg nocte and ezetimibe 10 mg daily. The lower rosuvastatin dose of 20 mg was chosen instead of 40 mg to minimize the potential side effects of high-intensity statin in this patient. She responded well to the combination treatment, where her LDL-c level decreased to 5.0 mmol/L, and her TC level decreased to 7.6 mmol/L. However, she still failed to achieve the ≥50% reduction in LDL-c or the target LDL-c of <1.8 mmol/L as recommended by the international guidelines. Her LLM will be further intensified by the lipid specialist in the subsequent follow-ups to achieve the recommended LDL-c target of <1.8 mmol/L by maximizing rosuvastatin from 20 to 40 mg nocte before adding an injectable LLM, such as the PCSK9 inhibitors. The possibility that lipoprotein apheresis may be needed in the future was also discussed with the patient if there is an inadequate response to the maximum tolerated dose of LLM. The cost of treatment with PCSK9 inhibitors and lipoprotein apheresis was also discussed, as these treatments are not currently reimbursed by the government health financing system in Malaysia.
The primary care physician conducted a cascade screening of her first-degree relatives. All three of her children were found to have elevated LDL-c levels and were clinically diagnosed with FH. They were started on statin monotherapy by the primary care physician and were referred to the lipid specialist for further management and intensification of LLM. The cardiology team was informed of the FH diagnosis in these children. summarizes the important key features of this case, and summarizes the clinical histories of her three children.