A 61 year old man presented with progressive lower left abdominal pain and constipation since a few months. Colonoscopy showed a large obstructing tumour in the descending colon, and a hemicolectomy was performed. Histology showed an inflammatory reaction, possibly caused by a fungal or parasitic infection, but no definite identification of an organism was made. Postoperatively his complaints disappeared, but after a few weeks he developed abdominal discomfort in his right upper abdomen, and six weeks postoperatively a CT scan revealed a large mass with a diameter of 6 cm central in the right liver lobe. Treatment with metronidazole, directed against an amoebic liver abscess, was unsuccessful. A subsequent four-week course with fluconazole resulted in a small decrease of the liver abscess, without clinical improvement. He developed a marked eosinophilia (27.7%). A liver biopsy was performed and the patient was referred to a university hospital.
A repeated CT scan showed a large mass with a diameter of 9 cm central in the liver, with extension to the right liver lobe . Review of the slides from the colonic mass and the liver biopsy showed similar features, with extensive necrosis and a mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate containing histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells and numerous eosinophils. In Grocott stained sections, many unusually large hyphae could be recognized which were surrounded by strongly eosinophilic material in haematoxylin and eosin stained sections (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon) .
On the basis of this morphology, a presumptive diagnosis of infection with Basidiobolus spp. was made. A percutaneous cholangiodrain was placed to treat the cholestasis caused by the hepatic mass. A few days later, the patient developed a septic shock, probably of hepatic origin. Blood cultures yielded Escherichia coli and Clostridium perfringens. The patient was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. The presumed basidiobolomycosis was treated with amphotericin B intravenously, because the preferred therapy, intravenous itraconazole, was contra-indicated because of severe renal insufficiency. A few days after initiation of the antifungal therapy the patient died of multiple organ failure. Postmortem autopsy showed signs of extensive fungal infection of the liver , gallbladder and sigmoid colon. Culture of liver, gallbladder and sigmoid colon yielded Basidiobolus ranarum.