A 58-year-old female presented with right facial and neck swelling and respiratory distress after a recent dental infection treated with clindamycin. On examination, there were grossly decayed teeth with a firm floor of mouth and diffuse erythema of the right neck, lower and mid-face. She was diagnosed with Ludwig’s Angina and immediately intubated due to stridor and pending airway compromise. Imaging revealed extensive infection and abscess formation involving the submandibular, pterygomandibular, and buccal spaces, and she was taken to the operating room for dental extraction and abscess drainage by the oral surgery team and started on broad spectrum antibiotics. Cultures from this operation were polymicrobial and consistent with oral microbes. On postoperative day 1, she developed rapidly expanding erythema and swelling of the right hemiface and neck with gross necrosis of the skin throughout the right neck and face. The Otolaryngology team was consulted for possible necrotizing fasciitis.
The patient was taken to the operating room for urgent debridement, which included the skin of the right neck and face up to lower eyelid, devascularized orbicularis oculi, mylohyoid, superficial muscular aponeurotic system in the midface, masseter, and all branches of the facial nerve. The debridement ultimately required removal of a 20x30cm segment of the right and central neck and a 20x20cm segment of the right face .
Subsequent debridement 2 days later required excision of soft tissue to the level of the zygoma and infraorbital rim. Penrose drains were placed to assist with drainage and irrigation of deeper spaces communicating with the open wound, including the pretracheal space. Antibiotics were transitioned to vancomycin, ampicillin-sulbactam, and fluconazole for a planned duration of 4 weeks, as was appropriate per bacterial culture susceptibilities.
The decision was made to proceed with twice daily local wound care with Dakins irrigations through the Penrose drains into the deep spaces, and placement of wet-to-dry Dakins-soaked gauze over exposed soft tissue between operative debridements. Ophthalmology was consulted for assistance with progressive ocular and lower eyelid involvement. Due to the extent of the wound, heavy sedation was required for dressing changes. However, due to open wound without overlying skin in the pretracheal space, a tracheostomy was not offered, as secretions would have saturated the wound bed and prolonged infection, resulting in a prolonged endotracheal intubation. Despite aggressive wound care, 12 days after initial aggressive debridement, purulent drainage continued to be encountered with irrigations, with concern for spread of infection threatening the right orbit and mediastinum. Furthermore, new areas of devitalized tissue were encountered routinely throughout the wound bed and debrided at bedside. The white blood cell count was persistently elevated throughout this time and the patient remained septic.
Several case reports and review articles have demonstrated success with NPWT in decreasing bacterial burden and stabilizing wounds in patients with NF, even within the head and neck regions [–]. Unfortunately, given the proximity of the wound bed to the lower eyelid and conjunctiva and surgical absence of the majority of the soft tissue of the eyelid including the orbicularis oculi, negative pressure wound therapy was contraindicated due to risk of traction injury to the globe and/or eyelid. To address this problem, a 3D-printed, patient-specific wound splint was designed at the point-of-care using the patient’s anatomy to facilitate NPWT. It was determined that the patient’s circumstances met the criteria for the FDA Expanded Access for Medical Devices Emergency Use mechanism (EAEU) with concurrence from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) . A follow-up report was sent to the FDA within 5 days on the use of the device as required.
A facial CT was obtained and Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) images were uploaded to Materialise Mimics (Materalise, Leuven, Belgium). These were segmented to include the remaining soft tissue and bony structures in the nasofacial sulcus, periorbital, and malar regions. The native anatomy was then imported into Materalise 3-Matic (Materalise, Leuven, Belgium) and a 3-Dimensional (3D) surface was formed through the offset of the soft tissue and bony structures within the wound and extruded to provide additional surface and contact area. This process was performed with both clinician and engineering input to ensure correct design and adequate contact area for both the wound-vac device as well as the mount sutures. The resulting model was then smoothed with additional surface post processing to ensure fitment would be exactly along the contour of the wound and as well as provide a wide and flat surface on the outside upon which the NPWT could be secured . An open-faced mold was then designed in 3-matic to allow for a naturally smooth surface for the NPWT film to attach. The mold was printed on a FormLabs Form 3B in FormLabs Biomed Amber resin (FormLabs, Somerville, MA, USA) and post-processed following the recommended Form Wash and Cure time and temperatures for clinical applications . Factor II VST-50HD (FactorII, Inc., Lakeside, AZ, USA) platinum cure two part medical grade silicone was selected for its shore hardness of 38A and safe skin contact properties and was mixed in ratio of 10:1 A:B, degassed, and gravity poured into the mold . The mold and poured silicone were allowed to cure at 60 °C for 3 hours and the splint was extracted from the mold. The splint alone underwent an additional cure in at 150 °C for 2 h to ensure complete cure. The wound splint was then cleansed in 99% IPA for 5 minutes, before being ready for patient application .
An EAEU was submitted to the FDA on the basis of a life threatening infection requiring prolonged intubation that was necessary due to heavy sedation requirements with dressing changes. Additional concerns of development of orbital involvement and vision loss were cited if the wound did not begin to rapidly heal, and failure of other treatment options (wet-to-dry dressing changes). Concurrence was obtained from our IRB.
The wound splint was then placed at the superior edge of the wound bed, just below the remnant eyelid and sutured in place. A NPWT sponge was placed in the remaining wound bed. The NPWT film was applied directly to the splint, and ophthalmology confirmed that there was no traction on the lower lid .
Since bedside dressing changes were no longer necessary, the patient was weaned from sedation, although she remained intubated. Two days following placement, the NPWT was exchanged in the operating room. The wound was noted to have stabilized, with well-healing granulation tissue present in > 50% of the wound bed, active bleeding throughout, and no evidence of devascularized areas or additional further purulence. The erythema of the mediastinal skin had improved, and the WBC count normalized. Five days later, the NPWT was again exchanged, and the dead space between the skin and trachea was noted to have healed and seated down, allowing for tracheostomy and removal of the endotracheal tube 2 weeks following initial placement . Now fully weaned from sedation, the patient was transferred out of the intensive care unit and continued to express appreciation for her customized care and device.
With each exchange of NPWT, the wound continued to demonstrate contraction and healthy granulation tissue formation, with no evidence of ongoing infection. Four weeks after initial placement, the NPWT was removed, and the defect was reconstructed with a pectoralis muscle flap, split thickness skin graft, and right paramedian forehead flap .
A second stage surgery for division and inset was performed 4 weeks after the initial reconstruction . Following completion of reconstruction, vision testing and patient-reported vision were at baseline from prior to infection, with minimal lagophthalmos, no exposure keratopathy and no damage to the globe.