A 76-year-old Chinese man was admitted with 1-month history of sudden onset of chest tightness. A month previously, the symptom started while he was doing exercise. It was associated with diaphoresis and shortness of breath, without chest pain. The resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed abnormal Q waves in leads II, III, and aVF, and the cardiac troponin T was elevated. He was diagnosed as having ACS and was treated at a local hospital. Owing to the fact that the hospital was unable to perform coronary angiography (CAG), the patient was discharged home several days later on aspirin (100 mg qd), clopidogrel (75 mg qd), metoprolol (12.5 mg qd), and rosuvastatin (10 mg qn). On admission to our hospital, the patient still had a mildly elevated level of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (21.58 ng/L). His initial ECG showed abnormal Q waves in the inferior (II, III, and avF) leads , which may indicate subacute inferior MI. His routine blood test was normal, including a platelet count of 201 × 109/L and a white blood cell count of 5.86 × 109/L. He had no history of blood dyscrasia and denied any history of smoking or drinking. The patient underwent CAG in our hospital after admission. CAG revealed evidence of left main (LM) and three-vessel coronary artery disease . Low-dose heparin (2000 units) was given during the procedure. We consider the optimal revascularization technique for this patient to be coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery and did not perform PCI. However, the patient decide to be treated with PCI rather than CABG. Four days later, CAG was performed again; multivessel coronary intervention was performed with drug-eluting stents and drug-coated balloon. The procedure lasted for about 2 hours, and the dose of heparin given was 6500 units. After the procedure, the patient was transferred in stable condition to the ward and treated by intravenous tirofiban at 0.15 µg/kg/minute. Post-PCI medications included aspirin 100 mg qd, clopidogrel 75 mg qd, metoprolol succinate 12.5 mg qd, rosuvastatin 10 mg qn, and benazepril 5 mg qd. A blood sample was obtained for a complete blood count 4 hours after the procedure, according to routine orders at our hospital. His platelet count was 21 × 109/L, which was confirmed by manual examination of the blood film. The patient’s hemoglobin level was 119 g/L. Tirofiban infusion was stopped by 4 hours, and other antiplatelet drugs including aspirin and clopidogrel were immediately discontinued. A heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) platelet factor 4 antibody test was performed, and the result was negative . Over the next 12 hours, the patient received 10 unit platelet transfusions to prevent hemorrhage, and his platelet count had increased to 49 × 109/L. Another analysis completed later indicated that his platelet count was 37 × 109/L. Additionally, immunoglobulin G (10g) was given. Aspirin and clopidogrel were resumed the next day, and the patient received another 10 unit platelet transfusions. Two days later, the patient’s platelet count had increased to 75 × 109/L. The course of the patient’s platelet count is shown in Fig. . There was a significant improvement after day 5, and the platelet count was 112 × 109/L. Seven days after the acute profound thrombocytopenia, his platelet count was 138 × 109/L, and he was discharged with no hemorrhagic sequelae.