A 30-year-old Japanese man was referred to our clinic complaining of pain, tenderness, and swelling on the left side of his palate for the past several months. Our initial clinical examination found that his left palatine mucosa was significantly swollen compared with his right side. The swelling was diffuse, and its borders were unclear . The swelling was especially pronounced in the left molar region of his palate, and his pain was exacerbated with the application of direct pressure to the lesion. The swelling exhibited increased signal intensity on T2-weighted magnetic resonance images (MRI, Fig. ). All of his left maxillary teeth were healthy, and no specific abnormalities in his left maxilla and maxillary sinus were observed on panoramic X-ray and computed tomography (CT) images. His medical and familial histories were unremarkable, and he was not aware of any history of trauma or inflammation of his head or neck. We administered antibiotics orally (cefcapene pivoxil hydrochloride hydrate 100 mg tablet every 8 hours) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (loxoprofen sodium hydrate 60 mg tablet every 8 hours) for 7 days because we suspected that his symptoms were due to inflammation secondary to an infection. However, his symptoms did not improve.
Based on his clinical and radiographic examinations, our initial diagnosis was a soft tissue tumor. An incisional biopsy was performed and histopathologic examination of the lesion revealed haphazard nodes and inflammatory cells in a fibrous stroma . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed significant staining for the neural marker S-100 in the bundles within the node . Factor VIII staining was positive in the fibrous stroma, but not in the bundles . These findings led to the diagnosis of a traumatic neuroma. The patient underwent resection of the tumor with a 5-mm margin using an electric scalpel under general anesthesia. Although the border of the mass was unclear and diffuse, the extent of the tumor could be determined based on the MRI images. As the tumor was conglutinated with a part of his palatine bone, we saucerized the bone surface including the overlying mucosa and the periosteum. His left greater palatine nerve was resected as the possible origin of the tumor. The open surgical wound was covered with a collagen-based artificial dermis (Terudermis, Olympus Terumo Biomaterials Corp, Tokyo, Japan) and a surgical splint. The size of the specimen was approximately 6×3 cm . The pathologic findings of the surgical specimen were the same as those of the incisional biopsy specimen, and the patient’s greater palatine nerve exhibited no pathologic changes. The tumor was not entirely encapsulated and some tumor cells were observed within the surgical margins. We decided to continue strict clinical follow-up without additional surgery because the traumatic neuroma is not a true neoplasm, and his pain subsided immediately after the surgery. No clinical evidence of a recurrence has been observed in the 3 years since the surgery.