A 17-year-old boy of Congolese origin, came to the hospital for tremors of the upper limbs occurring when the latter were solicited (eg, lifting a glass of water, bringing his hand to the mouth, and writing). The patient reported that the symptoms had been slowly progressing for approximately 6 months. In addition, the patient reported difficulty in seeing at a distance (decreased distance vision).

The patient is the second of three siblings, the eldest of whom died of acute respiratory infections in early childhood. It should be noted that the patient was the product of a dizygotic full-term twin pregnancy and that his twin was in apparent good health at the time of consultation. No morbid history was reported in the neonatal period or in the first years of life. There was no history of abortion or miscarriage in the mother, who did not acknowledge any consanguinity with her partner (although the couple were monoethnic).

Apart from the abovementioned complaints, the parents report a slowing of growth since the age of 10–11 years characterized by weight and stature stagnation (unlike his twin sister, who shows “normal” growth).

The patient’s general condition was preserved with slight ptosis in both eyes on morphological examination. From an anthropometric point of view, the patient weighed 30 kg with a height of 143 centimeters and a head circumference of 52 centimeters (BMI for age = 14.6). It should be noted that secondary sexual characteristics (external genitalia, pubic hair, and axillary hair) were present and consistent with the declared age (see Tanner stage P5/G5). Ophthalmological examination reported poor visual acuity in both eyes (2 out of 10) and macular degeneration in the left eye (the right eye was normal on the fundus). Neurologically, the patient is oriented in time and space and does not show any tremor of the limbs at rest. However, we note the appearance of tremors of the upper limbs during action, essentially during the finger-nose maneuver, as well as during writing, resulting in significant dysgraphia. The walk is straight and balanced. No nystagmus was noted, and the various clinical neurological tests ruled out dysdiadochokinesia in our patient. A cerebellar syndrome with delayed growth was evoked in a 17-year-old adolescent with no previous neurological history.

The helical CT scan of the brain without and after injection of iodinated contrast medium revealed bilateral striatopalidal calcifications. In addition, there are bilateral and symmetrical areas of hypodensity of the subcortical white matter opposite the occipital horns of the lateral ventricles, bridging the splenium of the corpus callosum and extending downward via the midbrain and the protuberance toward the two cerebellar hemispheres where they are more marked. In addition, there is an enlargement of the basal cisterns with an appearance of moderate bulboprotuberantial atrophy.

The phosphocalcic balance was normal (calcemia 9.1 mg/100 mL [8.8–10.4]; inorganic phosphorus 4.8 mg/100 mL [2.5–5.0]) as well as negative for syphilis and toxoplasmosis serologies (VDRL negative, positive Toxoplasma IgG 2.2 and positive Toxoplasma IgM 0.5). The anti-nuclear antibody assay was weakly positive (anti-nuclear protein Ac 1/320, anti-nuclear DNA Ac 1/160). Thyroid hormones and cortisol were within normal limits (TSH = 0.98 mIU/L [0.15–5]; T3 = < 0.77 µmol/L; T4 = 114 nmol/L [80–140]; cortisol = 240 nmol/L [110–520]).

In view of the failure to thrive (short stature and microcephaly) and the progressive cerebellar syndrome associated with intracerebral calcification, the diagnostic hypothesis of “Rajab-type cerebral calcification” could also be considered. Genetic testing is essential to confirm the diagnosis.