A 29-year-old male Albanian patient presented to our clinic owing to recurrent episodes of hypoglycemia. He referred to an incident of DKA that led to hospitalization abroad 20 days ago. The discharge report from the hospital referred to the DKA incident, but mentioned no precipitating factors. The patient was newly diagnosed with T1DM at this time, and intensified treatment with insulin at home was commenced (25 units of basal and 4–8–6 units of preprandial insulin per day). He had been going through stressful times, as he had recently received news of an upcoming fatherhood. He has a body mass index (BMI) of 21.6 kg/m2 and an unremarkable personal and family health record. He mentioned a 5 kg weight loss during the past 2 months. Laboratory tests exhibited glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) at 8.1%, C-peptide at 1.8 ng/ml (normal range 0.5–2 ng/ml), and fasting plasma glucose (FPG) at 120 mg/dl. Antibody tests for anti-tyrosine phosphatase-related islet antigen 2 (anti-IA2) were upper normal (7.3 IU/ml, normal range 0.0–7.4 IU/ml), positive for anti-GAD65 (5.5 IU/ml, normal range 0–5 IU/ml), and negative for anti-islet cell antibodies (ICA) and anti-insulin antibodies (IAA). Initial management included significant downtitration of preprandial insulin. Basal insulin dosage was decreased at about 20 IU daily (initial dosage was 0.2 times the patient’s body weight: 0.2 × 70 kg = 14 units of degludec). Differential diagnosis consisted of T1DM “honeymoon” period and possible misdiagnosis at the hospital. Prolonged T1DM honeymoon periods have been described in the world literature, but the age of the patient, along with hypoglycemic incidents after insulin administration, positive anti-GAD65, C-peptide levels, and positive anti-IA2 and negative T1DM antibodies (anti-ICA, anti-insulin), suggested a type of diabetes other than the initially diagnosed T1DM, most likely LADA, according to the 2020 American Diabetes Association criteria . On a follow-up visit, considering the persistent laboratory and clinical findings, we discontinued the administration of preprandial insulin, regulated the basal insulin dosage, and enhanced treatment with metformin. One month later, under treatment with 2 g of metformin daily and additional sitagliptin, basal insulin dosage decreased at about 8 units per day and was subsequently halted. Two years later, basal insulin needed to be reintroduced, along with metformin and a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP-1 RA). Insulin requirement after at least 6 months from original diagnosis confirmed our previous hypothesis of LADA, which first manifested with DKA. On a 6-year follow-up, according to laboratory findings and glucose measurements, diabetes progressed to T1DM and basal bolus insulin treatment (multidose insulin, MDI) with detemir and lispro was initiated. The patient remains adherent to the regimen, and it has not been modified since.
In addition, at the initial visit, the patient complained of excessive sweating and increased sensitivity to heat. A complete physical examination (PE) revealed upper limb tremor, lid lag, palpable thyroid gland, and heart rate of 110 beats per minute. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels were lower than 0.004 mIU/L (normal range 0.5–5 μIU/ml), total triiodothyronine (T3) at 2.19 nmol/L (normal range 0.9–2.8 nmol/L), total thyroxine (T4) at 14.60 μg/dl (normal range 5–12 μg/dl), free T3 (fT3) at 4.93 pmol/L (normal range 2–7 pmol/L), and free T4 (fT4) at 1.65 ng/dl (normal range 0.8–1.8 ng/dl). There were positive anti-thyroglobulin (anti-TG) (174 IU/ml, normal range < 116 IU/ml) and thyroid peroxidase antibodies (anti-TPO) (245 IU/ml, normal range < 16 IU/ml), while anti-TSH-R antibody was negative. An ultrasound scan of the thyroid gland was not indicative of pathology. Seven days later, a thyroid panel was conducted: TSH, 3.14 μIU/ml; T3, 1.57 nmol/L; T4, 87.19 μg/dl; fT3, 5.60 pmol/L; fT4, 15.26 ng/dl. TSH values decreased spontaneously with no treatment admitted. High levels of total and free thyroid hormones and presence of elevated anti-thyroid antibodies with negative anti-TSH-R navigated the diagnosis toward hashitoxicosis complicating Hashimoto’s disease and made Graves’ disease less likely. One month later, TSH was measured in a laboratory and found to be higher than normal (7.29 mIU/L), so levothyroxine treatment with maximal dosage of 88 μg was decided. On a 2-year follow-up, thyroxine was withdrawn as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis retreated, and the patient has remained euthyroid (TSH and thyroid hormone levels close to normal on blood test). On a 6-year follow-up, there were no identifiable changes in the patient’s thyroid state.