A 56-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with headache and right hemiparesis. Blood screening did not indicate any signs of infection, but she had the history of ovarian tumor resection. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a hyperdense mass in the right frontal lobe . MRI showed a nodular mass, with maximum diameter of 11 mm that was hypointense on FLAIR with perifocal edema. After gadolinium administration, the mass showed a ring enhancement [-]. Magnetic resonance angiography showed regular blood flow in the intracranial arteries. Because of the ring enhancement and surrounding FLAIR high signal, there was a significant probability of a metastatic brain tumor. We performed right temporal craniotomy with neuronavigation (BrainLab AG, Germany). Dissection was performed through the inferior frontal gyrus down to the level of the lesion. The preparation showed a hard spherical lesion with vasa vasorum at the lesion wall. Further, the lesion wall was grayish black and was found to be a thrombosed aneurysm originating from the distal temporal branch of the right MCA (M3 segment). Distal vessels exiting the aneurysm were seen, which were draped under the surface of the aneurysm, these were freed from the aneurysm dome . It was observed that they were not supplying the distal territory of MCA. At this time, a 4 mm permanent clip was placed across the distal vessel of the aneurysm. The proximal portion of the aneurysm and the parent vessel were identified and coagulated. We also clipped the proximal vessel . The aneurysm was fusiform in appearance. The aneurysm was then resected using micro scissors, cutting the proximal portion away from the permanent aneurysm clips, and then removing the distal portion of the aneurysm . The intraoperativeindocyanine green angiography demonstrated absence of blood flow in the aneurysm . It was observed that they were not supplying the distal territory of MCA. Histopathologicalfindings confirmed the thrombosed aneurysm and reveals remarkable angiogenesis of vasa vasorum .
Postoperatively, the patient was stable and had no neurological deficits. A collateral circulation from the MCA and posterior circulation was detected. After 1-month of follow-up, the patient recovered from the surgery and could walk without assistance.