A 62-year-old hypertentive man was admitted to a local hospital for persistent chest pain lasting 1 h. The patient said he had a heart murmur during a physical examination at age 8 but was misdiagnosed with mitral insufficiency, so he was not further treated. The electrocardiograph (ECG) demonstrated a significant ST-segment elevation in II,III,avF and V7–9 . A diagnosis of acute inferior-posterior myocardial infarction was made. The patient was given 300 mg aspirin,300 mg clopidogrel and then intravenous thrombolysis treatment (Reteplase 18 mg*2). However he still had chest pain and ST-segment elevation 2 h after treatment. Then, he was transferred to a regional percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)-capable hospital.
At admission, his blood pressure was 126/62 mmHg, and his heart rate was regular at 122 beats/min without cardiac murmurs. There was no systemic or pulmonary oedema. The cTNI was 6.64 mmol/L, NT-proBNP was 664.8 pg/mL, and D-dimer was 37,180 ng/mL.
Emergence coronary angiography was performed and showed a 50–60% stenosis in the middle left anterior descending artery (mLAD), and the left circumflex artery (LCX) was normal . When they tried to perform right coronary artery (RCA) angiography, the catheter could not enter the RCA. Ultimately, the physicians were still unable to observe the ostia of the RCA .
Echocardiography revealed a giant right coronary artery- right ventricle fistula. A computed tomography angiography (CTA) scan 7 days after admission showed that the dilated RCA opening was approximately 30 mm , and the widest segment was about 97 mm . The thrombus blocked the artery flow, and the contrast medium filling in the distal region was defective . 3D reconstruction of the heart showed a dilated and tortuous RCA originating from the ascending aorta and traversing through the right front the heart, but its development stopped because the flow was blocked . The 3D reconstruction of the heart and great vessels showed that the diameter of the RCA was almost equal to that of the descending aorta .
Therefore, a diagnosis of congenital right coronary artery-right ventricular fistula complicated with coronary artery aneurysm and acute myocardial infarction was made. The patient had discovered a cardiac murmur at age 8 but had been was asymptomatic for 62 years before the acute myocardial infarction occurred. After tortuous treatments, including intravenous thrombolysis treatment at a local hospital, coronary angiography was performed at a regional hospital. He was ultimately transferred to our hospital for complex surgical treatment.
After 1 month of medication, he was admitted to our hospital and underwent surgery for coronary artery fistula repair + coronary aneurysm resection + coronary aneurysm thrombectomy + aortic sinus plasty. During the operation, the RCA was tortuously dilated, with the widest point > 100 mm located in the right atrioventricular groove at 120 mm in length, causing compression on the right lung. Many red thrombi intermingled with white blood clots in the lumen were observed after the RCA was cut open. The dilated segment of the RCA was cut and removed, followed by opening of the RCA and the long axis to the aortic root. The ostia of the RCA was expanded approximately 30 mm, with a longitudinal suture line, cutting and forming the right coronary sinus. The distal RCA in the right ventricle was stitched. The right crown was small, the lumen was approximately 1 mm, and it was not treated.
The occluded part of the middle of the RCA was sent for pathological examination. Images show the formation of atherosclerotic plaques in the intima and partial organization of the mural thrombus, and lymphocyte infiltration was observed in the grossly dilated segment . The three layers in the relatively normal coronary artery wall segment are shown in Fig. b. The middle membrane of the artery was hypertrophic and atrophic, with partial replacement of collagen fibres and fibrous thickening of the outer membrane . The internal elastic lamina and external elastic membrane in the relatively normal coronary artery wall segment are shown in Fig. d.
The patient was satisfied with his treatment and outcome. He had taken aspirin 100 mg once a day, atorvastatin 20 mg once a day, isosorbide 20 mg twice a day, and atenolol 25 mg three times a day. After a 3-year follow-up, he had no angina pectoris, myocardial infarction or heart failure.