A 71-year-old woman with a pancreatic tumor involving the head and uncinate process was referred to our hospital with symptoms of back pain, weight loss, and diabetes. According to imaging, the tumor was approximately 30 mm in diameter. The patient was diagnosed with pancreatic duct adenocarcinoma based on findings from an endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle biopsy specimen. The tumor was in contact with the right side of the SMV at the level where it received the first jejunal vein tributary. The tumor attachment to the SMV had a longitudinal extent of about 20 mm but involved less than half of the vein’s circumference, so the tumor was considered resectable. However, extension of tumor along the retropancreatic nerve plexus (RNP) approached the superior mesenteric artery (SMA; Fig. ), so based upon the results of the PREP-02/JSAP-05 trial , 2 cycles of gemcitabine and S-1 were administered before surgery.
Although no radiologically evident changes of tumor status were recognized after chemotherapy, we planned to carry out pancreatoduodenectomy with SMV resection and reconstruction. The first jejunal vein tributary would be resected, provided that a vein-clamping test produced no jejunal congestion. Then the segment of the SMV caudal to its confluence with the inferior mesenteric vein (IMV) would be resected in continuity with the pancreatic tumor. Reconstruction of the SMV by simple end-to-end suturing without a venous graft would be difficult, considering that both the splenic vein and the IMV were to be preserved.
One notable finding from computed tomography (CT) before surgery was dilation of the right ovarian vein to a diameter of about 10 mm, similar to the SMV diameter where resection was planned . Although the patient had no active symptoms of PCS such as chronic pelvic pain, feelings of heaviness, or urinary urgency at the time of surgery, she had experienced severe dysmenorrhea prior to menopause and still had occasional feelings of pelvic heaviness, suggesting that she was at future risk for PCS. We reasoned that use of the dilated right ovarian vein as a graft might prevent or lessen such occurrences while also offering dimensions favorable for grafting.
No cancer dissemination was grossly evident at laparotomy; subsequent cytologic examination of abdominal lavage fluid detected no malignant cells. Dissection began with liberal application of the Kocher maneuver to the duodenum and firm retraction of the pancreatic head to the left. The peritoneum at the base of the transverse mesocolon was divided to approach the SMA and SMV, as in the mesenteric approach . When no evident jejunal congestion resulted from clamping the first jejunal vein tributary near the confluence of the tributary and the SMV, the tributary was ligated and divided. We performed the retropancreatic nerve plexus (RNP) hanging maneuver as we previously reported , making sure that the cut end of the RNP was free of cancer invasion. In brief, the RNP hanging maneuver was carried out as follows. The middle colic artery arising from the SMA and the middle colic vein both were ligated and divided, after which the SMA trunk was followed cranially to its origin. The tape for RNP hanging was placed around the RNP, which was divided together with ligation and division of the inferior pancreatoduodenal artery in the plane determined by the hanging tape prior to any division of the pancreatic parenchyma and gastric antrum. A 3-cm minimum length of the dilated right ovarian vein was removed for use as a venous graft. The tumor was removed together with the portion of the SMV that it had invaded. The SMV was reconstructed with no venous bypass, using the right ovarian vein graft. Obvious valves were not recognized within the patient’s graft after harvesting, so we carried out reconstruction in a standard manner: distal end to distal end and proximal end to proximal end. The duration of reconstruction was 38 min , while total duration of the operation was 607 min. Intraoperative blood loss was 390 mL. The pathologic diagnosis was invasive ductal carcinoma; the stage according to the classification of pancreatic carcinoma was pT3pN1b (4/40) M0, pStage IIB, with invasion of the SMV (pPV1). R0 resection status was achieved.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 25 days after surgery. She has finished adjuvant chemotherapy and was free from disease recurrence at 8 months after surgery. PCS symptoms have not occurred. Patency of the venous graft for SMV reconstruction was confirmed by contrast CT carried out with administration of a direct oral anticoagulant 8 months after surgery .