We report on a 33 year-old male patient followed at our center for a unrepaired tricuspid atresia type IC with unrestricted ventricular septal defect with left-right shunting, a non-restricted atrial septal defect with right-left shunting, and a functional single left ventricle with normal systolic function . His past medical history included two attempts of pulmonary artery banding at the age of 15 and 19 years at initial presentation at our center, requiring subsequent debanding due to ventricular arrhythmia. The patient declined any further surgical interventions and developed pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) class I.4.4. according to the Nice classification , with a pulmonary resistance of 7.5 WU and a persisting significant left to right shunt (Qp:Qs = 2.5 :1). Oxygen saturation at room air was 86 %. The patient is also known for cardiac cachexia, asthma without allergic components, and a restrictive syndrome of extra-pulmonary origin (mainly due to scoliosis and post-thoracotomy status). He developed secondary erythrocytosis and suffered a single episode of vertebrobasilar transient ischemic attack (TIA) in 2010, presumably of embolic origin. Anticoagulation with acenocoumarol was started. In 2016, he experienced a first episode of paroxysmal tachycardic atrial fibrillation (AFib) requiring emergency electric cardioversion. At that time, therapy with amiodarone and metoprolol was initiated and anticoagulation changed to apixaban 2.5 mg bid. In 2018, a second episode of tachycardic Afib associated with hemodynamic instability required an urgent electrical cardioversion. While he was euthyroid in the past, thyroid function tests performed in fall 2019 documented overt thyrotoxicosis with a TSH of < 0.005 mUI/l (0.27–4.3), a FT4 of 64 pmol/l (9–19), and a free T3 of 10.4 pmol/l (2.6–5.7) (Abbbott Architect immunometric assays). Antibodies against the TSH receptor were not elevated (0.51 U/l; reference <1.75) A thyroid ultrasound showed a goiter without nodules and with diminished vascularity. The diagnosis of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT), most likely of mixed nature, was established and treatment with carbimazole and prednisone initiated. The biochemical control remained unsatisfactory despite therapy with carbimazole 40 mg qd, prednisone 40 mg qd, and sodium perchlorate 900 mg qd. In parallel, the patient had recurrent episodes of tachycardic Afib leading finally to a prolonged hospitalization and a further electric cardioversion. The patient eventually developed persistent Afib which remained tachycardic and symptomatic despite the intensification of antiarrhythmic treatment with amiodarone, nadolol, digoxin and diltiazem.
Due to the refractoriness of Afib to medical treatment and the evidence of a newly compromised ventricular systolic function, the indication for semi-elective total thyroidectomy was established. Because of the very high anesthesiological risk due to the compromised cardiovascular and pulmonary situation, the indication for a thyroidectomy under local anesthesia was established in a multidisciplinary meeting. Rather than opting for intravenous sedation, it was decided to use hypnosis. All procedural steps were discussed and explained in detail with the patient. In particular, the anaesthesiologist-hypnotherapist provided thorough information about the hypnosis and local anesthesia. This also included a comprehensive collection of personal data of the patient with a focus on memory, observational capacity, understanding, personal activities, environment, and sensorial aspects . The patient provided informed consent and was willing to accept the risks of a general anesthesia in case of conversion to general anesthesia would have been necessary.
After standard monitoring in use in our department, the induction of hypnosis was performed in the operating room. Remifentanil (0.04 mcg/kg/min) was started concomitantly and used throughout the surgery. In order to induce relaxation and calmly modulate perceptions, sensations, and emotions of the patient, permissive suggestions were used by the anaesthesiologist-hypnotherapist. The operating room was prepared accordingly: the anaesthetist's monitoring devices as well as the surgical instruments were silenced, lights were dimmed, staff communicated in soft voice, and access to the room was strictly limited. The patient was placed in a semi-seated position, with his neck in slight hyper-extension. Once the anesthesiologist in charge of hypnosis gave the “go ahead”, the neck was prepared for surgery. As described elsewhere , anaesthesia was applied around the sternocleidomastoid muscle. A line connecting the mastoid process to the clavicle on the anterior and posterior edge of the sternocleidomastoid was drawn . A total of 29 mL of lidocaine 1% with adrenalin was injected on both sides as follows: middle of the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid (corresponding to the emergence of the superficial cervical plexus), anteriorly and longitudinally at 3 points (cervical branches), in the muscle itself, and along the cervical incision.
Given the multiple cardiac and large vessel malformations, a possible variant of the inferior laryngeal nerve was expected. Intra-operative neuromonitoring was not used. During surgery, a non-recurrent laryngeal nerve on the right side could indeed be identified. Surgery was performed with a harmonic scalpel (Harmonic FOCUS Curved Shear, Ethicon Endo-Surgery) and electro-bipolar forceps. All parathyroid glands were identified and preserved.
Communication with the patient was maintained at all times during hypnosis. The patient was then gradually guided back to full consciousness through controlled, focused breathing. Total hypnosis time was 165 min and surgery lasted 100 min.
In the recovery room, the patient was completely awakened. The intra- and post-operative pain control were evaluated using a numerical rating scale (0–10). The patient recalled almost no pain during the intervention (1/10), but experienced severe sore throat (8/10) during the first post-operative night and the following day, which improved within 48 h (3/10). During the first night in the intensive care unit, no rhythm disturbances requiring treatment were recorded. He developed transient asymptomatic hypocalcemia (2.0 mmol/L), corrected by oral calcium. The post-operative parathyroid hormone level was normal (35 ng/L).
In the immediate post-operative period, the patient complained of extreme fatigue which is a well described consequences of hypnosis .
The anatomopathological examination revealed a diffuse goiter (5 × 3.5 × 2.5 on the left side and 6.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 on the right).
Because of recurrent Afib, sinus rhythm was restored by a repeat electric cardioversion. The antiarrhythmic therapy with amiodarone, nadolol and diltiazem was continued. At 4 month follow-up, the interrogation of the loop recorder showed maintenance of sinus rhythm and only short runs of Afib.