A 37-year-old pregnant woman at 33 wk and 3 d of gestation had been diagnosed with RHD 4 mo ago. She was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of our hospital complaining of orthopnea, anhelation and lower extremity edema.
The patient was first diagnosed with RHD at 12 wk of gestation. She developed cardiac enlargement with moderate pulmonary hypertension (PH) at 28 wk of gestation followed by atrial fibrillation (AF) at 29 wk of gestation. At 33 wk of gestation, she experienced severe heart failure which had worsened in the last 24 h.
The patient was gravida 5, 1-0-0-0-1, with 3 spontaneous abortions because of embryo hepatocytes. The outcome of her first pregnancy more than 10 years earlier was a natural birth without any discomfort.
The patient denied a history of thrombosis, smoking, tuberculosis, and alcohol or drug use. No family members had similar diseases.
The patient’s heart rate was 145 beats/min, blood pressure was 113/82 mmHg, respiratory rate was 25 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry (SaO2) was 100% on room air. The patient’s current weight was 82 kg, BMI (before pregnancy) was 25.3 kg/m2, a total weight gain was 15 kg during pregnancy. There were no obvious abnormalities in the fetus.
The patient’s N-terminal pro brain-type natriuretic peptide was 1880 pg/mL, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 27.0 s, fibrinogen was 4.45 g/L, and D-dimer was 660 ng/mL. The cardiogram showed AF. The urine analysis and arterial blood gas was normal.
The TTE showed RHD with severe mitral regurgitation (MR), mild mitral stenosis, moderate aortic regurgitation (AR), severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR), heart dilatation, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 52% and a pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) of 75 mmHg. The patient’s right heart (RH) chamber was enlarged and the left ventricle was hypokinetic. The routine TTE monitoring in pregnancy are shown in Table .
During the CS, the TTE revealed a nascent thrombus that fluttered in a serpentine manner in the IVC after placental removal. The thrombus grew rapidly. From 81 mm at discovery to 155 mm in 18 min. The average growth rate was 4.1 mm/min. At 32 min after discovery, the thrombus detached to the tricuspid valve. At 43 min after discovery, the thrombus detached off to the pulmonary artery, where it fragmented and resulted in acute incomplete bilateral pulmonary embolism, and contemporaneously with the PASP increasing sharply to 93 mmHg, SaO2 decreased to 96%. Moreover, small thrombosis attachment to the mitral valve and left atrial appendage (LAA) were detected. The detailed thrombotic changes are shown in Figure . Postoperative computed tomography angiography showed that the right main pulmonary artery, the middle and lower branch of the right pulmonary artery and its branches, and the left lower branch of the pulmonary artery were embolized . Ultrasonic examination revealed no deep vein thrombus of the lower extremities during the perioperative period.