A 24 year-old right handed male consulted the neurology outpatient clinic for recurrent headaches evolving since one year. He described bilateral frontal and/or temporal attacks of throbbing headache, moderate to severe in intensity, worsened by head movements and accompanied by nausea, photophobia and phonophobia. The headaches were alleviated by rest and paracetamol 1 g tid he took no more than 10 days per month. Attacks lasted between 12 and 60 hours if untreated. There was no identified trigger factor. He never had symptoms suggestive of a migraine aura or an epileptic seizure. He reported a mean frequency of 2 to 3 attacks per month during the first 5 months of appearance of the headaches whereafter attacks progressively increased in frequency up to 5 to 7 severe attacks per month, which significantly impacted on his social and professional life. On taking history, the patient reported having consumed undercooked porcine meat. He had no history of head trauma, weight loss or chronic medical condition. He had no previous personal or family history of headaches or migraine.
General physical examination was normal. Blood pressure was 115/70, heart rate 68 beats per minute, respiratory frequency 15 cycles per minute and axillary temperature of 36.8°C. The patient weight was 71 Kg.
Neurological examination was totally normal. Cranial nerve examination was normal; there were no motor, sensory or cerebello-vestibular abnormalities. There was no neck stiffness or Kernig’s sign. Temporo-mandibular joint examination and sinus point palpation were normal. There was no neck or pericranial tenderness on palpation.The EEG was unremarkable. Neuroimaging was scheduled to rule out a secondary headache. Brain CT scan showed two contiguous occipital cystic lesions with ring enhancement and surrounding edema suggestive of cerebral neurocysticercosis . On laboratory work-up, blood serology for cysticercal antibodies was positive. Full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, c-reactive protein level, human immunodeficiency virus serology, liver and hepatic function were all normal.
Albendazole (1000 mg/day) and prednisolone (60 mg/day) were prescribed for seven days. He was asked to take ibuprofen 600 mg bid during headache attacks. A migraine calendar was provided to the patient to monitor the headaches.
The patient was examined again two months after the end of his treatment. There was a reduction in headache frequency (from 5–7 to 2 attacks/month) and severity. A control brain CT scan was proposed, but could not be afforded by the patient. Six months after treatment of neurocysticercosis, the patient is still presenting 1 to 2 attacks/month, with no interference with his daily activities and easily relieved by ibuprofen intake.