A 64-year-old man who came to our emergency department complaining of left shoulder pain.
He had mild left shoulder trauma due to accidental falling from the standing position while walking 3 h ago.
His past medical history included atrial fibrillation treated with aspirin enteric-coated tablets (Bayer SPA), metoprolol succinate sustained-release tablets (AstraZeneca AB), and chronic atrophic gastritis.
The patient denied a history of smoking, alcohol consumption, drug intake, and a family history of pathological fracture or osteoporosis.
Physical examination demonstrated swelling of the left shoulder, localized tenderness, percussion pain on the proximal humerus, and limited shoulder motion. The muscular tone of the upper limb was normal with no hypoesthesia. Physiological reflexes were present without pathological reflexes.
In contrast, routine laboratory evaluation on admission, with the exception of anemia, was unremarkable. Hematopoiesis accounted for 40%, the ratio of granulocytes to erythrocytes was approximately 2:1, and megakaryocytes were 2-7/high power field. Multifocal plasmacytoid cell aggregation was also observed. Immunochemistry showed CD38 (+), kappa (+), lambda (+); MPO (+), CD61 (+) and CK (-) .
Initial X-ray films of the left shoulder were obtained, which showed only a comminuted fracture and degenerative changes in the upper left humerus . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then performed and showed an abnormal signal intensity of the proximal humerus associated with a comminuted fracture, and multiple soft tissue masses around the fracture, ranging from 4.8 cm to 3.9 cm, which presented as hypointensity and isointensity, as well as hybrid hyperintensity on T1-weighted (T1-W) and T2-W images, respectively. The left humerus, glenoid, and clavicle had multiple sheet-like hyperintensity on T2-W images . A neoplastic lesion with radiological characteristics was highly suspected.
Further laboratory tests and imaging examinations were performed. Computed tomography (CT) scans and X-ray examinations revealed multiple areas of reduced bone density throughout the body. In addition, high 18-F-fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism was observed in several ribs on bone scans, and in the fifth lumbar vertebra (L5), and left proximal humerus .