We present a case of 49 years old Caucasian male suffering from congenital lymphoedema of the left lower extremity who developed composite haemangioendothelioma during his adulthood. Because of the lymphoedema, the patient was first operated on at the age of 6 years, which had only a minor effect on overall condition of the patient. Later on in his life, he experienced multiple erysipelas and at the age of 47 a vascular tumour was detected in the setting of the lymphoedema as its complication. In another institution, a microscopically non-radical (R1) resection was performed and a diagnosis of angiosarcoma was concluded based on the histopathological evaluation of the tumour. The patient was not indicated for any adjuvant therapy, or re-resection. He was followed up and the first control PET/CT scan showed neither local relapse nor distant spread. Local progression was detected after one year of follow up and the patient was re-operated. Second R1 resection was performed and subsequent histopathological examination revealed an angiosarcoma again. This diagnosis was supported by an early second local relapse after a month. After that, the patient was reported to our sarcoma centre for further treatment.
During the clinical investigation, two purple skin affections in the popliteal area at the edges of the dermo-epidermal mesh skin graft were found . The left lower extremity showed chronic disfiguration as a result of multiple erysipelas and chronic lymphoedema. Scattered ecchymoses were also present. In the left gluteal area, multiple small nonspecific purple skin affections were visible. For staging purposes, whole-body PET/MR was performed and revealed multiple small subcutaneous nodules located in the left gluteal area, left calf and left hamstring area . Every nodule demonstrated low metabolic activity; however, the finding raised clinical suspicion for metastases of the previously diagnosed angiosarcoma. During the multidisciplinary tumour board, a bioptic confirmation of the process within gluteal space was indicated. Under local anaesthesia excision biopsy of the skin affection in the gluteal area was performed and sent for histopathological analysis. Within dermis, there was a cavernous vascular tumour (diameter 5 mm) detected, which consisted of dilated thin-walled lymphatic vessels containing papillary protrusions at the periphery. The papillary protrusions contained hyalinised cores in the centre and were covered with columnar endothelial cells with hobnail or even matchstick-like features. There were present neither mitoses nor severe nuclear atypia. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed diffuse positivity of the neoplastic cells for CD31, ERG and FLI-1. Tumour showed also focal D2-40 positivity within slit-like spaces at the periphery. IHC markers CD34, HHV-8, CK-KL1 and smooth muscle actin were negative. Based on the clinical background (localization within the dermis of the gluteal area), morphology and immunophenotype of tumorous cells, the suspicion for papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma (PILA) was raised in contrast to the previous diagnosis . The expected structures of angiosarcoma were not identified within the sample.
To evaluate the uncertain undergoing process, the next multidisciplinary meeting led to an indication for excision of the recurrent focus and bioptic evaluation of the nodules of the calf and gluteal area. The operation was performed in February 2022 in form of an excision of two skin affections of the popliteal area (diameter 43 and 78 mm) and another biopsy of the tumour in the calf and gluteal area (diameter 20 mm and 10 mm). Histopathological examinations showed a new finding – the dermal-based vascular tumour with the retiform arrangement was detected, which consisted of branching vascular channels lined with hobnail-shaped bland endothelial cells. At some portions, papillary protrusions with hyalinised cores were found. There were neither mitoses nor nuclear atypia again. On the other hand, no association with the lymphatic vessels was found this time. IHC showed diffuse CD31 positivity and CD34 negativity of the neoplastic cells. Proliferation marker Ki-67 was low with positivity in approximately 10% of the cells within hot spots. Even though the histopathological finding was similar to the previous sample, due to the multifocality of the process, arborizing retiform architecture of the tumour and lacking association with lymphatic vessels in the current biopsy, the diagnosis of retiform haemangioendothelioma was made.
Because of the absence of angiosarcomatous structures, the original bioptic material was obtained from the first resection for the second opinion. But, the second look examination confirmed the former diagnosis of HG angiosarcoma: at the border between dermis and sub-cutis there was an infiltration of solid tumour consisting of elongated oval to spindle shaped cells showing marked nuclear atypia and numerous mitoses, including atypical forms. Erythrocytes filled slit-like spaced dissecting the solid areas were detected. IHC showed a similar immune profile of the neoplastic cells (CD31 positive; CD34 and D2-40 negative) and significantly higher proliferation (40–50%) based on the Ki-67 proliferation marker. Such a finding was consistent with the original diagnosis of HG angiosarcoma . However, at the base of the sample, small areas with a morphology of retiform haemangoendothelioma similar to the previous finding were spotted.
Based on the histopathological findings of three different vascular components resembling PILA, retiform haemangioendothelioma and HG angiosarcoma, the final diagnosis of CHE with HG angiosarcoma-like areas was established.
Recently it has been discovered that CHE can harbour a fusion gene YAP1::MAML2, especially among children with acral localisation of the tumour . We performed next-generation sequencing (NGS) to investigate this gene fusion and to exclude other entities which could mimic such lesion. Using Fusion Plex Sarcoma V2 panel (Archer) the fusions of the following genes were excluded: ALK, BCOR, BRAF, CAMTA1, CCNB3, CIC, CSF1, EGFR, EPC1, ERG, ESR1, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, ETV6, EWSR1, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, FOS, FOSB, FOXO1, FUS, GLI1, HMGA2, JAZF1, MBTD1, MDM2, MEAF6, MET, MGEA5, MKL2, NCOA1, NCOA2, NCOA3, NR4A3, NTRK1, NTRK2, NTRK3, NUTM1, PAX3, PDGFB, PDGFRA, PHF1, PLAG1, PRKCA, PRKCD, RAF1, RET, ROS1, SS18, STAT6, TAF15, TCF12, TFE3, TFG, USP6, VGLL2, YAP1, YWHAE).
In conclusion no gene fusion was identified, including YAP1::MAML2. However this finding does not exclude the diagnosis of CHE as for such gene fusion usually does not occur among adult patients outside acral localisations . Moreover, we also examined MYC amplification using fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) as there is an evidence in literature that high-level MYC gene amplifications (at 8q24.21) occur in majority of post-irradiation and chronic lymphoedema-associated angiosarcomas . However MYC amplification was not found in this case, which further supports the diagnosis of CHE favouring it over angiosarcoma.
Even though CHE usually shows indolent behaviour, the multifocality of the process in the setting of chronic lymphoedema allowed radical surgical treatment, which would have to be hemipelvectomy in this case. Such a procedure was rejected by the patient. Therefore, the current course of action is the follow up with periodical PET/MR scans. In case of local progression of any nodule, the patient would be indicated for the extirpation of the lesion. However, no growth of the remaining lesions was detected in the follow-up so far and there has been no metastatic spread of the disease since the first detection of the tumour two years ago.