A 63-year-old myopic female with exfoliation glaucoma presented with a visually significant cataract in the right eye. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/60 and IOP was 20 mm Hg on Latanoprost. Her untreated IOP was 25 mm Hg. The right eye had a cup to a disc of 0.6, with an axial length of 26.42 mm and an AC depth of 3.43 mm. She had a grade 3 angle open to scleral spur with 3+ TM pigmentation. She elected to have cataract surgery with a femtosecond laser and wanted vision correction at all distances, so the decision was made to perform FLACS with a trifocal IOL (Panoptix, Alcon, Ft. Worth, TX, USA), Given that her angle was open and her IOP was slightly elevated, she was a candidate for angle based MIGS. The decision was made to perform trabectome (Microsurgical Technology, Redmond, WA, USA) in combination with cataract surgery. Past medical history included hypothyroidism and hyperlipidemia. She had no other medical conditions, was not on anticoagulation therapy, and did not have any coagulation disorder.
The capsulorhexis, nuclear divisions, and an arcuate incision were performed using the Catalys Precision Laser System (Johnson and Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA) and there was no bleeding. She was then brought from the femtosecond laser room to the operating room for the manual portion of the surgery. A temporal paracentesis and temporal main wound were created, followed by injection of dispersive viscoelastic. Preparation for the trabectome was made by tilting the head and microscope. Upon placing the gonioprism, the angle was noted to be open, with a heavily pigmented TM and no blood noted in the Schlemms canal . The trabectome was placed into the AC and was performed, ablating and removing 90 degrees of the TM. Upon completion of the trabectome, there was a copious amount of bleeding from the nasal angle incision. Additional dispersive viscoelastic was injected into the nasal angle to tamponade the bleeding.
The manual portion of the cataract surgery commenced. The head was tilted back to the ortho position and the microscope was positioned. The capsulorhexis was removed and phacoemulsification was performed. During the cataract surgery, there continued to be bleeding from the angle, for which more dispersive viscoelastic was injected into the angle to try to stop the bleeding. The blood was removed with irrigation and aspiration during the phacoemulsification and cortical clean-up. The intraocular lens was implanted. After the lens was injected and viscoelastic was removed, there was still a large amount of blood emanating from the angle. AC washout was performed with irrigation and aspiration and more dispersive viscoelastic was injected to tamponade the bleeding. The bleeding continued, so the decision was made to use a needle tip cautery to achieve hemostasis. The microscope was tilted, the head was rotated and with the assistance of a surgical gonioprism, cautery was applied to the bleeding area of the angle. Additional washout was performed and more dispersive viscoelastic was injected to tamponade the bleeding. The bleeding improved and the surgery was completed. Dispersive viscoelastic was retained in the eye to continue to serve as tamponade. Head of bed elevation and no straining were advised.
On postoperative day 1, the vision was hand motions with IOP 49 mm Hg. The AC had a 7 mm hyphema with 4+ microhyphema. B-scan ultrasound showed no vitreoretinal pathology. The paracentesis was tapped until the IOP decreased to 6 mm Hg. She was started on timolol-brimonidine and netarsudil in the right eye in addition to moxifloxacin, prednisolone, and ketorolac. The latanoprost was discontinued.
On postoperative day 2, the vision was hand motions and the IOP was 44 mm Hg. The AC had 2 mm of layered hyphema and 4+ microhyphema. There was no area of active bleeding. The paracentesis tap was repeated until the IOP was 24 mm Hg. On postoperative day 3, the vision was hand motions and the IOP was 21 mm Hg. The AC had 1.5 mm of layered hyphema with 4+ microhyphema and a nasal blood clot . She was followed daily with improving hyphema and stable IOP. There was a rebleed on postoperative day 7 with an IOP increase to 51 mm Hg. An AC washout was considered, but the decision was made to continue with office-based management due to the possibility of continued bleeding with a surgical AC washout. A paracentesis was made, and wound tapping was repeated. The IOP stabilized on postoperative day 8 and onwards with resolving hyphema.
On postoperative day 18, the vision improved to 20/70, IOP was 13 mm Hg, and there were no clots or layered hyphema. There was remaining 4+ microhyphema. By postoperative month 1, the microhyphema had cleared, but there was an endocapsular hematoma present . An Nd:YAG posterior capsulotomy was performed successfully. On the postsurgery month 9 visit, visual acuity was 20/25 with IOP 15 mm Hg on Brimonidine once daily.