A 27-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a thyroid tumor of the middle and lower poles of the right thyroid, which was found 1 wk previously.
The patient was admitted to the hospital for routine physical examination 1 wk ago. Through thyroid color Doppler ultrasound, a thyroid tumor in the middle and lower poles of the right thyroid was found. The patient denied any symptoms such as dyspnea, fear of heat and lethargy.
The patient had no other diseases or surgical history.
The patient did not smoke or drink and denied a family history of genetic disease.
The patient’s trachea was in the center, breath sounds in both lungs were clear and symmetrical, and there was no murmur on heart auscultation.
The results of preoperative blood examinations, blood biochemistry tests, coagulation function tests, thyroid function tests, urinalysis and stool analysis were normal.
Preoperative color Doppler ultrasound of the thyroid revealed a 1.9 cm × 2.6 cm nodule in the middle and lower poles of the right thyroid. The results of preoperative chest roentgenogram, electrocardiography and echocardiography were normal.
On admission to the operating room, the patient’s heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation and electrocardiography were monitored. Propofol, vecuronium and sufentanil were administered intravenously for induction of general anesthesia and sevoflurane, propofol and remifentanil for maintenance anesthesia. ETCO2 and body temperature were continuously monitored throughout general anesthesia.
The patient was placed in the supine position, and the neck was extended with a shoulder pillow. In brief, after sterilization and draping, one 1.2-cm horizontal incision was made from 5 mm anterior the lower oral frenulum, and another two 5-mm horizontal incisions were made on either side of the first incision. Then 20 mL of 0.9% saline solution, containing 0.375% ropivacaine and epinephrine (1:40000), was injected subcutaneously into the submental and anterior neck area. A blunt-tipped 12 mm trocar was inserted into the space for insertion of a 10 mm 30-degree rigid endoscope (KARL STORZ-ENDOSKOPE, STORZ, Indonesia). The pressure of CO2 insufflation was 6 mmHg, and then two 5 mm trocars were inserted into the oral vestibule on both sides of the endoscope. Under endoscopy, grasping forceps and an ultrasonic knife were used to dissect the skin flap in the plane of the subplatysmal layer. The flap ranged from the level of the sternal notch and the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
During dissection of the anterior cervical area, the anterior jugular vein was inadvertently injured, and obvious bleeding in the surgical area was observed. The ultrasonic scalpel was used to staunch the bleeding . At this time, the patient’s ETCO2 had increased from 46 mmHg to 68 mmHg and continued to reach a maximum of 84 mmHg 1 min later . His heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, heart rhythm and airway pressure were similar throughout the procedure. A CDE was initially considered, and CO2 insufflation was immediately ceased, the sevoflurane vaporizer was turned off, and the patient was placed in the Steep-head down, left-lateral decubitus (Durant’s) position. Loud coarse systolic and diastolic murmurs were heard over the precordium using a stethoscope, and breath sounds were normal on both sides. The patient’s ETCO2 began to drop to 82 mmHg at the third min, then gradually decreased to the preoperative baseline level of 40 mmHg within approximately 10 min. Surgery was continued using a gasless facelift approach. After the operation, the patient was transferred to the post anesthesia care unit. Bedside chest roentgenogram was immediately performed in the post anesthesia care unit and showed no abnormalities .
To further examine the characteristics of CDE, such as the clinical manifestations, diagnosis, treatment and prognosis, in endoscopic thyroidectomy, we identified similar cases reported in the past decade. We first performed an electronic search of several databases including PubMed, Cochrane Library, EMBASE and Web of Science from January 2010 to November 2020. The search words included “embolism,” “hypercapnia,” “end-tidal carbon dioxide” and “thyroidectomy” and were adopted for all search strings according to the unique characteristics of each database. After the electronic search, we confirmed the included studies using the following entry criteria: the types of the published articles were case reports, prospective studies or retrospective studies, and the papers that reported hypercapnia or CDE occurring after CO2 insufflation during endoscopic thyroidectomy were included. Meta-analyses and non-English language studies were excluded.
Finally, 5 cases in four articles were obtained[-]. Data on age, weight, tumor size, surgical approach, insufflation pressure, intraoperative anesthesia, embolization time, possible causes, clinical manifestations, diagnostic tools, treatment and prognosis were extracted and are shown in Table . Surgical approaches included the bilateral axilla and nipple areola approach, transoral robotic approach, axillo-bilateral-breast approach and the transoral approach. Insufflation pressure was set to 20 mmHg in one study, 8 mmHg in one study and 6 mmHg in two studies. Gas embolism developed in 2 cases when CO2 was insufflated, and the other cases developed CDE during the process of tissue dissection. Only one report suggested a possible anterior jugular vein tear, and the other three reports did not specify the cause.
The clinical manifestations after embolism mainly included a sudden and severe drop in ETCO2, a drop in oxygen saturation, hypotension, sinus bradycardia, sinus tachycardia, atrial premature contraction and paradoxical embolism. Three cases developed cardiac arrest. Three reports mentioned ETCO2, one of which used transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) combined with ETCO2, and another reported the use of transthoracic Doppler ultrasound for diagnosis. The treatment methods for CDE included discontinuation of insufflation, adjustment of the patient’s position to Durant’s position, 100% oxygen hyperventilation, the administration of vasopressors and inotropic agents, aggressive volume expansion, positive end-expiratory pressure for ventilation and cardiopulmonary resuscitation for cardiac arrest.
From the prospective study of a small sample of 81 patients by Fu et al, 2 patients were identified as having CDE. We calculated that the incidence of CDE in transoral endoscopic thyroidectomy was approximately 2.4%. The prognosis of these 5 patients was good. However, we believe that a long term, high-volume, prospective study is required to accurately quantify the incidence of CDE in endoscopic thyroidectomy (using reference standard monitoring) and its consequences.
We found that CDE during endoscopic thyroidectomy is rare, and it can develop at any time during surgery. Although CDE may occur under various insufflation pressures, low pressures below 6 mmHg are generally recommended. If necessary, gasless endoscopic thyroidectomy can be considered as an alternative, which can significantly reduce or even avoid the occurrence of CDE[-].