A 72-year-old right handed male diagnosed with poorly-differentiated, stage IIIB neuroendocrine carcinoma of the colon s/p hemicolectomy, small bowel resection and carboplatin-etoposide × 3 cycles presented to the emergency department with acute altered mental status and right facial droop.
Four months prior, he presented with constipation and anemia. Colonoscopy revealed a large raised flat lesion in the transverse colon and CT abdomen demonstrated RLQ mesenteric lymphadenopathy. He underwent right hemicolectomy and small bowel resection weeks later. Pathology was significant for poorly-differentiated grade 3, neuroendocrine carcinoma with focal lymphovascular invasion and tumor invasion through the muscularis propria into the subserosa. Margins were negative, no perineural invasion and 1/33 lymph nodes were positive for carcinoma. There was an absence of non-neuroendocrine component. Immunohistochemical stains were positive for: AE1/AE3, CD56, chromogranin, and synaptophysin; Ki-67 of 60% proliferative index. He was staged as pathologic T3N1a, stage IIIB.
In the emergency department, head CT was negative for an acute hemorrhagic process and did not demonstrate any suspicious lesions. Within one day of admission, the facial droop resolved. Further imaging, CT chest abdomen pelvis, revealed stable enlarged mediastinal lymphadenopathy and a subcentimeter retroperitoneal lymph node but no progression was evident. Two days into the hospital stay, the patient developed fever and subsequently neck stiffness. His chest x-ray and urinalysis were non-diagnostic; EEG showed diffuse slowing but no seizure activity. A lumbar puncture was performed with cytopathology of the CSF suggesting metastatic disease to the central nervous system , along with lymphocytic pleocytosis, normal glucose, and significantly elevated protein and lactic acid. Cytologic analysis showed tumor cells with characteristically-high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, relatively round nuclei with stippled “salt and pepper” nuclear chromatin and minimal cytoplasm, features consistent with metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma . Immunohistochemistry showed the tumor cells were strongly positive for synaptophysin and Cytokeratin AE1/AE3 with a typical perinuclear dot pattern.
Medical oncology and radiation oncology were consulted. No further chemotherapy was recommended as he had progressed after completing 3 of 6 cycles of carboplatin-etoposide. Enrollment in an erlotinib trial was discussed vs palliative therapy. While radiation was considered to be potentially palliative for his symptoms, radiation oncology deemed it would be unlikely to change his overall survival. He was started on palliative high-dose steroids and ultimately transferred to inpatient hospice care. The patient passed away within a week of entering hospice.