A 78-year-old Chinese woman, gravida 2, para 2, with menopause at age 51, presented to the Department of Endocrinology with a 2-week history of 5 × 3 × 1.5 cm mushroom-like lump in her right thigh . According to the medical history, the patient was a housewife and confirmed that she was not exposed to excessively professional, accidental, or medical UV radiation. She had a 30-year history of type 2 DM and her HbA1c was 8.4 % (68mMol/mol) upon admission. There were several scars caused by chronic ulcers adjacent to the lesion . She denied any history of neoplasms.
The lesion was resected under local anesthesia. The sample was fixed in 4 % buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin using conventional techniques. Serial tissue sections were studied using hematoxylin and eosin staining, histochemistry, immunohistochemistry , and HPV type-specific PCR and genotyping. Blind evaluation of all results was performed by two independent pathologists.
Light microscopy examination showed that the lesion was mainly composed of malignant clear cells and signet-ring cells arranged in thick trabeculae or solid nests . The clear cells contained prominent vacuoles which were sharply demarcated and appeared empty. Each of the signet-ring cells contained a large cytoplasmic vacuole and an eccentric nucleus . Atypical mitotic figures were plentiful.
Periodic-acid Schiff (PAS), Alcian blue (AB), and mucicarmin techniques were employed to explore the nature of the observed clear cell/signet ring cell structures. The septa rather than the vacuoles showed positivity for PAS indicating the existence of glycogen . However, neither septa nor vacuoles expressed AB or mucicarmine, suggesting that neither mucin nor mucopolysaccharides existed (data not shown). In line with the above results, the septa expressed cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CK5/6, CK14, and CK19 . CK5/6 is a high molecular weight cytokeratin wihic is usually up-regulated in neoplasms of epithelial origin, including cSCC. Although malignant cells did not express mutant p53, they displayed strong and diffuse positivity for p63, another member of the p53 family playing an important role in normal epithelial development and differentiation . We also found the increased expression of fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 (FGFR2), a downstream effector of p63 . Nucleus immunoreactivity for Ki-67 is a hallmark of high cell proliferation. In the sections, less than 5 % of cancer cells expressed Ki-67 . Malignant cells exhibited negativity for CK7, CK8, CK18, CK20, P16, and c-erbB-2 (data not shown).
DNA was extracted from FFPE tissue sections and purified using the TIANamp FFPE DNA Kit (TIANGEN, Beijing, China). The operation was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequently, HPV DNA was amplified with the L1 consensus HPV PGMY09/PGMY11 primer set as described previously . PCR was performed with a 25 ul reaction system, which contained 1 ul (89 ng) DNA template and 0.75 ul DNA Taq polymerase. Amplification was carried out for 40 cycles in the CFX96 TouchTM Real-Time PCR Detection System (BIO-RAD, USA). HPV genotyping was performed using the HPV GenoArray test kit (Hybribio, Chaozhou, China), which identifies 15 high-risk HPV types (HPV type 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 66, and 68) and 6 low-risk HPV types (HPV type 6, 11, 42, 43, 44, and 81) using flow-through hybridization and gene chips. The result of genotyping indicated that this patient was not infected with HPV .