A 63-year-old man presented with hoarseness that continued for 6 months. Laryngoscopy revealed a white lesion in the right vocal cord . Biopsy of the right vocal cord was performed, and the patient was diagnosed with glottic squamous cell carcinoma. The patient reported drinking 1500 ml beer daily and had smoked one and a half packs of cigarettes per day for over 40 years. He quit smoking at the time of diagnosis. Computed tomography (CT) findings revealed no lymph node or distant metastasis. The patient's clinical stage was T1aN0M0, I (TNM classification, 8th edition). Definitive RT alone was planned. The RT dose was 63 Gy delivered in 28 fractions for the larynx using a three-dimensional conventional RT technique with a dynamic wedge. The radiation field size was 5.5 × 6 cm with a conventional rectangular field (no multi-leaf collimator) . At 3 days after RT initiation, laryngoscopy revealed that the primary tumor of the right vocal cord had slightly increased in size . At 2 weeks after RT initiation, the patient had resumed smoking, and laryngoscopy findings revealed a slightly changed bilateral vocal cord mucosa with a white lesion . He was instructed to quit smoking again. However, he continued drinking 1500 ml beer daily during RT. RT was completed on schedule with no pauses (total treatment time was 42 days). At the time of RT completion, laryngoscopy revealed that the primary tumor had disappeared . Acute toxicities included grade 2 dermatitis and grade 1 mucositis. The initial treatment response was complete response (CR), and the follow-up period was started.
Monthly examination was performed, and no local recurrence or metastasis was observed at 1 year after RT . During the follow-up period, although the patient had quit smoking, he continued to drink 1500 mL beer daily. At 13 months after RT, he resumed smoking one pack per day of cigarettes. At 1 month after resuming smoking, laryngoscopy revealed a slightly changed bilateral vocal cord with a white lesion without recurrence . At 2 months after resuming smoking, he had severe sore throat and hoarseness. Laryngoscopy findings revealed a large tumor in the larynx . Unfortunately, we did not perform CT at that time. Eleven days later, surgical excision of the tumor was performed , and the patient was histologically diagnosed with radiation-induced laryngeal necrosis as a late toxicity without cancer recurrence . After surgical excision, the patient continuously experienced sore throat despite oral painkiller administration. At 3 weeks postoperatively, he suddenly developed dyspnea, and laryngoscopy findings revealed total laryngeal paralysis . The patient underwent an emergent tracheostomy. After tracheostomy, the lingering sore throat disappeared momentarily. Enhanced CT revealed bilateral vocal cord edema, and bilateral arytenoid cartilage showed atrophy and sclerosis . No cancer recurrence was observed on enhanced CT findings. Transvenous administration of steroids alone was performed. First, we injected hydrocortisone 500 mg per day for 2 days, with a gradually decreasing dose (300 mg per day × 2 days followed by 200 mg per day × 2 days). Laryngoscopy findings revealed a slight improvement in vocal cord movement and necrosis . Thus, we switched to oral prednisolone. We administered prednisolone 30 mg per day for 2 days, with a gradually decreasing dose (20 mg per day × 2 days followed by 10 mg per day × 2 days; then, 5 mg per day × 2 days). Steroid treatment further improved the laryngeal necrosis and laryngeal paralysis . After oral administration of prednisolone, the patient was discharged with tracheostomy. At 2 weeks after discharge (1 month after tracheostomy), laryngoscopy findings revealed that the bilateral vocal cord further improved the movement and necrosis similar to the pre-tracheostomy status . No respiratory distress was observed even when the tracheal foramen was blocked.