A 67-year-old White male with no past medical history presented to the gastroenterology clinic in February 2017 with a complaint of persistent intermittent mid-chest discomfort over the past year. Prior to presentation, the patient underwent a negative coronary workup for intermittent mid-chest discomfort of unclear etiology. The patient described a retrosternal chest pressure that only later became associated with food intake. He denied heartburn, regurgitation, dysphagia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, bleeding, dyspepsia, fevers, dark stools, night sweats, or weight loss. The patient did not use any medications, was never a smoker, did not drink alcohol, and denied a significant familial medical history. On physical exam, the patient appeared in no acute distress and had a normal exam of his oral cavity, along with a soft, non-tender, non-distended abdomen and no apparent organomegaly or lymphadenopathy. His initial complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and liver function tests were within normal ranges. His negative workup and persistent symptoms, which were refractory to conservative measures, warranted further evaluation. He was referred for endoscopy, which revealed an ulcerative mass and a stricture in the distal third of his esophagus—concerns for malignancy .
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) examination further characterized the mass as 5 cm in length, 16–18 mm in thickness, and as a partially circumferential mass contained within the submucosal area, with evidence suggesting muscularis propria invasion . It was staged T3N0M0 as per endosonographic criteria. The mass appeared to be primarily below the diaphragmatic hiatus and its center within 0.5 cm of the gastroesophageal (GE) junction. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans demonstrated fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity involving the GE junction and extending to the lesser junction, but no signs of FDG avidity elsewhere. Biopsy obtained from EUS suggested a poorly differentiated carcinoma of suggested large cell neuroendocrine histology . As such, immunohistochemical staining followed, and it showed strong immunoreactivity for both synaptophysin and CD56, but showed negative chromogranin immunoreactivity. Serum chromogranin A was mildly elevated at 16 ng/ml (normal < 15 ng/ml), while serum serotonin at 154 ng/ml and 24-h urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) at 3.1 mg were normal (normal ranges < 230 ng/ml and < 8 mg/24 h, respectively). These findings confirmed the diagnosis of a stage IIA poorly differentiated large cell neuroendocrine tumor.
The patient was started on neoadjuvant chemoradiation in June 2017, consisting of weekly carboplatin with target area under the curve 2 (AUC2), and paclitaxel 50 mg, along with radiotherapy, ahead of surgical resection. He tolerated four cycles of chemotherapy and seven sessions of radiotherapy, which helped in shrinking his tumor size. This was followed by a successful and noncomplicated robotic-assisted, laparoscopic esophagectomy in July 2017. Surgical biopsies and lymph node dissection revealed metastatic involvement in 1 of 3 diaphragmatic lymph nodes and no tumor invasion beyond the muscularis propria, further fine-tuning staging as T2N1M0. The patient has been under active surveillance, with yearly EGD and computed tomography (CT) scans every 6 months.