A 60-year-old female presented to us with severe neck pain and stiffness, as well as standing and walking difficulty that had been persisting the last four days. Ten years earlier, she had been diagnosed with RA, on the basis of symmetrical polyarthritis, affecting the small joints of the hands and wrists bilaterally, high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 68 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) 49 mg/dl, positive rheumatoid factor (RF) 680 U, and positive anticitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) 410 U.
She reported that she did not receive any conventional synthetic disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (csDMARDs), nor biological (b) DMARDs except for paracetamol, and, occasionally, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Past medical and family history were unremarkable. Clinical examination showed swelling and tenderness of the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints bilaterally, as well as muscle atrophy . Clinical evaluation of the CS showed severe neck pain and stiffness at any head movement. Neurological examination revealed brisk tendon reflexes, symmetrical on the upper and lower extremities, and Babinski sign along with clones on the right foot. Laboratory tests revealed anaemia of chronic disease (ACD, Hb 9 g/dl, serum ferritin 158 mg/dl and serum ferrum 7 mg/dl), elevated acute phase reactants and high titres of RF and ACPA antibodies.
Radiological evaluation of the CS disclosed extensive degenerative changes involving the C3, C4 and C5 vertebral bodies, as well as fusion of the apophyseal joints C2,C3 and C4,C5 . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed SAS and spinal cord compression at C3 level and to a less extent in other levels . Hand x-rays showed severe erosive changes and subluxations of the MCP joints bilaterally, fusion of the carpal bones and severe osteopenia . The patient was admitted and directed to the neurosurgery department and underwent multi-level cervical laminectomy and spinal cord decompression with excellent results. Before discussing our case, we review the CS anatomy, its imaging evaluation, the role of conventional radiography (CR), the radiographic changes of CS, and the studies investigating the CS involvement in the setting of RA patients.