A 43-year-old female with no significant past medical history presented with a chief complaint of worsening respiratory symptoms that included purulent nasal secretions, dysphagia, mild dysphonia and dyspnea with chronic cough. The symptoms had begun approximately 2 years previously and had failed to completely resolve in spite of multiple rounds of empiric antibiotic therapy for a presumed bacterial upper respiratory infection. She denied previous tobacco use and had no pertinent family history. Her physical exam was notable for erythematous nasal mucosa and a small anterior septal perforation. Blood work demonstrated a white blood cell count (WBC) of 11,400/uL (neutrophils 93.8%) and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 11 mm/h. Electrolytes were all within normal limits and a random glucose was 96 mg/dL. Head and chest computed tomography (CT) showed air-fluid levels in the bilateral maxillary sinuses and irregular thickening along the left lateral and posterior tracheal wall just above the level of the medial clavicles but was negative for lung parenchymal changes.
Given these imaging findings in the setting of worsening dyspnea, the patient underwent a laryngoscopic examination, which revealed subglottic crusting with diffuse purulent secretions, anterolateral cricoid inflammation, and vocal cord inflammation. Her nasal cavity also demonstrated thick purulent secretions in the middle meatus bilaterally extending to the nasopharynx. Biopsies of the trachea, subglottis, and nasal septum demonstrated purulent, atypical squamous epithelium and necrotic tissue with bacterial colonies. Cultures from these sites were positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa but showed no fungal growth. As such, the patient was treated with intravenous vancomycin and cefepime in addition to steroids and nebulized treatments. Her breathing significantly improved during the course of her hospitalization and she was subsequently discharged with plans to continue outpatient intravenous antibiotics for an additional 2 months.
Several months later, the patient returned for follow-up and was found to have similar upper airway symptoms despite completing her antibiotic regimen. She again underwent endoscopic examination that revealed multiple regions of white, friable pseudomembranous patches spanning her mid-trachea, subglottis, and nasopharynx . Biopsies of these sites demonstrated diffuse tissue necrosis in the presence of extensive fungal hyphal infiltration . Cultures from the trachea and sinuses grew Aspergillus fumigatus. Given a new diagnosis of invasive pseudomembranous aspergillosis, the patient was started on oral voriconazole (100 mg, twice daily) with close outpatient follow-up.
Over the following year, despite continuous antifungal treatment, the patient continued to experience tenacious, mucoid secretions, worsening dysphonia, nighttime pharyngitis, and frequent low-grade fevers. She required two separate inpatient admissions due to symptom escalation requiring endoscopic debridement of her trachea, pharynx, and nasal passages. Repeat tissue biopsies during this time period continued to demonstrate necrotic exudates in the presence of fungal hyphae with cultures continuing to grow pan-sensitive Aspergillus fumigatus. A formal immunological workup during this time was non-revealing with normal immunoglobulin levels, CD4+ T cell counts, absolute neutrophil counts, and complement levels. HIV testing was negative. Given her poor response to antifungal monotherapy, she was initiated on topical amphotericin B (100 mcg/ml) and budesonide (10 mcg/ml) nasopharyngeal rinses twice daily for symptomatic flares in addition to an increased dose of oral voriconazole (200 mg, twice daily).
The patient continued on this regimen for 2 months and was found to have marked improvement on repeat endoscopic examination, at this point 18 months after her initial diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis. Her larynx and subglottis had near normal appearance; her nasal cavities were dry bilaterally; her nasopharynx demonstrated mild scarring but otherwise demonstrated significantly less mucopurulence than on previous exams. However, in spite of this transient improvement, the patient again began developing upper airway symptoms over the following year, correlating with increased purulence in the nasal cavities along with the reformation of pseudomembranous, brown-mucoid layering in the nasopharynx seen on endoscopic exam. Increases in her voriconazole dosing to as high as 300 mg, twice daily were attempted but did not result in significant improvement and were further complicated by vision changes attributed to supratherapeutic voriconazole trough drug levels. Additionally, while the frequency of mechanical debridement had previously averaged once every four to 6 months, the patient began requiring nearly monthly endoscopic suctioning of her nasal passage and pharynx for symptom control.
Approximately 6 years after her initial diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis the patient continued to experience chronic symptoms including dysphagia, persistent dysphonia, and purulent secretions. Erosive changes to her posterior nasopharynx resulted in velopharyngeal insufficiency. Of note, serial chest x-rays during the course of her treatment never demonstrated abnormal parenchymal findings suggesting long-standing upper airway disease without progression to lower airway involvement. In the setting of persistently positive fungal hyphae seen on upper airway tissue biopsy, she was continued on oral antifungal therapy in combination with oral rinses and periodic mechanical debridement for symptomatic relief.