A 52-year-old man was admitted in our institutional emergency department for chest pain, sweating, and vomiting. The patient had no medical history or known cardiovascular risk factors and denied any other symptoms. Blood pressure was 85/50 mmHg and heart rate 54 b.p.m. Intravenous fluid administration was started to manage hypotension. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with only non-specific ST-segment changes . Trans-thoracic echocardiogram showed normal global and regional left and right ventricular function and normal size of left and right chambers. In particular, left ventricular ejection fraction was 60%, left ventricular end-diastolic diameter was 45 mm, and right ventricular end-diastolic diameter was 38 mm. Troponin T levels were mildly elevated (3.0 and 5.0 ng/L at 0 and 3 h, respectively).
The clinical presentation was consistent with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome (ACS). Aspirin was administered and patient underwent coronary angiography, which revealed a patent large left anterior descending coronary artery providing collaterals to a large dominant right coronary artery draining into the pulmonary artery . Non-obstructive coronary artery disease was found. Right and left cardiac catheterization was concomitantly performed, showing a normal pulmonary artery pressure (24/10 mmHg, average 12 mmHg) and a non-significant left-to-right shunt (pulmonary venous oxygen saturation 95%; pulmonary artery oxygen saturation 80%; mixed venous oxygen saturation 76%; QP/QS: 1.3). Then, the patient was transferred to our Cardiac Care Unit for monitoring.
After 2 days, a cardiac computed tomography (CT) angiography was performed to better define the coronary anatomy. CT angiography confirmed ARCAPA, excluded any other coronary anomalies and showed normal calibre of pulmonary arterial vessels (diameter of pulmonary trunk: 26 mm; ). Finally, a 99mTechnetium-gated single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) with bicycle exercise test and then a 201Thallium-gated SPECT with dipyridamole were performed to assess the functional implication of the coronary anomaly , showing a reversible mild inferior perfusion defect without any significant difference between the two tests. Stress test was maximal: it lasted 9 min and the patient attained 154 b.p.m. (91% of target heart rate), 6.8 estimated metabolic equivalents and 180/85 mmHg as peak blood pressure. The patient experiences a subsequent event-free hospital stay, and was discharged on aspirin 100 mg and bisoprolol 2.5 mg. The patient was educated on actions to prevent future vaso-vagal episodes, including keeping adequate fluid intake (2 L/day), recognizing prodromes and lying down and performing counter manoeuvres in case of vaso-vagal symptoms. Also, in order to minimize gastrointestinal triggers the patient was visited by a gastroenterologist and diet recommendations were made.
At 2-year follow up, the patient was asymptomatic and repeated myocardial scintigraphy with dipyridamole stress test was performed after beta-blocker washout. The test confirmed the reversible mild inferior perfusion defect, previously observed. Bisoprolol dosage was up-titrated to 3.75 mg daily and aspirin was maintained.