A 55-year-old male, with no past medical history, was referred to our department for lower urinary tract symptoms. The patient has neither pain nor hematuria. Physical examination and blood tests were normal. Cytobacteriological examination of the urine was sterile. A routine renal ultrasound (US) showed a 36 mm cortical mass on the low pole of the left kidney with no dilation or deformation of the renal pelvis calyces. The ureters were normal. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) revealed an exophytic lesion in the lower pole of the left kidney, measuring 36 × 23 × 39 mm, well demarked, with peripheral enhancement, and a central fluid collection . No intratumoral calcification was identified. No invasion of perinephric fat tissues or adjacent structures, such as renal vein or inferior vena cava (IVC) was noted. No metastasis or lymphadenopathy was evident. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the mass was iso intense to the kidney in T1 weighted image and hyper intense with restricted diffusion in T2 weighted image. T2 weighted image also demonstrated a hyper intense peripheral signal associated to an exocentric, heterogenous and irregular hypointense signal in the center of the tumor .
The diagnosis of renal cell cancer was very likely, the patient underwent an open surgery. It was an 80% exophytic tumor lying on the lower pole of the left kidney, a clampless partial nephrectomy was performed. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.
Laboratory examination showed a well circumscribed, white, firm tumor confined to the lower pole which measuring 4 × 4 × 3 cm. There was no macroscopic capsular involvement.
Microscopic examination showed a well mesenchymal neoplasm surrounded by fibrous tissue occasionally separated by strip-like bands of collagen. The proliferation was composed of long spindle cell with acidophilic cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei, round to oval, organized in a patternless architecture with a combination of alternating hypocellular and hypercellular areas separated from each other by thick bands of hyalinized collagen. It also showed a thin-walled, hemangiopericytoma-like vessels . Mitotic activity and atypia have not been observed. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD34 and Bcl-2 and HMB45 stain was negative . Based on the histological and immunohistochemical features, the diagnosis of SFT of the kidney was established.
Nine months after discharge the patient had a Chest-abdomen-pelvis CT follow up with no evidence of tumor recurrence or metastasis.