A retired, 60-year-old female who was apparently healthy, presented in August 2020 to the COVID-19 treatment center of the Korle-Bu Teaching Hospital in Accra from a referral facility. She had a week’s history of low-grade fever, chills, rhinorrhoea, and generalized limb weakness. The patient had tested positive for COVID-19 infection 3 days following the onset of symptoms. There was no history of cough, pleuritic chest pain, exertional dyspnea or dyspnea at rest, recent calf pain/swelling, prolonged bedrest, long-distance travel and cancer diagnosis in the last 6 months. The generalized weakness was of sudden-onset and progressive, initially involving the lower limbs and extending to the upper limbs. There was no associated bowel or bladder incontinence and no sensory deficit. Her past medical history was negative for hypertension, diabetes or asthma.
The patient on presentation was not acutely ill-looking but febrile: 38.2 C, not clinically pale, anicteric, acyanosed, and well-hydrated. There was no palpable lymphadenopathy. A neurological exam revealed a conscious and alert woman with no cranial nerve deficits. She had hypotonia, areflexia and zero power in all limbs (Medical Research Council, MRC - 0/5). The plantar response was absent bilaterally. No sensory level was elicited. The pulse rate was 96 beats per minute with a regular rhythm, normal precordial findings and the blood pressure reading was 164/94 mm Hg. The respiratory rate was 20 cycles per minute with oxygen saturation of 98% on room air and normal chest findings. The abdominal exam was essentially normal whiles fasting blood glucose reading was 9.1 mmol/L.
Lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, neurophysiological studies, chest computed tomography pulmonary angiogram confirmed Guillain-Barre syndrome and pulmonary embolism .
The nerve conduction study shows electrodiagnostic evidence suggestive of absent motor responses in all the motor nerves evaluated in the upper and lower limbs. The median sensory nerve shows prolonged onset latency, reduced (Sensory nerve action potential) SNAP amplitude and slowed conduction velocity on the Right. All F-Wave latencies were absent. There was evidence of muscle electrical instability in the muscles evaluated in the upper limbs.