A 25-year-old right-handed male was admitted to our department with a chief complaint of swelling of the dorsal aspect of his right wrist for 3 years. There was no persistent pain in the right wrist. He had not suffered from severe trauma. The patient had undergone an ineffective superficial surgery of the right wrist 2 years earlier and no pathological specimen was sent. The wrist deformity had progressively worsened over the following 2 years. Physical examination showed a range of motion in the wrist of extension to 60°, flexion to 30°, ulnar deviation to 20°, and radial deviation to 0°. The fingers moved normally and functioned normally. Neurological examination of the right hand revealed diminished pain sensation. Apart from that, patients reported an obvious diminishing of pain when injured before. General laboratory tests did not reveal anything specific. X-ray examination confirmed bone resorption of the scaphoid . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination showed hyperplasia of the surrounding tissue, but no damage to the articular surface of the radiolunate joint . He was at that time diagnosed with synovitis and radiocarpal arthritis. We managed his disease with Four-Corner Arthrodesis and Synoviectomy to alleviate the damage of the joint and preserve motor function. At the time of surgery under general anesthesia, we observed synovial hyperplasia , the collapse of the proximal half of the scaphoid, an intact radiolunate joint surface , wear of the radialis carpal articular surface of radius , and a deformity of dorsal intercalary segment instability (DISI). Following a limited intercarpal arthrodesis, the intraoperative radiograph showed improvement . The wrist was fixed in a functional position, and the patient was then discharged.
The patient’s right wrist became red, painful, progressively swollen, and immovable over the next 2 months. Imaging indicated increased carpal bone damage . The white blood cell count was 8.81 × 109/L (reference values 4.00 × 109/L–10.00 × 109/L), and the proportion of neutrophils was 65.6% (reference values 50.0%–70.0%). Biopsy results showed no bacteria were cultured. Antinuclear antibody anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies and rheumatoid factor were negative. Results of acid-fast staining, T-SPOT.TB, and tuberculosis (TB) were both negative. Rheumatoid arthritis, TB arthritis, and infectious diseases were ruled out in this case. Because of the hypalgesia before surgery, a cervical MRI was conducted for further antidiastole, which revealed Chiari II syringomyelia . The patient was eventually diagnosed with destructive NA (syringomyelia), ut refused to undergo carpal and spinal surgery. After 2 months of conservative treatment, the right wrist spontaneously and completely fused and the pain disappeared . During the 1-year follow-up, there was no acute change in the condition . The patient was generally satisfied with the outcomes of the treatment.