A 90-year-old Caucasian man, in otherwise good health, presented with a left scrotal mass that had been present for eight months and was occasionally painful. The man had no fever, weight loss or night sweats; there was no lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly or mass in the right testis.
The patient underwent left radical orchiectomy. Macroscopically, the specimen consisted of testis, epididymis and spermatic cord. On the cut surface, the epididymis was replaced completely by a uniform tan mass that measured 6 × 3 cm without areas of necrosis or hemorrhage. No invasive lesions were observed in the testis and spermatic cord and the neoplastic tissue was restricted to the epididymis.
Microscopically, the testicular parenchyma showed no evidence of lymphomatous involvement . The epididymis contained a dense lymphoid infiltrate predominantly composed of small cleaved cells (centrocytes) with admixed small and large non-cleaved cells (centroblasts). The number of centroblasts ranged between five and 15. The neoplasm predominantly displayed a follicular growth pattern . Neoplastic follicles were quite expansive and irregular and were coalescent in some areas. Well formed mantle zones were absent. No tangible-body macrophages were present.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) investigation demonstrated that neoplastic cells strongly expressed CD45RB (LCA, clone 2B11+PD7/26, Dako), CD20 (clone L26, Dako), CD79a (clone JCB117, Dako), bcl-6 (clone PG-B6p, Dako) and CD10 (clone 56C6, Dako) . On the other hand, staining for CD3 (clone F7.2.38, Dako), CD45RO (clone UCHL1, Dako), CD5 (clone 4C7, Thermo Scientific), CD23 (clone SP23, Dako) and bcl-2 (clone 124, Dako and clone 100/D5, Novocastra) were negative . Immunostaining for CD21/CD35 (clone 1F8/Ber-MAC-DRC, Dako) demonstrated expanded networks of follicular dendritic cells within the nodules. Approximately 60% of the neoplastic cells reacted positively when stained with antibody against Ki-67 (clone MIB1, Dako). The proliferation index of follicular lymphoma generally correlates with tumor grade. The proliferation index reported here was independently performed by more than one pathologist and, although it is somewhat high for a low grade follicular lymphoma, discordances are known to occur in follicular lymphoma . Finally, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis revealed a monoclonal immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangement and the detection of t(14;18)(IgH/BCL2) revealed the BCL/JH rearrangement . The lymphoma was classified on the basis of the World Health Organization's (WHO) 2008 guidelines as follicular lymphoma, low grade, grade 1-2, with follicular pattern. The disease was staged as IE (extranodal) primary epididymal lymphoma. Commercial kits by AB Analitica (Padua, Italy) were used to perform both procedures according to the manufacturer's instructions. All used products are compliant with the requirements of the in vitro diagnostic directive (IVDD) 98/79/EC. IHC and molecular analyses were carried out as previously described [-].
The patient underwent full staging for lymphoma, including computed tomography of the total body which did not reveal any evidence of extratesticular involvement (image not shown) and did not receive chemotherapy. Bone marrow biopsy showed no evidence of lymphoma (data not shown). A post-operative follow-up of more than 15 months has been uneventful, without disease recurrence.