A 45-year-old man was injured in a motorcycle accident and transferred to the emergency department in a state of traumatic hemorrhagic shock. Radiographs indicated fractures of the left distal clavicle and scapula, associated with multiple rib fractures and a fracture of the transverse processes of spinal vertebrae. Computed tomography examination revealed a left hemopneumothorax. After resuscitation, the patient underwent osteosynthesis of the left distal clavicle fracture, using tension band wiring. 6-month post-injury, the patient presented to our hospital with severe limitation of shoulder motion, with visible atrophy of the deltoid muscle and inability to perform active shoulder abduction and external rotation. Active range of shoulder motion was as follows: 35° of forward elevation, 20°of abduction, and 0°of external rotation. The strength of all muscle groups of the shoulder, on manual muscle testing, was <M2. No impairments in elbow and wrist function were noted. Electromyography (EMG) assessment identified a complete denervation of the deltoid muscles, with the absence of voluntary potentials, and incomplete paralysis of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles. Based on the EMG and physical examination, a diagnosis of suprascapular and axillary nerve injury. Considering that 6 months had passed since the time of trauma, we selected to perform a radial to axial nerve transfer, using the branch from the medial head of the triceps, while selecting to monitor the status of the suprascapular nerve injury, based on the incomplete paralysis of supraspinatus and infraspinatus. 6-month post-surgery, the contractile strength of the deltoid muscle had improved to M3, but without recovery of shoulder abduction and external rotation, with the significant restriction in shoulder motion persisting at 14-month post-injury, as follows: 80° of elevation, 30°of abduction, and 0°of external rotation . Considering the extent of limitation in shoulder movement, we planned to perform a surgical reconstruction of the functions of the rotator cuff.
The surgical reconstruction was performed with the patient in a right lateral decubitus position, under general anesthesia. A zigzag incision was created along the axillary line, and the LD and TM were detached from the humerus. LD and TM were transferred to the attachment of the supraspinatus muscle, using an anchor and a 4 cm × 10 cm graft extension of the tensor fascia latae. An incision of approximately 20 cm was created along the spine of the scapula, from the acromion to the inferior angle of scapula. The lower portion of the trapezius was elevated, along with the periosteum from the lateral margin, and directly sutured to the insertion of the infraspinatus muscle using an interlacing technique, without the use of an autogenous tendon . The wound was closed and an airplane splint applied with the shoulder in 90° of abduction and neutral rotation.
The patient had begun active and passive elbow range of motion(ROM) at 2-day post-surgery, passive shoulder ROM at 2-week post-surgery, and active shoulder ROM at 4-week post-surgery. After gradual decrease of abduction angles of the airplane splint in 2 weeks, the splint was removed at 6-week post-surgery. 9-week post-surgery, an active range of 110°of the shoulder elevation, 75°of abduction, and 15°of external rotation was achieved. At 12-month post-surgery, the muscle strength of shoulder elevation and external rotation had recovered to M3/M4, and the patient had returned to his activities of swimming and water jet skiing. At 24-month post-surgery, the patient had recovered 170° of shoulder elevation, 170° of abduction, and 60° of external rotation. Moreover, muscle strength of external rotation had recovered to M4 , with a Hand20 score of 13, compared to 30.5 preoperatively.