This study included a 44-year-old obese male (BMI 32.0) who showed no symptoms. Twenty years ago, he was diagnosed with a hepatic mass but the mass was not treated. In July 2020, during an abdominal ultrasound examination at a medical checkup, a 50 mm × 57 mm hyperechoic lesion was observed in segment 8 (S8) of the liver. He came to our hospital with suspected hepatocellular carcinoma.
The patient developed systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis aged 24 years, and type 2 diabetes and hypertension aged 32 years.
Physical examination was normal.
His blood tests showed mild inflammatory reaction and renal dysfunction but no liver dysfunction. The patient did not have hepatitis virus or tumor marker elevation. Urinalysis showed mildly elevated urine protein but no other abnormalities.
Ultrasonography (US) revealed a hyperechoic mass with a 79 mm oval halo in S8 of the liver . An abdominal plain computed tomography (CT) scan indicated a heterogeneous low-density mass with internal fat . The patient suffered from renal dysfunction and could not undergo contrast-enhanced CT. We performed abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the T1-weighted image using the Dixon method. The T1-weighted opposed phase image showed an apparent signal drop in the peripheral area of the lesion. The center of the lesion showed a predominant fat component, and the surrounding area showed a mixed fat component. The T2-weighted image showed hyperintensity, the diffusion-weighted image (DWI) showed a hyperintensity area in the peripheral region of the lesion, and the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map showed hypointensity corresponding to the hyperintensity area on DWI, which indicated restricted diffusion. The central fat-predominant area showed hypointensity on the DWI and mixed hypo- and hyper-intensity on the ADC map .
The lesion contained erythroblastosis cells on glycophorin C staining, granulocytic cells on myeloperoxidase staining, and megakaryocytes on CD61 immunostaining. Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed fat droplet deposition in the background liver tissue, which suggested chronic liver inflammation .