This is a 28-year-old African para1 housewife who presented with symptoms of irregular menses, vaginal bleeding, and lower abdominal pain of one-year duration. Seven years prior, she gave birth at home with the assistance of a traditional birth attendant who had difficulty delivering the placenta. After the delivery, both the mother and neonate were in good health and did not visit a hospital. Our patient had no previous history of gynecologic surgery, sexual disorders, pelvic inflammatory disease, or abortions. She received an HPV vaccination. There were no intermenstrual or postictal bleedings, and her menses, which last 3–5 days, occur every 28–30 days.
She has had normal menses for the six years following the delivery, but she has not been able to conceive. She was examined for infertility at a private clinic, where she was informed of normal results from hormonal (LH, FSH) and abdominopelvic ultrasound studies. She experienced a mass-like sensation in the vagina, abdominal pain, and vaginal bleeding 2 months before presenting to our hospital. She was diagnosed with AUB (abnormal uterine bleeding) after being investigated with a CBC (complete blood count), which showed moderate anemia, at a local health center. Despite being given iron tablets and a combined oral contraceptive, her symptoms had not improved. In addition, she had no family history of bleeding diathesis, diabetes, heart disease, or any previous gynecological procedures.
Upon admission, the patient appeared pale and acutely sick, with vital signs showing a pulse rate of 112 beats per min and a blood pressure (BP) of 90/60 mmHg. On physical examination, she had pale conjunctiva and a soft and non-tender abdomen. PV examination showed there was a rubbery mass protruding through the cervical OS, which made it difficult to pass the examining finger through the cervical rim.
On investigation, her hemoglobin and hematocrit were 3.9 g/dl and 12%, respectively. Pelvic ultrasound revealed the uterine fundus to be on cervical OS, as depicted in Fig. , pointing towards the diagnosis of uterine inversion. There were no tumors or fibroids on the pelvic ultrasound.
After transfusing 3 units of whole blood, the patient was prepared for surgery, and the first step was to try to manually return the fundus into the uterine cavity, which yielded no success. Under general anesthesia, the abdomen was opened by a Pfannenstiel incision, where a typical flower vase appearance with fundal cupping of the uterus and inward pulling of the tubes and ovaries was seen as in Fig. . Hence, confirming the diagnosis of uterine inversion. The uterus was held at the level of the bilateral round ligaments, and a vertical incision was made to the posterior wall at the point of the constrictor ring. Finally, the uterus was gently lifted upward and repositioned as depicted in Fig. , and the normal anatomy of the pelvic organs was restored by Haultain’s technique. Apart from the inversion, there were no masses or abnormal findings on the uterus.
Our patient’s post-operative period was uneventful, with no complications and stable observations. Investigations (a renal function test and a liver function test) done after the surgery were within the normal range. Upon correction of the post-operative hemoglobin and hematocrit to 10 g/dl and 29%, respectively, she was discharged with iron tablets and advised on the next delivery. In addition to being given a subdermal implant, we stressed the need to deliver the next child by elective cesarean delivery. At her follow-up visit at 4 weeks, the patient was well, with normal vital signs and no bleeding. On a subsequent visit in the third month, the patient reported no new complaints, and menstrual flow was normalized.
The patient returned 16 months after the procedure and informed us of her desire to conceive. Upon removal of the contraceptive, we advised her to adhere to strict follow-up. She conceived 4 months later, and her follow-up antenatal care was uneventful. At 37 weeks, the patient started to have labor pains and was unable to reach a hospital in time. By the time the ambulance arrived at her home, she was in the second stage of labor and had delivered via spontaneous vaginal delivery on the way to a health facility. The placenta was removed carefully by a midwife once she arrived at the hospital, and there was no excessive bleeding or derangement of the vital signs. Abdominal ultrasound, performed in the immediate postpartum period and on subsequent follow-up after 3 months, showed the uterus in its normal position.