A 25-year-old primigravida with no significant past medical history at 22 weeks and 0 days gestation presented to a local hospital with sudden onset of right-sided back pain radiating to her right lower quadrant that had persisted for less than one day. She denied nausea, vomiting, fevers, vaginal bleeding, and dysuria. Her pregnancy had been otherwise uncomplicated. Her pain became uncontrollable with intravenous medication and localized solely to her right lower quadrant. She was transferred to a tertiary care center for further management, given concern for appendicitis and possible need for surgical intervention.
Her pain worsened on transport, and on arrival to the tertiary care center, she demonstrated severe right lower quadrant tenderness with rebound and voluntary guarding without costovertebral angle tenderness. She was hemodynamically stable, but intravenous hydromorphone only provided transient and mild improvement in her pain. Her cervix was found to be closed on digital exam, and no abnormalities were noted on speculum exam. Initial laboratory evaluation demonstrated a normal comprehensive metabolic panel and coagulation studies. Hemoglobin was 10.7 gm/dL and white blood cell count was not elevated (9.9 × 103/μL). Urinalysis was negative.
She underwent an abdominal MRI showing a normal appendix. However, in a verbal read from the on-call radiologist, concern was communicated for right forniceal rupture given the constellation of radiologic findings of hydroureter combined with perinephric and retroperitoneal fluid, highlighted in . Her left kidney and collecting system were normal in appearance. Renal ultrasound was therefore performed, and it revealed right ureteral tapering between the gravid uterus and right iliac artery with no right ureteral jet visualized. Given these findings, the patient was subsequently managed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of maternal-fetal medicine, urology, and interventional radiology. Three strategies were discussed and included conservative management with close follow-up, placement of a ureteral stent, and placement of a percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) tube. Patient preference was for PCN placement. Of note, urine culture collected prior to PCN placement was negative.
Following its placement by interventional radiology, her pain was relieved, and she was discharged with follow-up with maternal-fetal medicine and interventional radiology. Her pregnancy was subsequently complicated by readmission for recurrent pain and pyelonephritis with culture isolation of Enterobacter cloacae resistant to both nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX). She required placement of a midline IV for daily infusion of ertapenem at her local hospital. Her pregnancy was also complicated by fetal growth restriction, diagnosed at 35 weeks. Uncomplicated vaginal delivery occurred at 37 weeks and 1 day. Her PCN was removed postpartum at which point antibiotics were also discontinued.