A 62-year-old woman with type-2 diabetes mellitus and high blood pressure came to the emergency department with nine days of malaise, high-grade fever, cough, and progressive dyspnea, which led to acute respiratory failure that required invasive mechanical ventilation. A polymerase chain reaction for the SARS-CoV-2 virus was positive. Chest radiography showed bilateral ground-glass opacities and alveolar infiltrates. Biochemical analyses showed leukocytosis (13 000 cells/mm3) with neutrophilia (11 900 cells/mm3), lymphopenia (510 cells/mm3), and an elevated hs-C reactive protein (5 mg/dl), with preserved renal and liver function. She was started on IV dexamethasone and transferred to the intensive care unit.
On the third day, the patient had a sudden hemodynamic collapse with hypotension, tachycardia, and increased blood lactate levels, requiring vasopressor support. An electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation in the precordial leads with diffuse T-wave inversion . Transthoracic echocardiography showed severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction, with regional wall motion abnormalities characterized by extensive mid and apical dyskinesia with preserved mobility in the basal segments (Supplementary Video). Hs-Troponin I was measured and found to be 8000 ng/L (reference value: 14 ng/L). An emergency coronary angiography was performed to rule out an acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction. We documented normal flow in all coronary arteries and no relevant obstructions.
Left ventriculography showed diffuse apical dyskinesia with basal segment hyperkinesia and apical ballooning, consistent with an apical variant of Takotsubo syndrome (TTS) (Supplementary Video).
She was started on levosimendan and her hemodynamic parameters and clinical status improved, which allowed us to withdraw vasopressors. We continued the management of severe COVID-19 pneumonia with respiratory support. Echocardiography showed normal wall motion in all territories and recovery of LV function on day seven (Supplementary Video). The patient had a good clinical evolution, was weaned from respiratory support, and was discharged with complete recovery after one month of hospitalization.