Our patient is a 70-year-old male, right-hand dominant farmer who presented at the outpatient clinic after falling on the concrete and landing on his left hand. The patient complained of pain on the ulnar side of his hand and swelling was noted on examination. No apparent deformity of the little finger was noted, finger cascade was normal, and full range of motion was elicited but with pain on motion. Ulnar nerve function was intact. Radiographs of the left hand were performed and showed no fractures or dislocations .
The patient denied any interval injuries but had persistent pain on the ulnar side of his left hand, prompting him to come back to the clinic 9 weeks later.
Repeat radiographs showed complete ulno-palmar dislocation of the 5th CMCJ. A CT scan with 3-D reconstruction was also done, confirming said injury, and no associated fractures were noted .
Manual closed reduction was done under fluoroscopic guidance, but the joint was noted to be unstable when traction was removed. The patient was then indicated for open reduction of the 5th CMCJ.
The dislocated joint was approached from the dorsoulnar side and scar tissue was carefully removed from the 5th CMCJ . All ligaments of the 5th CMCJ were torn including the pisometacarpal ligament. Using manual longitudinal traction and dorsally directed force to the 5th metacarpal base, the 5th CMCJ was repositioned to its anatomic location. A K-wire was inserted perpendicular to the long axis of the 5th through 4th metacarpals as a temporary fixation. Thereafter, intermetacarpal fixation was performed between the 4th and 5th metacarpals using Mini TightRope® (Arthrex, FL, USA) .
Under C-arm guidance, 1.2-mm holes were drilled with a trajectory about 1 cm distal from and parallel to the articular surfaces of the 5th metacarpal base to the 4th metacarpal base, approximating the original location of the intermetacarpal ligament. Together with one of the stainless-steel metal buttons, a loop of the Mini TightRope® construct is passed from the ulnar to the radial hole of the 4th metacarpal. Mini TightRope® construct was then pulled to tension until the button was flush on the radial cortex of the 4th metacarpal base. The two strands of Mini TightRope® FiberWire were then passed through the radial to ulnar holes of the 5th metacarpal, and second button was then loaded into the sutures and pushed until it was flush against the ulnar cortex of the 5th metacarpal. While maintaining tension, a provisional knot is created, and range of motion and finger cascade are then checked. Once deemed acceptable, sutures were then tied for up to 5 knots over the ulnar button. Remaining strands are then cut using a blade 11 scalpel. Capsule, fascia, and skin were then closed. Immediately after surgery, the patient was allowed to use his fingers freely with unrestricted range of motion.
K-wires were removed at 2 weeks postoperatively. Follow-up radiograph at 1 year postoperatively showed maintained proper alignment of the 5th CMCJ and the little finger had no limitation of motion. There are no plans to remove the Mini TightRope®, unless the patient begins to complain of pain related to the aforementioned hardware.