A 5-year-old girl initially presented to our department due to worsening pain in the left proximal thigh. Osteosarcoma was suspected radiographically . Open biopsy revealed a high-grade conventional osteosarcoma. The tumor was initially staged as IIB (T2b N0 M0), and neoadjuvant chemotherapy was commenced in accordance with the NECO-95J protocol . After three cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the pain was alleviated, the extra-osseous mass was dramatically reduced, and limb-salvage surgery was planned. As the tumor had already invaded the epiphyseal plate and epiphysis of the left distal femur at initial presentation, osteo-articular resection was thought necessary so as to obtain a negative surgical margin. At 6 years and 2 months old, distal femoral resection and temporary spacer insertion was performed . Both medial and lateral meniscuses were preserved. The spacer was hand-made, using an intramedullary nail of 7 mm in diameter and molded polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA). Because there were no commercially available molds fitting the distal femur of such a young child, we made the spacer by hand, imitating the original distal femur of the patient that had been just removed. After surgery, the left leg was externally fixed in a cast for 4 weeks. Partial weight bearing on the affected leg, supported by a hinged knee brace, was thereafter commenced ; however, the spacer was dislocated at 7 months post-operatively, preventing the patient from bearing weight and leading to bone atrophy in the left leg .
At 7 years and 8 months old, secondary surgery was performed with the aim of enabling weight bearing on the affected leg. In order to stabilize the spacer against the tibia, a custom-made ceramic spacer (Kyocera Corp., Japan) with a smooth straight stem of 8 mm in diameter had been ordered 3 months prior to the surgery . Intra-operatively, after the removal of the initial spacer, a 1-cm length of the distal edge of the residual femur was removed, but the periosteum and reactive membrane around the molded PMMA was preserved. The junction between the residual femur and the ceramic spacer was fixed with PMMA, and then covered with the preserved periosteum and membrane . After surgery, the left leg was placed in a cast for 4 weeks, after which the patient re-started partial weight bearing using a hinged knee brace as with the first spacer. The bone atrophy in the left leg was gradually resolved. At 18 months after the second surgery, the cortexes of the femur and tibia had thickened sufficiently for expandable mega-prosthesis; however, loosening of the stem and varus deformity was observed . A third surgical intervention was, therefore, planned.
At 9 years and 7 months old, the second spacer was removed, and the knee joint was reconstructed using a custom-made growing femoral prosthesis (Stryker Corp., Germany) with a curved porous stem of 8.5 mm in diameter fixed to the residual femur with two screws . Intra-operatively, the PMMA around the junction was already loosened, and the stem was easily removed. The residual femur was carefully reamed, and the stem was inserted. Cancellous bone chips from the proximal tibial epiphysis were grafted around the bone-prosthesis junction and then wrapped with the preserved periosteum and pseudo-periosteum membrane. The proximal surface of the tibia was also replaced, but the growth plate was preserved. Immediately after surgery, range of motion (ROM) exercise was started. Six weeks after surgery, partial weight bearing was permitted. Ten months after the third surgery, the patient was able to walk unsupported, and a radiograph showed further thickening of the cortex of the residual femur . At 10 years and 7 months old, the growing femoral prosthesis was extended by 1.1 cm. At the latest follow-up, at 11 years and 1 month old, the patient was 143 cm in height with a limb length discrepancy (LLD) of 5 cm and was able to walk unsupported using a 2.5 cm shoe lift (Video ). The Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) score was 24 out of 30 points . The muscle strength of quadriceps recovered to manual muscle test (MMT) level 3, and active straight leg raising became possible without extension lag. The ROM of the left knee was 0–90°. The patient was receiving a second extension of growing femoral prosthesis.