We present the case of a 15-year-old girl with no significant personal or family history and no consanguinity.

She presented with chief complaints of dysgraphia and right hand incoordination with a two-month history. She had no other disorders or infectious or traumatic history. She had started taking the combined oral contraceptive pill at the time of the complaints. The patient was not on any other medication and did not smoke. On objective examination at admission, she had mild dysgraphia. The rest of the neurological examination did not reveal any language disorders. For example, she named and repeated well everything that was asked of her, with a slight decrease in fluency with words beginning with P. There was no apraxia or changes in visual fields, oculomotor or facial mimicry. There were no motor or sensory deficits or gait abnormalities. The patient was seen by the ophthalmology unit with normal findings.

In terms of additional diagnostic tests, a brain MRI was performed, which revealed several ischemic lesions with different rates of evolution, affecting the left cortico-subcortical frontoparietal region, with extension to the whole centrum semiovale, suggesting infarcts of the basins. The angioresonance MRI showed multiple subocclusive stenoses of both supraclinoid segments of the internal carotid arteries, of both A1 segments and also of the M1 segment of the left middle cerebral artery. The laboratory studies did not show relevant alterations, with complete blood count, renal and hepatic function, and lactate dehydrogenase showing no changes. There was no dyslipidemia, the homocysteine value was normal and the immunological study showed no alterations, including antiphospholipid antibodies and antinuclear antibodies, as well as rheumatoid factor. The coagulation study was normal and, by a prothrombotic study, a common polymorphism of methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase was found. In addition, there were normal levels of inhibitor of activator of plasminogen-1. The cerebrospinal fluid presented a normal cytochemistry, a negative bacteriology and a positive polymerase chain reaction of cytomegalovirus, with an intermediate cycle threshold value. The serum immunoglobulins G were positive, and the immunoglobulins M, negative. The research of the DNA of cytomegalovirus in the serum was negative. It was decided to initiate intravenous ganciclovir and corticoids.

Cytomegalovirus in the cerebrospinal fluid was investigated by real-time polymerase chain reaction-specific cytomegalovirus, which was negative. The patient completed six days of antiviral treatment. The oligoclonal bands in the cerebrospinal fluid were unchanged. A magnetic resonance of the vessel wall was performed to investigate further. A slight increase in the T1 signal was observed after gadolinium use in the vessel wall along the left M1 segment, corresponding to the focal stenosis point, without an increase in the vessel wall thickness. There were no other focal abnormal enhancing areas affecting the rest of the intracranial vessels. These changes favoured a primary moyamoya disease and not a secondary etiology, namely a vasculitis. A conventional cerebral angiography was performed that showed significant stenosis of the right A1 segment and irregularities of the left M1 segment (with decreased distal flow), left A1 occlusion, with some degree of collateralisation, through the pial vessels of the left middle cerebral artery. The presence of moyamoya-like vessels was not observed.

During the hospital stay, persistently elevated blood pressure was observed. An electrocardiogram, an echocardiogram, a renal echo-Doppler and a renal artery computed tomography angiography were also requested, which were not remarkable, and the patient had normal aldosterone, activated renin and plasma metanephrines.

With the mass sequencing of the moyamoya disease panel in progress, our patient was discharged on treatment with acetylsalicylic acid and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. In addition, the combined oral contraceptive pill was discontinued and she was referred for multidisciplinary follow-up.

In the study of the sequences of the coding regions and of the flanking intronic regions (±8 bp) of the ACTA2 gene, no mutations were detected in the regions analyzed. In addition, in the study of the sequences of the coding regions and of the flanking intronic regions (±8 bp) of the RNF213 gene, the variant c.12185G>A, p.(Arg4062Gln) was detected in heterozygosity in the RNF213 gene. This result indicates that the patient is heterozygous for the variant c.12185G>A, p.(Arg4062Gln) in the RNF213 gene. The detected variant has already been described in the literature as a founder variant in the Asian population, associated with moyamoya syndrome. This variant is described in ClinVar as a variant of unknown clinical significance. In addition, it is not described in the population databases (dbSNP, ESP and gnomAD) and affects a highly conserved amino acid. With the information available, this variant should be classified as probably pathogenic. The study of the patient's parents allowed the conclusion that the detected variant was inherited from the father.

Approximately four months after discharge, a repeat MRI brain angiography revealed a worsening of intracranial stenosis, specifically a new stenosis of the left P1 segment of the posterior cerebral artery. The angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor was discontinued. Three years after the initial hospitalization, our patient underwent elective surgery for indirect cerebral revascularization, encephaloduromyosinangiosis. Both the surgery and the postoperative period were uneventful. Currently, about five months after the surgical procedure, she remains asymptomatic, on aspirin, and under follow-up.
