On February 23, 2022, a 53-year-old male was admitted to our hospital because of 15 d history of progressive swelling, pain and blurred vision in the left eye, in the absence of obvious inducement.
Fifteen days ago, the patient developed swelling, pain and blurred vision in the left eye, and was admitted to the 9th Hospital of Hangzhou. He was diagnosed with "neovascular glaucoma” and was given tobramycin dexamethasone eye drops and pranoprofen eye drops for anti-inflammatory therapy, timolol eye drops and brinzolamide eye drops for ocular hypotensive therapy. However, the disease symptoms did not improve, and he visited the First People's Hospital of Hangzhou on February 23, 2022, for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient had no past illness.
The patient had no special personal or family history of illness.
Ophthalmological examination showed that visio oculus dexter was 0.8 and Visus Oculi Sinistri was sensitive to light (mainly contains distorted light that is located above and below the nose). Noncontact tonometer showed that R/L = 16.3/Tn + 3 mmHg. There was no hyperemia of right bulbar conjunctiva. The cornea was clear and the depth of anterior chamber was satisfactory. Pupils were round in shape and reactive to light while light was mixed in the lens of right eye, optic disc boundary was clear and flat, while omentum was located in the fundus, mixed congestion in the conjunctiva of left eye and corneal edema were also noted. There was mild swelling in one-third of the anterior chamber, pupil was round in shape and not reactive to light and it was not extending to posterior chamber of eye, while the other details were unclear.
Relevant antibody tests and other laboratory tests were further performed, and the results were all negative.
Ophthalmic ultrasound showed a solid lesion in the left eye, indicating possible optic nerve head melanoma . CT showed patchy slightly hyperdense shadows anterior to the posterior wall of the left eyeball, suggesting a mass . MR imaging showed left eyeball mass with slightly short T1, equal short T2 abnormal signals, about 8 mm × 5 mm in size, which were significantly enhanced after contrast enhancement . PET/CT fusion images showed that the posterior left eyeball was locally thickened. The glucose metabolism of the lesion was normal . No significant abnormality was observed in the pancreas, spinal cord, cerebellum, adrenal gland, or kidney. The patient signed a written informed consent form before the examination. This retrospective study involving human participants was reviewed and approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Hangzhou First People’s Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine (Approval No. 2022-007-01).