A 42-year-old white man without pre-existing comorbidities was transferred to our unit on 8 September 2014. He was involved in a car crash on 30 August 2014 with traumatic hemorrhagic shock and an ISS of 28. Shock resuscitation according to Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) guidelines and massive transfusion policy were immediately started . Upon hemodynamic stabilization, a total body computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed unstable pelvic fractures and right flank mesenteric bleeding, without clear evidence of intestinal perforation. Damage control surgery of his pelvic fractures was performed by positioning external fixators [, ]. Transfer to our unit was then planned for definitive osteosynthesis.
On arrival he had fever and profuse diarrhea, leukocytosis, normal procalcitonin (PCT), elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), lactate 0.9 mmol/L, an Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score of 11, and a Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score of 3; his Predisposition, Infection, Response, and Organ Dysfunction (PIRO) score was 5 . He wore a tracheostomy and was mechanically ventilated on analgosedation; he was left on parenteral nutrition and a minimal enteral feeding was started.
Chest X-rays detected a right basal infiltrate. Orthopedic surgery was postponed. After thorough microbiological sampling, immune chromatography for Clostridium difficile was negative, rectal swabs grew MDR Acinetobacter baumannii, whereas blood cultures yielded coagulase-negative staphylococci. His antibiotic therapy was modified as described here and in Table . As external fixators poured purulent secretions, on day 15 he underwent definitive pelvic osteosynthesis in spite of persistent fever and diarrhea . Septic shock ensued 24 hours after surgery, with oliguria, leukocytosis, PCT 4.39 ng/ml, CRP 46.6 mg/L, and lactate 1.17 mmol/L; his SOFA score rose to 6. After adequate fluid resuscitation, norepinephrine was added for persistent hypotension, based on data of hemodynamic monitoring (cardiac output and stroke volume variation using PiCCO Plus monitoring system) and trends of central venous saturation of oxygen (ScVO2). Low doses of steroids were prescribed for the first 3 days. Microbiological sampling included blood cultures, quantitative culture of tracheal secretions, and culture of urine . Blood cultures were negative; urine and tracheal aspirate samples were positive for CRKP and MDR A. baumannii.
He had a short-lasting improvement, with fever, abdominal pain, and vomiting relapsing after a few days; a repeated CT scan of his abdomen revealed suprapubic and left ischiatic abscesses at surgical sites, as well as dilated bowel due to paralytic ileus. Surgical debridement was performed, followed by vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) therapy . Intraoperative microbiological sampling revealed multiple CRKP isolates, with a worsened resistance profile, including colimycin (colistin) resistance. He improved and a control radiographic (RX) scan of his thorax was negative; bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) sampling, however, confirmed persistence at low bacterial load of CRKP. After 21 days, colimycin was withdrawn. However, 4 days later, he had fever and severe leukocytosis; he relapsed with acute renal failure: creatinine 2.53 mg/dL and acute kidney injury (AKI) stage 2 according to the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes classification (KDIGO) . His PCT levels rose above 100 ng/ml, his lactate was 3.3 mmol/L, and his SOFA score was 10. After further blood sampling for blood cultures and multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR; Magicplex™ Sepsis Test, Seegene), colimycin and anidulafungin were restarted with the addition of rifampicin . Multiplex PCR revealed A. baumannii and Candida albicans. To support septic shock recovery, two extracorporeal hemoperfusion devices were used: the Polymyxin B-Immobilized Cartridge (Toraymyxin® PMX 20-R, Toray Medical, Tokyo, Japan), allowing endotoxin removal and coupled plasma filtration adsorption (CPFA; CPFA® LYNDA®, Bellco, Mirandola, Italy), a hydrophobic resin with high affinity for many inflammatory mediators. Within 3 days, two Polymyxin B and three CPFA treatments were overall delivered. Clinical improvement ensued; his PCT fell to 19.25 ng/ml and serum creatinine to 1.82 mg/dL. Microbiological samples yielded: MDR A. baumannii and CRKP from tracheal aspirate, C. albicans and MDR A. baumannii from blood cultures, and A. baumannii and panresistant CRKP from wound swabs. In spite of septic shock reversal, he remained febrile with diarrhea and worsening anemia in the next 2 weeks. Control blood cultures (three lots) were persistently positive for C. Albicans, A. baumannii and CRKP. Ophthalmoscopy revealed retinal involvement, so that sequential therapy with liposomal amphotericin B was started. In the following weeks frequent vomiting ensued, impeding any enteral nutrition; his abdominal pain increased, paralleled by a palpable mass in his right flank. Colonoscopy revealed patchy serpiginous ulcers; a repeated CT of his abdomen revealed a periappendicular mass. Based on such data, after repeated multidisciplinary consults, an exploratory laparotomy was at last performed and an inflammatory pseudotumor of his right colon was diagnosed and resected with ileostomy. Soon after surgery, his blood cultures turned negative. Colimycin was interrupted. Once more, septic shock relapsed 4 days later. Leukocytosis, hypotension, PCT >100 ng/mL, renal failure, and lactate 4.0 mmol/L led to a SOFA score of 11; creatinine zenith was 4.73 mg/dL. Combination antibiotic therapy was modified (see Table ) and a single Polymyxin B extracorporeal hemoperfusion cycle was repeated. Blood cultures were persistently positive for CRKP. After interdisciplinary consultation, removal of pelvic synthesis media was anticipated. Shortly after surgery, he improved; 3 weeks later, microbiological and biochemical evidence of infection resolved, as well as gastric atonia. Combination therapy was continued for 56 days . He was transferred to the orthopedic ward after 146 days of ICU stay and later to rehabilitation. At present, he is doing well at home able to walk.