A 67-year-old man presented with a 2-wk history of progressively worsening polyarthralgia and nail dystrophy.
The patient was diagnosed with advanced gastric adenocarcinoma with distant lymph nodes (LNs) metastases was referred to our department in March 2020. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a 3-cm sized ulcerofungating mass in the pre-pyloric antrum. Histopathological examination of the endoscopic biopsy specimen revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, negative results for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (immunohistochemistry 1+), Epstein-Barr virus, and deficient DNA mismatch repair (dMMR) (retained nuclear expression of MSH2 and MSH6 and loss of MLH-1 and PMS-1). Abdominal computed tomography showed multiple enlarged LNs in the para-aortic and aortocaval areas. The patient was treated with capecitabine and oxaliplatin as the first-line palliative chemotherapy for 11 mo, followed by ramucirumab and paclitaxel as second-line palliative chemotherapy. After 2 mo of treatment with ramucirumab and paclitaxel, the tumor response indicated progressive disease. In June 2021, pembrolizumab (200 mg in a 3-wk cycle) was initiated as third-line palliative chemotherapy, given that the tumors showed dMMR.
He had a history of foot psoriasis, which was well controlled without treatment.
He had no personal and family history.
The patient was afebrile with stable vital signs. Physical examination revealed erythematous swelling in the distal interphalangeal joints, left shoulder, and both knees . He had plaque psoriasis with psoriatic nail dystrophy and dactylitis in the distal joints of the fingers and toes .
Before pembrolizumab administration, the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR, absolute neutrophil count divided by absolute lymphocyte count) and prognostic nutritional index (PNI, 10 × serum albumin value, g/dL + 0.005 × total lymphocyte count/mm3) were 1.1 and 50.5, respectively. Two months after the initiation of pembrolizumab, laboratory testing revealed a normal white blood cell count of 7970/µL with 72.6% neutrophils and 17.9% lymphocytes, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 89.0 mm/h, and a serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) level of 2.3 mg/L. Immunological serum tests were negative for rheumatoid factor (RF) and anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibody. Synovial fluid analysis of knee joint revealed a yellow appearance, decreased viscosity, and a cell count of 26,678 cells/mm3 with 81.2% neutrophils, indicating inflammatory arthritis. Gram staining was negative, no crystals were detected by microscopy, and cultures for common pathogens and mycobacteria were negative.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the right knee and left shoulder showed joint effusion and synovial enhancement.