A 60-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with complaints of difficulty in swallowing and left chest pain.
The patient had a 6-month history of persistent, worsening difficulty in swallowing since December 2023.
The patient had no significant history.
Mother of the patient had the history of uterine cancer.
The patient showed a poor general condition, with Eastern Comprehensive Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS 3).
Blood tests showed preserved bone marrow, liver, and kidney functions, without coagulation abnormalities. Serum levels of tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, SCC) were not increased.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a submucosal tumor-like protruding lesion, occupying nearly the entire lumen from the mid to lower thoracic esophagus, causing stenosis . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed esophageal tumor invasion into the left atrium, multiple liver and lung metastases, and a left pleural effusion . The biopsy specimen of the esophageal tumor showed spindle cells, positive for the mesenchymal marker vimentin and negative for epithelial markers including AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, p40, and cytokeratin 7, leading to a suspicion of esophageal sarcoma, and the patient was referred to our hospital for treatment. Cardiac ultrasonography showed a tumorous lesion on the posterior side of the left atrium, however, no invasion into the heart or intramyocardial tumor was observed. Chest X-ray and ultrasonography showed a pleural effusion, and thoracentesis was performed to alleviate symptoms and make a diagnosis, draining 1000 mL of slightly turbid, bloody pleural fluid. However, chest X-ray the next day showed re-accumulation of pleural fluid to the same degree as before drainage. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy allowed passage of a slim scope, and biopsy of the primary lesion was performed. Histopathologically, atypical spindle cells and polymorphic cells, however, no epithelial components, were observed and immunohistological staining was negative for AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, cytokeratin 5/6, and p63, similar to the previous pathological report; thus, an epithelial malignant tumor could not be confirmed. The programmed death-ligand 1 Combined Positive Score (CPS) was ≥ 10. Pleural fluid cytology showed malignant cells, and cell block immunostaining showed similar findings to those of the primary lesion. Cancer stem cell markers including ZEB1 and TWIST were positive in both the primary and metastatic cardiac lesions .