A 75-year old Caucasian man with a long-standing history of tophaceous gout and several recurrent episodes of arthritis during the past five years presented with a large, painful, ulcerated tophus located on the first metatarsophalangeal joint of his left foot to our emergency department. He had intentionally interrupted treatment with allopurinol four months previously; however, he did not report any recent deviations from his standard diet, any alcohol abuse or diuretic treatment. Five days before presenting to the emergency department, a tophus on the first toe of his left foot had become painful, red and swollen. He tried a course of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) without improvement. Ten hours before seeking medical assistance, the tophus burst releasing a viscous, chalk-like material.
On physical examination he had a mild fever of 37.8°C. A greyish, voluminous and ulcerated nodule containing chalky material was located on the first metatarsophalangeal joint of his left foot . Further examination revealed multiple other tophi overlying the first and second metacarpophalangeal joints of his left hand and the interphalangeal joints of his right hand , wrists, elbows , ankles, interphalangeal and metatarsophalangeal joints of the feet and heels . Two smaller ulcerated tophi were also seen on the fingertip of the left thumb and over the first interphalangeal joint of the right foot. Many joints were also deformed. The first metatarsophalangeal joint of his left foot was totally nonfunctional.
Laboratory workup revealed leukocytosis (14.524/mm3), elevated C-reactive protein (7.21 mg/dl) and elevated serum uric acid (14 mg/dl). Radiographs of the foot showed soft tissue swelling and total destruction of the first metatarsophalangeal joint . Moderate periarticular alterations were also observed in the other joints of the foot. Cultures from the ulcerated tophus were negative. Antibiotic treatment with ciprofloxacin (800 mg/day) and intravenous administration of NSAIDs (lornoxicam 16 mg/day) was initiated.
Due to the extraordinary size of the ulcer and the complete destruction of the underlying joint, amputation of the left foot was considered. However, before resorting to this solution, a surgical debridement with lavage of the joint was performed. Debridement was also performed on the minor ulcers. Five days after admission treatment with allopurinol (300 mg/day) was initiated. The patient improved clinically and was discharged two days later. For the next 33 days foam silver-containing wound dressing (CELLOSORB® Ag) and heterologous lyophilized collagen (BIOPAD®, equine collagen) were used on the largest of the three ulcers, on an outpatient basis, while efforts were made to keep serum uric acid levels within normal limits. All three ulcers healed completely within eight, 10 and 40 days after initial presentation, respectively . Six months after treatment, he remains symptom free, although he still refuses to comply with the prescribed uric acid lowering regimen and rejects any further surgical intervention.