A 94-year-old man, who suffered dark urine, epigastric pain, and loss of appetite, was admitted for evaluation and treatment of bile duct cancer. He has a past history of hypertension and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Computed tomography (CT) showed a nodule in the lower bile duct, which was slowly enhanced by dynamic CT . Tumor markers were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen of 7.2 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19–9 of 22 U/mL, respectively. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed biliary obstruction and biliary drainage was performed . Cytopathological examination revealed adenocarcinoma of the bile duct. The patient was carefully evaluated whether he overcame pancreatoduodenectomy by cardiac ultrasonography, brain magnetic resonance angiography, nutritional evaluation by rapid turnover proteins (RTPs) (retinol-binding protein of 2.4 mg/dL, pre-albumin of 19.9 mg/dL, transferrin of 196 mg/dL), and CT-based assessment, including osteopenia and sarcopenia. Sarcopenia was evaluated by the area of the psoas muscle at the caudal end of the third lumbar vertebra by measurement of the lengths of the major and minor axes of the psoas muscle . We then evaluated sarcopenia by comparing the area of psoas muscle with previously reported sex-specific average . Osteopenia was defined as actual bone mineral density (BMD) below the calculated standard BMD, which was calculated as previously reported (308.82–2.49 × age in men and 311.84–2.41 × age in women) . BMD was measured in trabecular bone by calculating average pixel density within a circle in midvertebral core at the bottom of 11th thoracic vertebra (Th11) on preoperative computed tomography. The patient was independent in activities of daily living and was graded as performance status 1 and American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status (ASA-PS) 2. He had enough ejection fraction of 65%, and examinations revealed no impairment of cognitive function and neither of osteopenia and sarcopenia .
With a diagnosis of bile duct cancer with no distant metastasis, the patient underwent subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with lymph node dissection . Operation time was 299 min and estimated blood loss was 100 ml. Pancreatic duct stent (6Fr), external biliary stent (7.5Fr), jejunostomy, and 2 drain tubes (Winslow and anastomosis of pancreatojejunostomy) were placed after operation. The resected specimens showed a tumor in the lower bile duct . Pathological examination revealed papillary adenocarcinoma of the bile duct (pT3N1M0 Stage IIIB) and the surgical margin was negative. Enteral nutrition (ENEVO®, Abbott, Japan) was given through jejunostomy and then the patient started oral intake after an evaluation of swallowing function on the postoperative day 7. Although RTPs were decreased on the postoperative day 7 (retinol-binding protein of 0.8 mg/dL, pre-albumin of 8.1 mg/dL, transferrin of 115 mg/dL), those were recovered after 1 month (retinol-binding protein of 1.6 mg/dL, pre-albumin of 13.7 mg/dL, transferrin of 208 mg/dL) with careful nutritional support and rehabilitation. The patient discharged on postoperative day 65 without any complications. He remains well with no evidence of tumor recurrence as of 1 year after resection.