A 48-year-old caucasian woman (weighing 60 kg) was transferred from the emergency room (ER) of Boscotrecase (Naples, Italy) to the intensive care unit (ICU) of University of Campania “L. Vanvitelli” for suspected pyelonephritis with systemic impairment, fever, sepsis, and altered mental state (coma). She had no history of relevant comorbidities or particular risk factors such as immunosuppression.
In the ER, she underwent a computerized tomography (CT) scan of abdomen, chest, and brain with and without contrast enhancement. The CT scan demonstrated “moderate ectasia of the right renal calyx with peripheral medullar densitometric alterations,” being suggestive for pyelonephritis. On admission in our ICU, the patient was sedated, intubated with an orotracheal tube, monitored, and ventilated in a controlled mode. Vital signs on admission were arterial pressure 80/40 mmHg [mean arterial pressure (MAP), 53 mmHg]; heart rate 110 beats per minute (bpm), peripheral saturation of O2 (SpO2) 100%. Her body temperature was 39 °C; lactate values were 6.2 mmol/l. Right after admission, the patient’s monitoring was switched from noninvasive to invasive, with cannulation of the left radial artery and monitoring of hemodynamic parameters with the Vigileo system (a device that analyzes arterial blood pressure waveforms and their variations).
The hemodynamic parameters monitored with Vigileo showed cardiac output (CO) 2.1 l/minute (normal range 4.0–8.0 l/minute), systemic vascular resistance (SVR) 350 dyne seconds/cm5 (normal range 800–1200 dyne seconds/cm5) (MAP 53 mmHg).
Routine blood tests were performed, in addition to procalcitonin (PCT) sampling, serology for hepatotrophic viruses and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and a multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) molecular biological blood sampling for detection of nucleic acids of bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Urine routine analysis along with microbiological tests was performed as well. A brief sedation window was performed, and neurological examination demonstrated a coma state with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 5 (Eye 1, Vocal 1T, Motor 3), with a decorticated response to pain, bilaterally myotic pupils with a torpid pupillary response, and a bilaterally positive Babinski sign.
Early fluid resuscitation began with a bolus of 30 ml/kg of crystalloid in 3 h, and norepinephrine infusion began at a rate of 0.2 µg/kg/minute [, ].
Empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftazole/tazobactam (1 g/0.5 g every 8 hours), meropenem (1 g every 8 hours), and aciclovir (250 mg) was administered. Dexamethasone was added as adjuvant therapy (10 mg once per day for 4 days) .
Blood samples revealed white blood cells (WBC) 11.00 × 103/μl (normal range 4.2–9.0 × 103/µl) (neutrophils 86.0%, lymphocytes 12.6%), red blood cells (RBC) 3.97 × 106/μl (normal range 4.5–6.1 × 106/µl), hemoglobin (HB) 10.2 g/dl (normal range for women 12–16 g/dl), platelets (PLT) 54 × 103/μl (normal range 150–450 × 103/μl), procalcitonin (PCT) 61 ng/ml (normal range < 0.5 ng/ml), and C-reactive protein (CPR) 17.5 mg/dl (normal range < 0.5 mg/dl).
Furthermore, blood PCR analysis was positive for E. coli. The analysis was negative for N. meningitidis, H. influenzae, and S. pneumoniae.
Urine microbiological examination was also positive for E. coli, with a total microbial load (colony-forming units, CFU) of 10,000 CFU/ml. The antibiogram showed high sensitivity of E. coli to meropenem. We therefore decided to suspend ceftazole/tazobactam and continue therapy with meropenem.
After etiologic diagnosis, in consideration of the septic shock condition and the relatively young age of the patient, it was decided to introduce an immunoglobilins (Ig)M-enriched intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) preparation (Pentaglobin®) at a dosage of 250 ml/kg per day for 4 days. Pentaglobin® (immunoglobulin IgM-enriched; Biotest) is a plasma-derived solution with the following composition: 12% IgM, 76% IgG, 12% IgA. Although the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines advise against the use of IVIG in patients with sepsis or septic shock, given the lack of a statistical significance for survival benefits [, ], our recent positive outcome in treating septic shock with an IgM-enriched formulation as an adjuvant therapy and the Gram-negative etiology of the patient’s condition were a convincing rationale, as IgM-enriched IVIGs were found to have higher antibody levels against Escherichia
coli and other Gram-negative bacteria than did normal IVIG preparations .
After 24 hours of therapy, the patient showed an improvement in blood chemistry (CPR 8.3 mg/dl; PCT 7.7 ng/ml; lactate 4.1 nmol/l) and hemodynamic parameters (CO 3.2 l/minute; SVR 550 dyne seconds/cm5, MAP 70 mmHg). Her body temperature was 36.5 °C. GCS score remained 5 (E1, V1T, M3) when another sedation window was performed. Her hemodynamic stability allowed her to undergo a brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan . The MRI scan revealed an altered signal and post-contrast enhancement of the leptomeninges. Moreover, multiple T2 and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintense and sometimes confluent lesions were detected: in the thalamus, which appeared swollen; in the pons, in the cerebellar peduncles, and in cerebellar hemispheres, also appearing swollen; in the ventricles (mostly in the lateral ventricles and in the occipital horn bilaterally); and in the parahippocampal region bilaterally. All these lesions were also characterized by a reduced diffusivity in diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) scans.
Finally, multiple comminute T2/FLAIR white-matter hyperintense lesions were demonstrated, located in the juxtacortical white matter, especially in frontal regions, in both the corona radiata, and in periventricular regions bilaterally.
After 48 hours from the start of Pentaglobin treatment, there was a remarkable improvement in hematochemical and hemodynamic parameters. In particular, the patient no longer needed inotropic support, and we therefore suspended continuous infusion of norepinephrine. Ventilation was switched to an assisted mode to wean the patient from the ventilator. Three days after admission, hemodynamic parameters of the patient were still improving, she was not febrile anymore, and lactate levels were dropping; on the other hand, her neurological condition was still severe, with a persistent altered mental state, bilateral miosis with a torpid papillary response, nystagmus, dyplegia with bilaterally positive Babinski sign and hyperelicitable osteotendinous reflexes.
96 hours after Pentagoblin introduction, there was an evident improvement in the patient's clinical condition. GCS score increased to 10 (E3, V1T, M6). The patient was also able to be extubated, breathing spontaneously. Blood chemistry values were CPR 5.18 mg/dl, PCT 1.2 ng/ml, and lactate 1.2 mmol/l. Hemodynamic values were CO 5.4 l/minute, SVR 1200 dynes second/cm5, MAP 90 mmHg final. Neurological examination showed normal pupils and pupillary response, dyplegia with bilaterally positive Babinski sign, and hyperelicitable osteotendinous reflexes. Other cerebellar signs besides nystagmus became evident, with dysarthria and dysmetria of the upper limbs. A mild cognitive impairment was also detected, as the patient showed apraxia and executive functioning deficits. As the patient was more responsive, both a physiatrist and speech therapist assessment were scheduled to evaluate her and commence rehabilitation.
Six days after admission, the patient underwent a control CT scan, which demonstrated a partial resolution of the renal alterations suggestive of pyelonephritis. She also underwent a control brain MRI on day 9 after admission. The MRI scan showed a reduction of all the previously detected lesions, with less swelling of the thalamus and cerebellum. On the other hand, the multiple juxtacortical and periventricular white-matter lesions remained substantially unchanged, also showing some microbleeding spots The patient remained in our department for the continuation of antimicrobial therapy and close monitoring. Twenty-one days after admission the patient was remarkably improved, showing only mild cerebellar signs (mostly dysarthria, along with dysmetria and a slight action tremor), slight hyposthenia of the four limbs, and mild apraxia on neurological examination. She was discharged and transferred to a rehabilitation center for post-intensive care rehabilitation to regain limb strength and coordination and to improve her speech abilities. Physiatrist, speech therapy, and neurological out-patient consultations, as well as a 6-month control brain MRI scan, were scheduled. Three months after discharge, a striking improvement of her condition was reported, as she was almost free from any neurological sign or symptom and almost fully recovered from her condition.