A 72-year-old man, experiencing chest pain near the sternum for 2 days, was admitted to our hospital. He had no history of coronary artery disease, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and other comorbidities. He gradually developed dyspnoea during the preceding month, with no fever or peripheral oedema.
On initial examination at the Emergency Department, the patient was haemodynamically stable (blood pressure of 110/65 mmHg; regular pulse rate of 70 b.p.m.; and respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min). Cardiac and respiratory examination showed normal heart sounds and an absence of murmurs, gallops, and clear lung fields. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm and low amplitude QRS complexes with right bundle branch block (RBBB) morphology . Echocardiography revealed concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, biatrial dilation, mild pericardial effusion close to the right atrium , and a preserved ejection fraction with predominantly left ventricular basal hypokinesis. Serial testing of cardiac biomarkers showed an increased level of high-sensitive cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT), along with normal levels of serum creatine kinase myocardial band (CK-MB). According to these clinical and troponin findings, ACS had to be excluded, despite a normal level of CK-MB. The patient was given 500 mg of aspirin and 600 mg of clopidogrel before urgent percutaneous coronary intervention. However, coronary angiography demonstrated non-obstructive right and left coronary arteries . The patient was referred to the Department of Cardiology for further evaluation, where screening for cardiomyopathy was performed. Physical re-examination showed signs of non-cardiac disease, suggesting amyloid fibril damage, including macroglossia, periorbital purpura, and purpura above the nipples . Laboratory investigations revealed elevated serum immunoglobulin free light chain (FLC) kappa and lambda levels with an increased FLC ratio. These findings were suggestive of amyloidosis; therefore, the histopathological features of an abdominal skin punch biopsy specimen were studied. Congo red stain detected amyloid deposits under the light microscope and showed apple-green birefringence using polarizing microscopy. Immunostaining showed accumulation of kappa light chain-immunoreactive amyloid . These histological analyses confirmed the diagnosis of immunoglobulin light chain (AL) amyloidosis in this patient.
During the 1 week of stay at our hospital, the patient’s medical management included losartan 12.5 mg o.d., bisoprolol 1.25 mg o.d., furosemide 20 mg o.d., and isosorbide mononitrate 60 mg o.d. Losartan and bisoprolol were indicated based on limited evidence in the treatment of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Furosemide and isosorbide mononitrate were used for maintaining euvolaemia and relieving the symptoms of chest discomfort, respectively. Because this regimen gradually ameliorated his clinical status, we decided to continue with the medical treatment. The patient was discharged in a stable condition. To screen for a possible concurrent multiple myeloma, the patient was referred to a haematology centre. Unfortunately, 5 days post-discharge, he suddenly expired at home.