A 50-year-old post-menopausal woman was diagnosed with a stage IIB (T2N1M0) right breast cancer and subsequently years later developed an unusual recurrence that was diagnosed following rupture of one of her breast prostheses. Following initial diagnosis, she underwent a right modified radical mastectomy and review of surgical pathology revealed a grade 4 (of 4) invasive lobular carcinoma, nuclear grade 2 (of 3), forming a 2.2 × 2 × 1.8 cm mass. No definite vascular invasion was noted apart from the central tumor mass, although lobular carcinoma in-situ with extension into adjacent ducts was seen. Lactiferous ducts beneath the nipple showed pagetoid spread of carcinoma cells. One of 14 right axillary lymph nodes was positive for metastatic involvement with focal extranodal extension of disease. Tumor cells were ER/PR positive. Following surgery, she received six months of chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil (CMF). A subsequent prophylactic left simple mastectomy with bilateral breast reconstruction was performed 4 months following completion of chemotherapy. Approximately 4 months after surgery, tamoxifen therapy was started and administered for 5 years. Of note, this patient underwent a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy a year after breast reconstructive surgery.
The patient had regular follow up without evidence of disease recurrence. Approximately 12 years after her breast reconstructive surgery, she developed a deflated right breast implant. She was scheduled for bilateral implant exchange surgery. During preoperative evaluation, she was found to have evidence of mitral valve regurgitation due to a flail mitral valve posterior leaflet, and subsequently underwent mitral valve repair. The cardiothoracic surgeon informed the patient that her sternum was found to be “somewhat mushy” during her sternotomy.
About 5 months after open heart surgery, the patient had developed a neck lump and back pain. Imaging studies with CT revealed postoperative mastectomies with implants. However, the right breast implant was ruptured with extensive soft tissue mass and nodularity involving the anterior chest wall, predominantly anterior to both sides of the sternum but slightly more marked on the right with subcutaneous nodularity throughout the right mastectomy site . This was noted to be inseparable from the adjacent pectoralis muscles along with right subpectoral adenopathy and right neck base adenopathy consistent with tumor recurrence. The anterior chest wall mass extended posteriorly through the chest wall into the hemithorax and was also associated with internal mammary adenopathy. Partial lytic lesions were seen in the mid sternum. In addition, there was bulky anterior mediastinal adenopathy and tumor extending inferiorly along the anterior pericardium and anterior to the right atrium and right ventricle as well as to the root of the aorta . Nodularity was noted in the right upper lung pleura and left lung base pleura. There were bulky soft tissue masses in both costophrenic angles. Tumor nodularity was noted anterior to the liver representing peritoneal implants. Skin thickening was noted over both anterior chest walls but greater on the right. Bony metastases were noted in the T5 and L1 vertebral bodies, the right temporal bone of the skull, and the right anterior iliac bone.
The patient underwent a T10 vertebroplasty and then subsequent palliative radiotherapy to T8 through L1 vertebral bodies. During palliative radiotherapy, she developed right hip pain and was found to have a destructive metastasis in the right femoral head and neck requiring surgery with a right hip replacement followed by palliative radiotherapy to bilateral hips and the right femur. She went on to receive palliative chemotherapy but ultimately expired from disease progression approximately 11 months following diagnosis of metastatic disease.