A 60 years-old man was referred to our department due to painless gross hematuria. The patient had no risk factors including smoking, previous radiation therapy, occupational risk factors or hereditary factors. In addition, no other pre-existing conditions were known. The patient was painless and did not have any B-symptoms including weight loss or night sweats, furthermore, no neurological deficits were reported.
After exclusion of urinary infection as cause for hematuria, cystoscopy has been performed revealing a 6 cm solid tumor on the right bladder wall. Urinary cytology (voided urine and bladder washing) remained negative.
Consequently, a transurethral resection of the tumor has been performed and the tumor was macroscopically totally removed. Primary histology of the tumor specimen showed a muscle invasive small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma pT2a GIII. Moreover, tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin and AE1/AE3, with a high proliferation rate (KI-67) of 95 % on immunohistochemical analysis . In contrast, chromogranin A, CD56, CD3, CD20, TdT, S-100 and HMB45 confirmed negative staining.
18 FDG-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) performed at the time of primary diagnosis did not show any lymph node or visceral metastatic tumor spread. A subsequent cranial magnet resonance tomography (MRT) also confirmed no tumor infiltration into the brain.
As there are reports of increased survival rates upon neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients suffering from SCBC , the patient underwent four cycles (day 1–3; 1 cycle = 21 days) of cisplatin (25 mg/m2)/etoposide (100 mg/m2) without any complications. In addition, we performed a prophylactic WBRT with a total dose of 26 Gray. Subsequently, the patient underwent radical cystoprostatectomy and ileal neobladder with bilateral extended pelvic lymphadenectomy (including 32 resected tumor-free lymph nodes). Final pathology confirmed complete response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy, with no vital small cell carcinoma tissue formations in both the lymph nodes and the cystoprostatectomy specimen (ypT0, N0, L0, V0, Pn0). An uneventful intra- and postoperative course was observed. The time from transurethral resection to chemotherapy start was 28 days. 34 days after chemotherapy was stopped, radical cystoprostatectomy has been performed.
Currently, the patient undergoes 6-monthly regular follow-up controls including urinary cytology (voided urine), measurement of residual urine, blood gas analysis and imaging studies (chest/abdominal CT scan every second visit or chest radiography in combination with abdominal ultrasound). We noticed no evidence for relapse, even 33 months after initial diagnosis of SCBC.