A 65 year old woman was referred with the compression fracture of the first lumbar vertebrae (L1) due to falling down, two week ago. Her visual analogue pain score (VAS) was 8 out of 10 in lumbar region, and did not had paresthesia or limb weakness. CT and MRI showed acute wedge fracture of the first lumbar vertebrae which resulted in 30%–40% decrease of vertebral height (. In the physical examination, no nerve defect and intestine or urinary bladder dysfunction were seen. In straight leg raising test (SLR), no radiculopathy sign was seen. In palpation, first to forth lumbar vertebrae were painful. The patient had an acute heart diseases (33%) ejection fraction, heart’s enlargement, twice its standard size and pace maker. The patient was diabetic and had high blood pressure and pulmonary disease (COPD) (. The patient was taking 15 drugs daily (such as dilantin, losartan, spironolacton, furosemide, warfarin, digoxin, citalopram, serteralin, alprazolam, clonazepam, atrovastatin, aspirin, salmetrol, flixotide, and carvedilol). Laboratory tests were normal except coagulation time due to the intake of warfarin for cardiovascular problems and after correcting that she was a candidate for Kyphoplasty.
After i.v. premedication (fentanyl 50 mcg and midazolam 1 mg), cefazolin 1 g and hydrocortisone 100 mg were injected. Under sterile condition, an anterior-posterior projection was obtained by fluoroscopy, so that the first lumbar and its pedicle were detected. Then, the fluoroscope was moved 10 degrees towards caudo-cephalic direction and 20 degrees oblique so that the pedicle was seen as a circular shape. The entrance of the needle was chosen in 1/4 outer-upper of the pedicle by Transpedicular approach. Local anesthesia was made by lidocaine 1%. A 5 mm skin incision was done. The trocar needle was introduced by fluoroscopic guidance in a tunnel view and the needle was advanced. After confirmation of the correct position of the needle in the several lateral and anteroposterior views in the vertebral body, the guide wire was placed inside of the needle, and the first trocar was replaced by No.11 trocar over the guide wire. After that, the guide wire was removed, and a drill was placed into the trocar. By drilling, a primary cavity was made in the vertebral body to provide for insertion of the balloon into the body. Then, the drill was removed, and the containing balloon with contrast media was placed into the cavity and was inflated up to 15 PSA (. The balloon was kept in this position for 5 minute restore the vertebral height. Then two filler needles were filled up by 2 ml of cement (Poly-Methylene-Methacrylate). The filler needle was replaced instead of the balloon, and 4 ml of cement was injected under the live fluoroscopy, in order to control the leakage of cement into the spinal cord and disc. The patient was kept in the same position for 15 minutes for cement stabilization. The patient was monitored in the recovery. After two hours, a CT scan was taken, and the vertebral body was correctly filled by cement and no evidence of leakage was obsereved (.
After the procedure, the pain was decreased quickly and the pain score (VAS) was decreased to 1. The patient was discharged next day with overall good condition and without any neurological complications. During two next weeks, she was in a very good condition.