The proband was a preterm newborn boy, the first child of non-consanguineous parents, born at 31 weeks gestation to a 44-year old father and a 43-year old mother by cesarean section. At birth, the child weighed 1,480 g, measured 44 cm in crown-to-heel length, and exhibited multiple congenital anomalies. The newborn was transferred to the Intensive Care Units (ICU) immediately after birth. His general health condition deteriorated progressively, leading to his death at 105th days after birth. The newborn had brain malformation, including ventriculomegaly and corpus callosum dysgenesis, cleft lip and palate, retrognathism, hypertelorism, clenched hands with overlapping fingers, and hypotonia. Additionally, he revealed mild heart septal hypertrophy, ambiguous genitalia, enlarged kidneys without corticomedullary differentiation, and gallbladder with tiny cystic formations . His mother had three miscarriages from previous marriages and one miscarriage with her current husband. The remaining of his family history was otherwise unremarkable.
Both parents signed a written informed consent and the mother signed as the legal representative for the child. Peripheral blood was obtained to isolate genomic DNA for CMA using Qiagen QIAamp® DNA Mini kit (Hilden, Germany). Karyotyping was performed in a private laboratory through conventional cell culture, harvesting, and GTG banding with a > 550 bands resolution following standard procedures . Chromosome analyses were done using Zeiss Axio Scope (Jena, Germany) and the software IKAROS® (Metasystems Corporation, Altlussheim, Germany). All laboratory procedures were carried out following international standardized protocols and consensual criteria of quality.
The CMA was carried out on proband and his biological parents using the GeneChip® CytoScanHD™ (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, USA) following the manufacturer’s recommendations without modifications. Chromosomal analyses were done using the Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS®) software (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, USA) and the CNVs found in the patient were analyzed in comparison with public databases, including Database of Genomic Variants (DGV), Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans using Ensemble Resources (DECIPHER), and CytoScanHD™ Array Database. Furthermore, CNVs were classified according to their nature, based on [, ].
The proband showed a male karyotype with a large submetacentric SMC in 90% of the analyzed metaphases after counting 50 metaphase spreads. His karyotype was 47,XY,+mar[45]/46,XY[5], suggesting 10% mosaicism. The parental karyotypes and CMA results had no visible numerical or structural alterations. The proband’s CMA revealed the marker chromosome corresponded to a de novo 70.77 Mb gain at arr[GRCh37] 9p24.3q21.11(203,861_70,974,662)× 4[0.3] dn with 30% mosaicism, encompassing 286 genes, including 152 OMIM morbid genes .