A 51-year-old Chinese man with good past health presented with a 10 day history of reduced vision and a superior visual field defect of the right eye. He denied a history of recent steroid use via any route. His best-corrected visual acuity was 0.5 OD and 1.0 OS. An examination of the fundus showed inferior bullous retinal detachment in his right eye with yellowish fibrinous exudates and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) changes without retinal break . An examination of the anterior segment and vitreous cavity showed an absence of any inflammatory reaction suggestive of an inflammatory cause such as Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease. A B-scan ultrasound confirmed inferior retinal detachment and optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed foveal involvement . Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed early hyper-fluorescence with diffuse late leakage at the macula and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed dilated choroidal vessels with choroidal hyper-perfusion consistent with CSC . An examination of the fundus of his left eye showed mild RPE changes at the superior macula, with a mild RPE window defect on FA and mildly dilated choroidal vessel on ICGA. The findings in his left eye were consistent with resolved CSC.
A diagnosis of bullous CSC was made and despite a two-week course of oral acetazolamide (250 mg qid) and observation for three months, the exudative retinal detachment persisted and his right eye vision deteriorated to 0.3. He subsequently underwent half-dose (3 mg/m2) verteporfin PDT with a spot size of 4500 μm to cover the area of dilated choroidal vessels in ICGA. One month after the PDT, his vision improved to 0.8 OD with a reduction in inferior retinal detachment. After three months, there was complete absence of sub-retinal fluid . A B-scan ultrasound and OCT confirmed the resolution of exudative retinal detachment . FA and ICGA showed reduced leakage and choroidal hyperpermeability . He was followed for 38 months, during which there was no recurrence and his final vision was 1.0 OD.