A 76-year-old man presented with a 12-month history of low back pain radiating down his right leg, without sensory dysfunction or motor weakness. Preoperative pain intensity was 8 on a 10-point scale and unresponsive to medication (i.e., continuous oral NSAIDs and 6 weeks of opioids). Preoperative MRI showed a paramedian, down-migrated, L3-L4 disc herniation (, B). Given the concordance between clinical symptoms and MRI findings, a right L3-L4 FETD was planned. From a prone position (, A), the patient underwent the procedure under monitored and local anesthesia (local infiltration with a 50/50 mixture of lidocaine 2% and physiological solution). Preoperatively midazolam 2 mg was intravenously administered for anxiety control. Propofol was administrated by continuous target-controlled infusion to achieve conscious sedation with spontaneous ventilation .
The Joimax TESSYS® (Joimax® GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) transforaminal endoscopic surgical system was used. We established the paramedian skin entry point, under fluoroscopic guidance, at approximately 10−11 cm lateral to the L4 spinous process. Using intermittent fluoroscopic guidance, alternating between lateral and anterior-posterior views, an 18-gauge needle was advanced until reaching the lateral border of the right L4 peduncle (,1). Then it was replaced by a soft Kirshner wire that served as a guide for introducing sequential dilators. The smallest dilatator (green guiding rod, outer diameter: 1.8 mm) was hammered inside the right L4 pedicle (,2). The trajectory was forced towards the medial wall of the pedicle to access the intracanal space After radiographic confirmation of the trajectory, the hole in the pedicle was increased with subsequential dilatators and reamers (outer diameters: from 3 to 7 mm). The instrument position was kept under radiographic control while continuously switching from lateral to AP views (,3). The reamers were used to cross the pedicle and penetrate the full width of the bone. The breaking of the medial pedicle wall, and thus the access to the intracanal space, was confirmed by simultaneously feeling the loss of resistance by hand and real-time fluoroscopic confirmation.
We then inserted the endoscope working cannula (8.0 mm in outer diameter) and the camera (,4). The herniated fragment was clearly visible (, A). We mobilized the disc fragment with the probe and the root retractor and then removed it with small forceps. The decompression was considered successful when we saw the nerve root pulsating freely in the epidural space (, B), after having checked the intraspinal space for additional fragments (, C). We closed with a resorbable suture.
Late postoperative MRI showed satisfactory decompression (, C) and no sign of additional instability or fractures. Patient radiculopathy entirely resolved after the surgery – postoperative pain was negligible after the first 6 h and 24 h and at the 8-month follow-up.