A 70-year-old woman was diagnosed as having PD at 65 years of age after having difficulty with walking and clumsiness with her hands. She also had olfactory impairment. She had no family history of PD. Examinations revealed asymmetric parkinsonism with limb rigidity and bradykinesia that were more prominent on the left. There were no cerebellar signs or gaze palsy. Her Hoehn and Yahr stage was 2 and her Mini-Mental State Examination score was 30. Magnetic resonance imaging of her brain revealed normal findings. She was initially treated with levodopa (L-dopa), (200 mg/day), which markedly improved her symptoms. A reduced meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) cardiac uptake on myocardial scintigraphy was detected. On the basis of these findings, she was diagnosed as having PD. At 67 years of age, she developed orthostatic hypotension and was treated sequentially with fluids, compression stockings, and midodrine. Her disease slowly progressed over the next three years, and L-dopa dosage was increased to 600 mg/day. At 70 years of age, she had a mild head trauma with loss of consciousness. One month later, she developed acute-onset lateral flexion of her trunk to the left side while standing, and she was admitted to our hospital. On admission, her neurological examinations revealed slight weakness of her left upper and lower extremities in both proximal and distal muscles, as indicated by her Medical Research Council (MRC) scale score of 5-/5. She showed a sustained 10.1°lateral flexion of her trunk to the left side on standing . This posture was alleviated in the supine position. Her Pisa angle was assessed using NeuroPostureApp© . Her right muscle strength was normal. Her sensory systems were normal and no cerebellar signs were detected. Her deep tendon reflexes were normal and her plantar reflex was flexor bilaterally. Her presurgical brain computed tomography (CT) showed CSDH in the right hemisphere resulting in a marked compression of the hemisphere . She was immediately referred to the neurosurgical department of our hospital and the subdural hematoma was successfully evacuated by single-burr-hole drainage. Her brain CT carried out four days after the operation showed improvement of her subdural hematoma . Seven days after her operation, her PS disappeared and she fully recovered to her preoperative level of function without any sequelae such as headaches and cognitive impairment caused by her CSDH. She is still being follow-up.