A 62-year-old woman was referred to our department with complaints of low back and lower extremity pain for 2 years, 1.5 years after lumbar spine surgery, and recurrent low back pain for 1 year. The pain was dull and soreness, located in the lower back, accompanied by difficulty in turning over and radiating to the lower extremities. No numbness in the lower limbs has been previously reported. No apparent cause of the pain has been reported. The patient was treated at a local hospital and underwent L5/S1 discectomy with internal fixation in August 2019. Symptoms were relieved after surgery. However, low back pain recurred four months after the surgery. It was more severe on the left side, with soreness and cramp-like pain that worsened with changes in position and was insensitive to ibuprofen and codeine phosphate tablets. Non-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine was performed three months ago and showed a bulged lumbar intervertebral disc at the L3-L5 level.

Her medical history included hypertension and diabetes. The blood pressure and glucose levels were well controlled, but the specific values did not contribute. She had undergone thyroid surgery eight years ago and continued to take levothyroxine sodium tablets (Euthyrox) after the operation. The patient had no family history of bone tumors.

Examination revealed decreased lumbar mobility, straight leg raise (SLR) test (-), hip test (-), bilateral femoral nerve traction test (+), bilateral sacroiliac joint tenderness (+), bilateral T12-L3 paravertebral tenderness (+). Several questionnaires were used to assess patient status. The scoring results were as follows: numerical rating scale (NRS) 4 points in the resting state and 7 points when moving, ID-pain score 1 point, patient health questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) 13 points, generalized anxiety disorder 7-item scale (GAD-7) 5 points, Patient Health questionnaire-15 (PHQ-15) 5 points.

The laboratory test results revealed elevated hs-CRP levels (28.3 mg/dL; normal range 0–8 mg/dL), and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (49, 53, 67, 73, and 62 mm/h; normal range 0–20 mm/h). Results for serum autoantibodies, rheumatoid factor, and HLA-B27 were negative. All the other results were within the normal range. Lumbar computed tomography (CT) with three-dimensional reconstruction revealed postoperative changes in the L5-S1 vertebrae and intervertebral disc, narrowing of the intervertebral space, increased vertebral body density, and compressive changes in the L2 vertebrae. Lumbar noncontrast MRI revealed L5-S1 vertebrae fixation. The L3/4 intervertebral disc slightly bulged, L2 vertebral body compression changes and abnormal signal, and T11-L2 vertebrae abnormal signal. Sacroiliac joint CT showed high intensity in the left sacroiliac joint, which indicated osteitis of the left sacroiliac joint. Sacroiliac joint magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed postoperative changes in the L5-S1 vertebrae.

Adjacent segment degeneration (ASD) is a condition that often occurs after spinal fusion or when another back surgery is performed. Combined with the patient’s back surgery history and lumbar CT results, we first considered the possibility that the patient may have ASD. Symptomatic and supportive NSAIDs and nerve nutritional therapy were administered. Loxoprofen 60 mg TID, cobamamide 1.5 mg QD, calcium carbonate and vitamin D3 600 mg QD, and tromethamine 30 mg BID were given to the patient. However, the patient’s symptoms did not improve significantly. Therefore, we attempted to identify the other diagnoses.

During re-examination, we found that her palms showed hyperkeratosis with active pustulosis. Combined with the previously elevated hs-CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, we suspected that the patient had SAPHO syndrome and performed skeletal emission computed tomography (ECT). Skeletal ECT found a typical “horn sign” change on the sternum stem and revealed active bone metabolism of T8, T10, T11, L3, S1 vertebrae, bilateral sternoclavicular joints, bilateral sacroiliac joints, and bilateral knee joints, as well as increased bone density in some thoracic vertebrae.

The patient met the diagnostic criteria for SAPHO syndrome and was diagnosed with SAPHO syndrome. Based on the original treatment, we added sulfasalazine enteric-coated tablets 1 g BID, adalimumab 40 mg once a fortnight, pregabalin 75 mg BID, and tramadol sustained-release tablets 100 mg BID. The patient reported that her pain symptoms were significantly relieved. He was discharged from the hospital and received adalimumab treatment (40 mg once per fortnight in the first 6 months and 40 mg once per month after month 6) in the outpatient clinic. Patient compliance was good during the treatment, and no adverse reactions were reported. Hyperkeratosis with active pustulosis on both palms fully resolved after 12 months of treatment. The patient was followed up for 6 months after full recovery, and no recurrence was found in the symptoms of low back and lower extremity pain and palmar hyperkeratosis with active pustulosis.