A 56-years-old woman with history of hypertension, decompensated diabetes mellitus, was referred to our hospital with critical limb ischemia (CLI) presenting rest pain and ulcer on the left leg and negative COVID-19. On physical examination, her blood pressure was 160/90 mmHg with 130 b/m. Auscultation of the abdomen revealed a mesogastrium systolic bruit. Electrocardiogram showed signs of ST segment depression without thoracic pain. Coronary angiography was positive for severe coronary artery disease with no indication to treatment. Duplex ultrasound (DUS) revealed widespread irregularities of the aortic wall with monophasic wave on right common femoral artery and direct flow on the left femoral axis; diffuse disease of both superficial femoral arteries (SFA) with distal occlusion in the left side.
CT-scan showed atherosclerotic disease on infrarenal abdominal aorta with focal dissection, occlusion of right common iliac artery origin and short dissection of the left common iliac artery origin not hemodynamically significative .
The presence of ulcers in the left leg was the indication to address the left SFA throughout an antegrade percutaneous homolateral access with drug eluting balloon (DEB) angioplasty in the proximal SFA (6.0 × 60 mm Luminor®; iVascular, Vascular S.L.U., Barcelona, Spain) and distal stenting (5.0x80mm iVolution; iVascular) . The final result was a complete lesion healing in the left foot at three weeks .
After two months of the index procedure, the patient was readmitted due to gangrene of the right foot and asymptomatic COVID-19 infection. The control CT showed a similar vascular pattern on the right side with no significant difference with the previous CT. At this stage, the rapid and aggressive right foot lesions evolution was the indication to address vascular lesions in the right axis.
The intervention was carried under general anesthesia with surgical exposure of both common femoral arteries employed as remote accesses for multilevel endovascular intervention. The first step consisted of aorto-iliac repair (aortic dissection and right common iliac occlusion) using an AFX aortic endograft (Endoogix Inc., Irvine, CA, USA); stenting of the right common iliac artery (balloon expandable stent - Isthmus 10 × 39; CID SpA, Saluggia, Italy).
During the same operation, the right SFA disease was addressed with a DEB (Luminor 5 × 200 iVascular) . The multiple intervention determined the increase of the distal flow and the reappearance of dorsalis pedis pulse. After two days, the patient was asymptomatic for right foot pain and underwent to right foot minor amputation. The patient was discharged after a week with double antiplatelet therapy. CT angiography performed after two months confirmed the proper positioning of the aortic stent-graft with good patency of iliac-femoral axis and right foot ulcers healing .