We report on an 81-year-old woman with no relevant comorbidities and a smoking history of 5 pack years. In 2006 she was diagnosed with a pT2a, pN0 (0/5), cM0, UICC stage IB squamous cell carcinoma of the left upper lung lobe, for which she underwent a double-sleeve lobectomy with lymphadenectomy. During 5 years of follow-up, no relapse occurred. In April 2019, the patient presented with a post-stenotic pneumonia. Computed tomography of the chest showed a mass in the left lung. Radiological staging with whole-body 18F-FDG-PET/CT and brain MRI showed metastatic disease with a strongly metabolically active primary tumor (SUVmax 16.7), pleural carcinomatosis on the left side (SUVmax 9.4), periclavicular lymph node metastases on the left side (SUVmax 9.9), and bone metastases in the 12th thoracic and 4th lumbar vertebra (SUVmax 5.0 and 4.6, respectively) . Histology of bronchoscopic biopsy specimens revealed squamous cell carcinoma, which could be interpreted as recurrence or as a second lung cancer, taking into consideration the 13-year-long disease-free interval. The immunohistochemistry for programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) revealed an expression in 20% of tumor cells and in < 10% of immune cells. In order to complete our internal lung cancer diagnostic algorithm (Treichler G, manuscript in preparation), we performed next-generation sequencing using the FDA-approved FoundationOne®CDx assay. We found a structural aberration on the long arm of chromosome 3 (3q) with amplifications of the genes , SOX2, and FGF12; mutations of TP53, ATRX1, RB1, and, subclonally, PIK3CA; a stable microsatellite state (MSS), and a low tumor mutational burden (5 Muts/Mb).
Based on the recommendation by our multidisciplinary tumor board, a therapy regimen consisting of pembrolizumab, carboplatin and paclitaxel in analogy to the KEYNOTE-407 study was suggested. The patient declined systemic treatment. She was thus referred for radiotherapy in order to achieve local control, due to the central localization of the tumor with associated risk of post-stenotic pneumonia and bleeding. The patient underwent conventionally fractionated radiotherapy of the principal pulmonary tumor bulk with palliative intention with 3 Gy in 12 fractions, resulting in a total dose of 36 Gy, using Volumetric Modulated Arc Therapy (VMAT, RapidArc™). Radiotherapy was well tolerated, with esophagitis grade 2 according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0. Four weeks after the last day of radiotherapy, restaging was performed with 18F-FDG-PET/CT. A partial remission of the tumor bulk, the nodal metastases and, surprisingly, also of the vertebral lesions was shown . Of note, the supraclavicular lymph nodes and the two bone metastases in the spinal column had not been included in the irradiation field with scatter doses of 0.201 Gy, 0.093 Gy, and 0.021 Gy on the lymph nodes, vertebra Th12, and L4, respectively . Furthermore, no antiresorptive medication had been administered. Due to the remission and the lack of tumor-related symptoms, systemic treatment—although no longer refused by the patient—was withheld. The patient underwent radiological follow-up, during which further decrease in tumor size and complete metabolic remission of the bone, pleural and lymph node metastases was seen . Currently, 25 months after radiotherapy, the patient is still free of symptoms and has an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status of 0.