In August 2008, a 44-year-old female had undergone surgery for resection of a malignant melanoma in the right lower leg and a right inguinal metastatic lymph node , followed by chemotherapy with doxorubicin, adriamycin, vincristine, and interferon beta (DAV-feron). In March 2012, computed tomography (CT) revealed brain and lung metastases, so the patient began radiation therapy to treat these lesions.
In September 2012, the patient was admitted to our hospital for back pain. Abdominal CT and magnetic resonance imaging detected new multiple hepatic metastases of melanoma. A transcatheter arterial infusion of cisplatin was administered, and transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was performed. In October 2012, she began treatment with vemurafenib, based on the finding of a positive BRAF V600E mutation in the resected primary site of the skin, which was analyzed by direct sequencing analysis using DNA from the paraffin-embedded primary cutaneous melanoma. She tolerated the treatment remarkably well, and the size of the multiple hepatic and lung metastases decreased, while the size of the brain metastases did not. In addition, the serum concentration of 5-S-cysteinyldopa (5-S-CD), a biological marker of melanoma progression, was also decreased from 40.1 ng/mL to 5.2 ng/mL.
In December 2012, she suddenly developed severe abdominal pain. Abdominal CT revealed ruptured hepatic metastases accompanied by massive intra-peritoneal hemorrhage. A retrospective and sequential analysis of the CT images suggested that a part of the liver metastases had enlarged rapidly and then ruptured with intratumoral hemorrhage during vemurafenib treatment . An emergency TAE was performed by selective occlusion of the right hepatic artery using gelatin sponge particles. The postoperative course was uneventful for several days. However, on the 26th postoperative day, she developed hemorrhagic shock and died of renewed intra-abdominal bleeding.
An autopsy examination revealed hemoperitoneum due to rupture of the liver metastases. Metastases were also discovered in the brain and lungs as well as in the kidneys, adrenal gland, and lymph nodes, although these had not been detected on imaging while she was alive. There was also massive bloody ascites (1700 mL). The background liver was completely normal, whereas exposed necrotic tissue and intratumoral hemorrhage were observed at the site of tumor rupture . We concluded that the cause of death was hemorrhagic shock from ruptured hepatic metastases of malignant melanoma. Finally, for improved understanding of the mechanism of refractory metastasis, we conducted an immunohistochemical analysis of the signal transduction molecules, phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (p-ERK), and phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt), as well as the melanocyte marker Melan-A and Ki-67 in tumor cells of the primary malignant melanoma obtained from the right lower leg and in hepatic and lymph node metastases obtained on autopsy . Our findings showed that hepatic and lymph node metastases were positive for p-ERK and negative for p-AKT, even though the primary tumor was negative for both.