A previously healthy 14-year-old girl presented with cough, sputum and shortness of breath after activity. She had a history of trauma 10 days prior to presentation. She was previously admitted to another hospital and diagnosed with tuberculosis. Antituberculosis treatment was ineffective; therefore, she was transferred to our hospital. She had no family history of genetic or osteolytic disease. She was admitted to the respiratory department with dyspnea and persistent cough. Examination revealed tachypnea, diminished breathing sounds, a deformity on her back, and tenderness. She exhibited percussion pain in the T6–T9 vertebrae and an absence of motor power in the thoracic spine. Neurological examination was normal.
Plain radiographs revealed an osteolytic lesion in the thoracic spine . Thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed a moderate right-sided pleural effusion and atelectasis . Her thoracic spine CT revealed the presence of ill-defined lytic lesions in the ribs and the T6–T9 vertebrae as well as a fracture in the T7 vertebra . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans revealed a pathological fracture and spinal canal stenosis at the T7 vertebra and high intensity in the T6–T9 vertebral bodies . Whole-body bone scintigraphy was performed, and radiolucent foci were observed in the fracture lesion on the radiographic images. Blood analyses indicated nearly normal biochemical levels, except for a high concentration of cross-linked N-terminal telopeptides of type I collagen (111.60 ng/ml) and decreased vitamin D (8.99 ng/ml).
Recurrent chylothorax was managed via repeated thoracentesis, and percutaneous fine needle aspiration of the lesion yielded more than 1000 ml/day of a reddish turbid, nonodorous fluid. Analysis of the aspirate revealed a positive Rivalta test result, which was reported as chylothorax. The patient was transferred to the thoracic surgery department to control the pleural effusion. A thoracic duct ligation and pleurodesis along with chest drainage was planned. The biopsy could not be analyzed because insufficient tissue was taken from the lesion during the process. Chest CT showed bilateral pleural effusions 2 days after surgery , and the chest was drained on the left side. To investigate the lesion pathology, the patient underwent another incisional biopsy of the T6–T9 vertebral bodies at the department of spine surgery. The bones appeared honeycomb-like intraoperatively. Postoperational pathological examination of the incisional biopsy revealed many dilated sinusoids with hemorrhaging, mononuclear and lymphocytic infiltration, fibrous tissue and dead bone . Based on the clinical, radiological and pathological findings, we confirmed the diagnosis of GSS because the biopsy material was negative for bacterial and fungal growth, and osteolysis was clearly demonstrated in the imaging results.
No treatment has been approved for GSS; thus, several treatment methods are used. In our case, the treatment plan was discussed and confirmed in a multidisciplinary clinic meeting. Bisphosphonates and vitamin D therapy were administered to treat the disease because the patient was vitamin D deficient, and the disease is self-limiting. Because the neurological exam showed no abnormalities, conservative treatment was considered, and a custom-made polypropylene body jacket was prescribed to prevent kyphotic deformity. Her clinical status improved steadily following the oral bisphosphonates and vitamin D supplementation. A final thoracic CT was performed 2 years after diagnosis and showed a successful reduction in the amount of pleural fluid and stabilization of the thoracic spine deformity.