A 39-year-old female patient presented to our facility with a 2-day history of fevers, malaise, and central dull chest pain that was neither pleuritic nor altered by position. She had a past history of relapsing Philadelphia-positive ALL for which she had received two consecutive allogeneic stem cell transplants (SCT) from a sibling donor, as well as an infusion of donor lymphocytes. She had no previous history of cardiovascular disease and at the time of presentation had been in remission from her ALL for 6 months. Her post-remission course had been uneventful prior to her emergency presentation.
On assessment she was dehydrated, tachycardic (up to 130 b.p.m.) and hypotensive (90/65 mmHg) with a temperature of 38.5°C. The remainder of the cardiovascular examination was unremarkable. Blood tests demonstrated an elevated C-reactive protein of 72.7 mg/L (<10) and a Troponin T of 2490 ng/L (0–14). Her white cell count was normal (10.4 × 109/L), and peripheral blood film examination did not identify precursor cells. The remainder of her biochemistry was within normal parameters including her haemoglobin, electrolytes, creatinine, and liver function tests. Multiple blood cultures were taken and remained negative. Chest radiography was normal. Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated a sinus tachycardia with new deep T-wave inversion (TWI) in leads V3–V6, not seen on a previous ECG . A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated mild–moderate left ventricular hypertrophy with anterior and anteroapical hypokinesis and a small circumferential pericardial effusion. The left ventricular size was normal, but systolic function was impaired with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 45%. There was no significant valvular pathology . Coronary angiography did not reveal significant obstructive disease.
The patient was resuscitated with IV fluids, given tazocin 4.5 g 6 hourly and commenced on therapy for presumed severe myopericarditis, receiving pulsed 1 g intravenous methylprednisolone daily for 3 days; however, failed to respond with ongoing fevers, tachycardia, and hypotension. Differential diagnoses including infiltrative, tachycardic, and catecholaminergic cardiomyopathies were considered. In the absence of a clear aetiology and given her failure to respond to initial therapy, an urgent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was sought. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging identified severe, patchy increased signal intensity involving the myocardium and pericardium in the basal antero-septum, anterior wall, mid-lateral wall, and the distal interventricular septum on oedema-weighted, and late gadolinium sequences with associated regional wall motion abnormalities consistent with severe myocarditis .
She subsequently underwent transjugular endomyocardial biopsy (EMBx). Endomyocardial biopsy revealed a heavy infiltrate of malignant lymphocytes percolating between myocytes , with resultant atrophy of the intervening myocardial fibres as well as an accumulation of the malignant cells in a prominent perivascular and pericardial distribution , confirming a leukaemic infiltrate in the myocardium. The lymphocytes exhibited mild to moderate nuclear pleomorphism with scattered mitoses and hyperchromatic nuclei with increased N:C ratio and stained strongly positively for CD20, CD10, TdT, and PAX5 immunoperoxidase stains , confirming the presence of immature lymphoid lineage blood cells. Interphase FISH Probes for BCR/ABL1 [t(9; 22)(q34; q11.2)] revealed a signal pattern consistent with BCR-ABL1 rearrangement in the infiltrating cells and DXZ1 (X centromere), DYZ1(Yq12) loci-specific probe set confirmed that the majority of the cells contained recipient (XX) origin, with only occasional donor (XY) cells noted . These findings were in keeping with recurrence of the patient’s ALL.
Her clinical course was complicated by runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (treated with amiodarone 300 mg orally thrice daily in a weaning regimen and coupled with low-dose bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily, titrated to blood pressure), persistent fevers, and intermittent chest pain with associated changes in serum troponin. Within 2 weeks of confirmation of diagnosis by EMBx the patient had evidence of lymphoblasts (50%) in her peripheral blood. She was commenced on a second-line compassionate-access tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Ponatinib (45 mg orally once daily), as a palliative measure, though she failed to respond and by 4 weeks her blast count was 23.71 × 109/L with a doubling time of under 24 h. She soon thereafter died from fulminant multi-organ failure.