An 85-year-old menopausal woman was referred to our hospital for diagnostic evaluation of worsening dyspnea over 6 weeks. The patient had a history of chronic atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease (CKD) of uncertain etiology. She had a uterine fibroid diagnosed at 64 years of age. Pre-admission medication included amlodipine (10 mg/day), valsartan (40 mg/day), verapamil (120 mg/day), digoxin (0.125 mg/day), and rivaroxaban (10 mg/day).

Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 146/97 mmHg, heart rate 90 beats/min and irregular, and respiratory rate 21 breaths/min. Physical examination revealed a third heart sound, diminished breath sounds from the right lower lungs, and notable bilateral leg edema, but no remarkable jugular vein distention (JVD) was observed. A hard mass was palpable in the lower abdomen. The electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation. Chest radiography revealed cardiomegaly and right-sided PE. Laboratory testing revealed elevated levels of serum creatinine (1.36 mg/dL, reference, 0.65–1.07 mg/dL) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) (183 pg/mL, reference: < 18.4 pg/mL). Hepatic and thyroid function, C-reactive protein levels, and urinalysis were within normal ranges.

Echocardiography demonstrated normal left ventricular (LV) cavity size and systolic function, with an ejection fraction of 54% and left atrial dilation (35 mL/m2). Doppler and tissue Doppler profiles for the assessment of LV diastolic function revealed a decreased septal e′ of 5.8 cm/sec and an elevated E/e′ of 17, indicating elevated LV filling pressure. In addition, continuous wave Doppler revealed a peak tricuspid regurgitation velocity of 2.6 m/s, consistent with a pressure gradient of 27 mmHg and an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of approximately 35 mmHg. Echocardiographic evaluation of the right heart revealed almost normal systolic function; tissue Doppler of the free lateral wall (S′) = 9 cm/s (reference: ≥ 10 cm/s), tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion = 18 mm (reference: 16 ≥ mm), and fractional area change = 53% (reference: ≥ 35%), respectively.

Thus, a tentative diagnosis of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) was made. The patient was administered oxygen at 3 L/min and treated with intravenous loop diuretics (furosemide 40 mg daily). On day 6, although diuretic treatment improved leg edema, PE remained unchanged.

A subsequent diagnostic workup of unexplained PE was performed. The patient underwent thoracentesis with drainage of 1240 mL of serosanguineous PE. PE analysis revealed lymphocyte-predominant exudates fulfilling Light’s criteria. Additionally, the serum-to-effusion albumin gradient was 0.3 g/dL (reference: ≤ 1.2 g/dL), further confirming the true exudative effusion. The adenosine deaminase activity in PE was 9.3 U/L. PE cytology, as well as the bacterial and mycobacterial cultures, were unremarkable.

Chest computed tomography revealed an absence of lung tumors or inflammatory infiltration after the removal of PE. Abdominal/pelvic computed tomography scan revealed bilateral inhomogeneous ovarian masses. Magnetic resonance imaging further characterized the right substantial mass and detected a trivial ascites. Axial and sagittal T2-weighted images demonstrated the peripheral hypointense mass, which contained hyperintense and multilocular areas in the central portion, mimicking a malignant ovarian tumor with a central necrosis or a degenerated subserosal fibroid. Gadolinium-enhanced axial imaging showed inhomogeneous enhancement correspondently on the peripheral solid portion, suggesting malignancy. In addition, screening tests for tumor markers revealed elevated CA-125 levels (382 U/mL, reference: < 35 U/mL). Repeated serial thoracentesis was ineffective, and PE reaccumulated within a week. Thus, we highly suspected of ovarian cancer with pleural dissemination. Nevertheless, a repeated cytological examination of PE revealed no evidence of malignancy, which led us to consider the possibility of MS.

On day 26, the patient underwent bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. The resected masses exhibited yellow-to-tan fleshy cut surfaces, with hemorrhage and extensive hyaline degeneration. Histopathological examination revealed a mitotically active cellular fibroma (MACF) of the ovary. Spontaneous resolution of the right-sided PE was noted post-operatively after 7 days of follow-up, confirming a definitive diagnosis of MS. A follow-up echocardiography revealed no significant changes. The post-operative course was uneventful, and the patient made a full recovery and was discharged with no changes to her pre-admission medication regimen on day 33. She remained clinically stable upon subsequent follow-up.