This is the case of a 49-year-old man, a smoker at 20 pack-years, with no medical history except retrobulbar optic neuritis and an appendectomy. A family history of elevated blood pressure was reported in his father.
The patient was diagnosed with axial SpA in 2017. The diagnosis was made according to Assessment in Spondyloarthritis International Society (ASAS) 2009 criteria: inflammatory back pain for more than a year, age of onset<45 years, bilateral grade II sacroiliitis on radiographs, and elevated positive C-Reactive Protein (CRP) at 164mg/l [normal value (NV)≤8 mg/l]. No extra-articular manifestations were identified at the time of diagnosis. Blood pressure and blood sugar levels were normal. Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) treatment (diclofenac and indomethacin) was initiated for the first two months after diagnosis. This treatment was quickly stopped upon the discovery of proteinuria at 0.3 g/24h. A corticosteroid therapy was therefore prescribed (10 mg of Prednisone) and we decided to start a biologic drug. Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow-up from 2017 to 2020. During this time, he was self-medicated with NSAIDs and analgesics.
He consulted in December 2020 for white, soft, and pitting edema of the lower extremities. On examination, he weighed 78 kilograms, his body mass index was 24.6 kg/m. His blood pressure was elevated at 180–200 mmHg for systolic and 100–120 mmHg for diastolic. Cardiac examination was normal. There was no hepatomegaly or pathological jugular turgor. Pulmonary examination found decreased breath sounds on pulmonary auscultation, which were absent at the base. Oxygen saturation was 97%. The abdomen was distended but painless to palpation. Bilateral flank dullness was noted on percussion. Examination of the external genitalia revealed a bilateral hydrocele. Osteoarticular examination revealed stiffness of the back without mobility limitation, and mobility limitation of the hips. There were no other joint involvements or abnormalities on general examination.
Laboratory examinations had shown: CRP at 51 mg/l [NV≤8 mg/l], creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) at 53.04 μmol/l [NV: 55–100 μmol/l] and 151 ml/min [NV: 90–130 ml/min] respectively, 24-hour proteinuria at 5.9 g/24h [NV<30 mg/24h], total serum protein at 46 g/l [NV: 60–80 g/l], and serum albumin at 14.4 g/l [NV: 35–50 g/l]. Otherwise, there was no hematuria. These clinical and biological data led to the diagnosis of impure nephrotic syndrome with hypertension. Furthermore, the SpA was highly active, according to the disease activity scores (BASDAI: Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity and ASDAS-CRP: Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Score) which were 6.3 and 4.95, respectively.
In order to explore the nephrotic syndrome; we performed a renal biopsy whose histologic examination concluded with an FSGS involvement. In fact, the biopsy was performed under ultrasound guidance and brought 3 cortical fragments with 25 glomeruli, none of which were sclerotic. In light microscopy, segmental and focal hyalinosis lesions were observed in 5 glomeruli per section plane. Podocytes had a turgid appearance with abundant cytoplasm. The walls of the glomerular capillaries were normal in appearance, no visible deposits were observed, and Cango Red staining was negative. Moreover, a non-inflammatory interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy occupying 20% of the examined parenchyma was observed. As for the vessels, there were 2 to 3 interlobular arteries of normal appearance. The arteriolar sections showed moderate hyalinosis .
For immunofluorescence, hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed in 7 glomeruli and revealed membrane staining with IgA antisera, segmental glomerular IgM deposition and negative fibrin, C1q, C3, and IgG antibodies.
Only light microscopy and immunofluorescence analyses were performed, as an electron microscope was not available.
The patient was hospitalised and an etiological investigation has been initiated. We ruled out viral infections (human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, parvovirus B19, and cytomegalovirus) by negative viral serology, drug and toxic causes by interrogation, and causes of FSGS by glomerular hyperfiltration by normal renal ultrasound and urological exploration and given the absence of diabetes, obesity, sickle cell disease and cyanotic cardiac disease. At the same time, we started corticosteroid therapy (Prednisone) at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day in association with furosemide (initially intravenously at a dose of 200 mg then a gradual decrease to 40 mg per OS), spironolactone (100 mg per OS per day), and ramipril (2.5 mg per OS per day). In addition, five albumin infusions were prescribed.
The patient was initially monitored daily (during his stay in hospital). Then he was examined as an outpatient every week for the first month and then every 2 weeks. Proteinuria was assessed at each visit by urine dipstick, and a 24-hour proteinuria determination was performed every 4 weeks. Blood analysis (serum protein, albumin, and creatinine) was also performed.
After 12 weeks of treatment, the patient lost 15 kg of weight. His creatinine and eGFR levels were 51.33 μmol/l and 156 ml/min, respectively. His total serum protein and albumin levels were 64 g/L and 32.4 g/L, respectively. However, he still had an estimated proteinuria of 2.3 g/24h (3 crosses on the urine dipstick).
Concerning SpA management, the patient is currently waiting for an agreement for the coverage of a biologic drug (Adalimumab) from the social insurance funds. He is only receiving analgesic treatment.