A 69-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a 5-month history of chest tightness, palpitation, nausea, and fatigue during activity. The symptoms were alleviated at rest. Chest computed tomography that had been performed in a local hospital showed cardiomegaly without a pulmonic lesion. She had a 9-year history of hypertension and declared there had been no recent continuous fever, except for “flu,” for which she had received general treatment in a local clinic 6 months previously.
Further evaluation revealed that the patient was afebrile with stable vital signs. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed enlargement of the left ventricle (60 mm diameter during diastole) with moderate aortic regurgitation due to valve degeneration, dilatation of the right heart without right ventricular dysfunction, and moderate tricuspid regurgitation (tricuspid annulus diameter 45 mm). TTE also revealed PV stenosis with a peak velocity of 4 m/s and patent foramen ovale (PFO). Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was performed because of poor visualization of the pulmonary artery on TTE. TEE had revealed a large main pulmonary artery (diameter 56 mm), severe pulmonary regurgitation with vena contracta of 15 mm , patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) with a diameter of 7 mm , and a thickened, dome-shaped PV with no attached vegetation. The patient was diagnosed with multiple congenital heart diseases—PV stenosis, PDA, PFO—accompanied by degeneration of the aortic valve. The cause of her pulmonic regurgitation, however, remained undetermined.
Cardiac surgery was scheduled after preoperative tests showed that the white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level were within normal ranges. Intraoperatively, the surgeon found an approximately 2 cm2 perforation in the PV leaflet , and the pulmonary artery had a rough surface around the PDA orifice with no vegetation. The patient successfully underwent a complicated procedure involving closure of the PDA and PFO, replacement of the PV and aortic valve with Medtronic bioprosthetic valves (#27 and #25, respectively), and tricuspid valvuloplasty with a #30 Solo ring under cardiopulmonary bypass. She was discharged on postoperative day 10. At the 3-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic, and TTE revealed good function of the bioprosthetic valves.