A 25-year-old woman, without previous medical history, presented for infertility lasting for more than one year. Clinical examination was normal but abdominal and pelvic computed tomodensitometry (CT) revealed a cyst of the left ovary associated with abundant peritoneal ascites that could correspond to mucinous material. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed ascites and showed a heterogeneous mass of the left ovary measuring 8.4 × 6.8 cm with adipose, solid and cystic regions that were suggestive of a dermoid cyst. The right ovary and uterus seemed normal. No other lesion was seen in the rest of the body, notably in the digestive system. In this context, surgery by left oophorectomy with appendicectomy and omentectomy was performed 3 months after the first consultation, without resorting to additional hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC). Intra-operative examination revealed mucinous material inside the peritoneal cavity and a normal digestive tract with a normal appendix. There was no complication of the surgery. The 5-month follow-up based on clinical and imaging surveillance revealed no complaints. Without relapse, the patient was able to pursue her plan to have a child.
Macroscopically, the left ovary was cystic measuring 9.5 × 7 × 7 cm and weighing 305 g. It was ruptured on 4 cm. Its cut section revealed a heterogeneous and viscous mass with hair. The appendix, measuring 6 cm in length, and the omentum were macroscopically normal. Histologically, the ovarian cyst corresponded to a mature pluritissular teratoma with intermingled skin and pilosebaceous annexes, serous and mucinous glands, respiratory epithelium, adipose tissue and smooth muscle . The organoid areas with the aspect of a colon, representing about 20% of the ovarian cyst, were composed of colonic mucosa, muscularis mucosae, and submucosa from the surface to the depth. A thick muscularis propria was also observed. In the colonic mucosa, some glands were elongated and layered with moderate proliferating epithelial cells with minimal atypia, near to mucin pools stained with Alcian blue. The colonic epithelial cells were immunohistochemistry stained with CK20 and CDX2, and showed heterogeneous staining for CK7. These cells were negative for estrogen and progesterone receptors . The ovarian surface was covered with hyperplastic mesothelial cells and presented acellular mucinous pools, also found in the omentum. The left fallopian tube was normal. The appendix examined in totality was histologically normal besides mucin deposits on the surface of the serosa. It did not present any mucocele or LAMN/HAMN. All together, these data suggested a diagnosis of acellular PMP (according to Carr classification ) caused by a ruptured appendiceal-like mucocele associated with LAMN, in a left ovarian teratoma.
Next generation sequencing of the LAMN of the teratomatous mucocele revealed an activating mutation of KRAS gene c.35G > A corresponding to the p.(Gly12Asp) substitution . Complementary molecular analysis by SNaPshot showed an associated mutation of GNAS c.602G > A resulting in p.(Arg201His). No mutation was found by these two techniques on the other tissues of the ovarian teratoma (squamous, respiratory, adipose or smooth muscle elements) or in the normal appendix and ovarian parenchyma .