A 57-year-old female presented with sudden-onset severe headache, photophobia, and drowsiness to the emergency department in a hospital located in Babylon, Iraq. The initial non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan showed subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in the basal cistern . The patient was admitted to the neurology ward for observation and symptomatic management, after which her relatives approached our team for a second opinion. We advised the patient’s family to conduct a CT angiogram (CTA); the patient’s healthcare team informed the family that CTA would be harmful to the patient within two weeks of presentation and would not provide conclusive results. This statement contradicts the international guidelines, which recommend urgent treatment for suspected ruptured intracranial aneurysms, and indicates CTA as the investigation of choice for cases of SAH due to aneurysmal rupture. However, it is essential to note that those guidelines are not considered standard guidelines in the Iraqi health system and transfer.
Following this, based on our request, the patient’s family took the responsibility on themselves to transfer the patient, and a CTA was conducted in a nearby private facility. This should not be a usual instant where the family takes responsibility for taking steps in the management of a potentially life-threatening case such as SAH. In addition, more patient transfer in a nonambulance or hospital-supervised facility has its risks. Moreover, the report of the CTA showed that it was negative for any aneurysm and any other vascular malformation. This finding was a disastrous part of this case, as it will show in further investigations.
The patient and the family had two options: stay at home based on the imaging findings or travel a 140-mile trip from Babylon to Baghdad to reach our neurovascular center (Baghdad Neurosurgery Teaching Hospital) through a personal, non-equipped vehicle . The family chose the latter option and arrived at our center. After an initial assessment of the patient and revision of the investigations, we decided to conduct a diagnostic catheter angiography, which surprisingly revealed not one but four aneurysms. Those aneurysms included aneurysms in the right posterior communicating artery (PComA), superior hypophyseal artery, intraorbital ophthalmic arteries, and left PComA .
Due to the lack of medical insurance in Iraq and the high financial burden for endovascular treatment that can be applied in such cases of multiple aneurysms, the family decided that they could not afford such costly intervention. As a result, the only viable option left was to do open surgery. Hence, we opt to target the tandem right PComA aneurysm, the adjacent superior hypophyseal aneurysm, based on the location of SAH in the initial CT where we suspect the rupture has occurred on the right side .
A right pterional approach was performed, and the right Sylvian fissure was retracted to expose and dissect the supraclinoid internal carotid artery; we started by clipping the right PComA aneurysm due to the presence of a daughter cyst, and there was an ipsilateral vasospasm of A1 and M1 portions of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries, respectively, on the angiography making it our initial target. However, after clipping, we were convinced that the PComA aneurysm was not the ruptured one. While trying to explore the adjacent right hypophyseal aneurysm, we encountered a huge intraoperative rupture from it that was managed promptly by applying a pilot clip followed by a dissection of the neck. Then, we secured the aneurysmal neck with a permanent clip. The rest of the surgery went uneventful, with no subsequent operative or postoperative complications.
For the remaining two aneurysms, we decided on a watchful follow-up as a next step, with serial follow-up imaging every three months. Both aneurysms were asymptomatic and stable in size and shape at 18 months of follow-up.