A 57-year-old Greek man was referred to our facility with pain, hemorrhage and a gangrenous smell due to a so-called wound on his penis. A physical examination revealed the complete absence of his penis and a large chasm in the lower abdominal wall, which made it possible to see parts of the lower pelvis, such as the spermatic cords, the destroyed basis of the corpora cavernosa and the residual stump of the urethra. The scrotum and the testicles were stiff and were possibly invaded by the cancer. In the chasm margins, we could detect hemorrhagic and necrotic areas . The inguinal lymph nodes were palpable, hard and mobile. Our patient was in a good general condition and his body temperature was normal. From his medical history, he had discovered a lesion in his inner prepuce 18 months before. He had requested medical advice at a private health center concerning that lesion. According to his recollection, a biopsy had been taken and he was diagnosed as having penile cancer (this biopsy could not be found, as he did not ask for a copy of it at the time and the private health center failed to track our patient's data as he was never hospitalized there). The physicians at the time suggested he should undergo a partial penectomy, but he refused and stopped seeking medical treatment.
The lesion slowly progressed, eventually involving the whole penis. He could not specify the exact time his penis sloughed off completely. He was not circumcised. Standard laboratory test results showed that his values were within normal limits except for a small rise in white blood cell count (14,750 cells/μL) and microcellular anemia (hemoglobin = 9.8 g/dL, hematocrit = 31.2%). A chest X-ray did not show any remarkable findings. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed lymph nodes of a pathological size and number, bilateral in the iliac vessels and inguinal areas as well as an erosion of the pubic bone . We proceeded with a chest CT scan, which did not show any distant metastases or lymph nodes. On the first day of his hospitalization, we obtained biopsies from the chasm margins and identified a poorly differentiated SCC. The clinical staging was T4N3M0 and our patient was treated with chemotherapy and regional radiotherapy. We also performed a bilateral cutaneous ureterostomy, with a Gibson incision in order to protect the corroded tissues from further urine impregnation . From a combination of regional radiotherapy and bilateral cutaneous ureterostomy, total dryness of the wound was achieved. During his extended hospitalization, he presented with deep vein thrombosis in the right shin vein and seizures that were attributed to small ischemic brain strokes after a brain CT scan. Debulking and flap coverage of the wound was not considered possible, firstly because of deep vein thrombosis, epileptic seizures and his poor general condition increased the risk from operation and secondly the size of the chasm combined with very poor vascularization of the region (a topical angiography was performed). Gradually, our patient developed depression, denial of feeding and loss of weight. He died 18 months after his first admission and six months after his last follow-up admission to our clinic.