The patient was a 55-year-old woman with a history of smoking and prolonged opium inhalation, referred to Ghaem clinic in Mashhad with dysphonia, hoarseness, and occasional aspiration since last year. No sign of odynodysphagia, stridor, and dyspnea was observed in the case.
The patient did not previously undergo any treatment. In laryngoscopy, prior to surgery, left arytenoid, aryepiglottic fold, left false vocal cord, true vocal cord, anterior commissure, and subglottic region were tumoral. In addition, other parts of the larynx and hypopharynx were normal. The left vocal cord was fixed. In the preoperative computed tomography scan, there was a transglottic involvement on the left side, and cervical lymphadenopathy was not detected. Laryngeal cartilage and hyoid bone were reported to be normal. The right paraglottic space was involved, and the epiglottis was normal. The tongue, esophagus, trachea, and thyroid were normal. The biopsy of the affected areas represented the well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Furthermore, chest X-rays and liver function tests were normal. The patient was ultimately diagnosed with a transglottic squamous cell carcinoma of the T3N0M0 stage. Moreover, total laryngectomy with total thyroidectomy (due to subglottic involvement) and bilateral elective cervical lymph node dissection level I-IV were performed. The tumor was macroscopically removed, and the surgical margin was checked with a frozen section for the presence of the tumor. The neopharynx was closed with the suturing technique. The patient diagnosed with salivary fistula was initially treated with conservative management, including total parenteral nutrition, pressure dressing, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy .
Despite the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics in the 12th day, due to swelling and cervical erythema on the right side, the case with a diagnosis of infectious colonization, followed by the salivary fistula, was transferred to the operating room.
In addition, the drainage and diversion of salivary secretion away from the carotid sheath were performed under general anesthesia. Moreover, in order to sterilize the fistula and help the formation of fibrosis to close it, 10 cc of the acetic acid solution diluted to 0.25% was orally prescribed three times a day.
To reduce the flow of saliva botulinum toxin injections in both submandibular glands were conducted under ultrasound guidance, and propantheline (i.e., an anticholinergic drug) was simultaneously prescribed for the patient.
In spite of conservative treatment, the fistula was not recovered after 3 weeks.
Due to the probable surgical procedures, such as gastric pull-up or free flap reconstruction, in the final stages of fistula treatment failure, the jejunostomy was inserted instead of gastrostomy, and intestinal gavage was initiated. There was no evidence of positive surgical margins on permanent specimen pathology.
Regarding the completion of the medication, conservative treatment, lack of response to the closure of the fistula, and risk of carotid injury with the salivary flow, it was considered to repair fistula by a free flap or gastric pull-up. Therefore, a thoracic surgeon was consulted about gastric pull-up considering the fistula repair.
It was decided to perform fibrin glue injection into fistula tract via the endoscopic approach after consultation with a gastroenterologist and thorax surgeon and according to the successful management of fistula with the use of plasma-rich compounds, such as fibrin glue, in addition to patient's desire for no major surgery. Furthermore, informed consent was obtained from the patient before the surgery.
The case underwent an endoscopy to locate internal fistula orifice. In gastrointestinal endoscopy, a fistula was identified in the anterior wall of ​​the neopharynx .
Fibrin glue was prepared from the patient’s blood sample under certain procedures. The PCF tract was endoscopically localized, and an endoscopic retrograde cholangio- pancreatography (ERCP) catheter passed through the fistula, pushed forward, and pulled backward gently to prevent injury to major vessels. The de-epithelialization of fistula orifice was performed, and the fibrin glue was endoscopically injected into the fistula tract via the catheter. Afterward, a nasogastric (NG) tube was inserted under the endoscopic view.
Following the administration of fibrin glue, the patient with NPO (i.e., nothing through the mouth) underwent pressure dressing and continued conservative treatment. Two weeks later, the case was discharged with an NG tube and antibiotics (oral Clindamycine 300 mg TDS). One month after the fibrin glue injection, no evidence of contrast extravasation was observed on barium swallow test, and the fistula was completely closed . The normal saline serum was given to the patient with a methylene blue as a surgical marker, with no evidence of leakage. When oral feeding started, the patient tolerated the pain without difficulty. The NG tube was drawn 1 month after the fibrin administration, and the patient returned to normal oral feeding without any problems.
Fibrin glue preparation
Two components are required to prepare fibrin glue. The first component is fibrinogen, and the second one is thrombin. Fibrinogen is prepared after the extraction of blood from the patient's vein or blood bank and a series of other steps. The second part that is thrombin is produced as a ready-to-use commercial solution, as well as being extractable from the plasma of the patient. Thrombin is diluted in distilled water and combined with aminocaproic acid as an antifibrinolytic agent. The first component is prepared by three following methods:
• The first method (plasma): Firstly, 36 ml of citrated blood from a blood bank is evenly divided into four tubes, and the tubes are centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 min. The plasma is then removed by pipet and combined with 1 ml of calcium chloride solution.
• The second method (plasma cryoprecipitate): Firstly, 350 ml of frozen blood in a bag (frozen at -18°C) is placed in a refrigerator at 4°C until it melts slowly. Then, the melted blood is centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 min. Afterward, 1mm of calcium chloride solution is added. Finally, the substance sediment in the foam bag is used as fibrinogen.
• The third method (plasma cryoprecipitate): Firstly, 36 ml of noncytarabine blood is collected in four tubes, each one containing 1 ml of 10% sodium citrated solution. Afterward, the tubes are centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min. The obtained plasma is mixed with 1.3 ml of ammonium sulfate saturated solution in four silicon tubes in which fibrinogen is immediately precipitated and then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 min. About 1.5 ml of white sediment is collected by siphoning and mixed with 1 ml calcium chloride.
In this study, the second method was used for the preparation of fibrin glue.
Fibrin glue injection
In this case, fibrin glue was injected by endoscopy. Firstly, under the intravenous sedation and left lateral decubitus position under the cardiopulmonary monitoring, the endoscope entered into neopharynx through the mouth. The location of the fistula was observed in the anterior neopharyngeal wall and 12 cm from the incisive teeth. The probe of the endoscope was fixed at the fistula location. Then, the ERCP catheter passed through the endoscope into the fistula, pushed forward, and pulled backward gently to prevent injury to major vessels.
The de-epithelialization of fistula orifice was performed, and 5 cc of the fibrin glue was endoscopically injected into the fistula tract via the catheter. In addition, some fibrin glue was percutaneously injected into the outer orifice of the fistula. The patient follow-up showed that the fistula was completely closed 3 months after the administration. The NG tube was removed, and oral nutrition was successfully started. The subsequent follow-up demonstrated that the patient tolerated a soft diet and fluids without any problems .