A 26-year-old Colombian male without past medical history presented to the emergency department with a 1-month history of dry cough, progressive dyspnoea, and orthopnoea. On physical examination, his blood pressure was normal (110/70 mmHg), but he exhibited tachycardia (110 b.p.m.), and elevated jugular venous pressure. No cardiac murmurs or lung rales were detected. The electrocardiogram revealed generalized low voltages, and blood test results were unremarkable. A chest X-ray showed significantly enlarged cardiac silhouette . A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of a giant aneurysm in the ascending thoracic aorta (maximum diameter 96 mm) and a massive pericardial effusion (maximum diameter 65 mm). The remaining aorta and its branches appeared to be of normal calibre. A bedside echocardiogram indicated signs of cardiac tamponade and, because of rapid worsening symptoms, emergent pericardiocentesis was performed to stabilize the patient. The obtained pericardial fluid was serosanguinous. Subsequently, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for further stabilization.
A transoesophageal echocardiogram revealed severe aortic regurgitation , with a broad and dense central jet resulting from a large coaptation defect secondary to the enlarged ascending aorta. Holodiastolic flow reversal in the descending aorta was observed, with an end-diastolic velocity of 40 cm/s. The estimated effective regurgitant orifice area was 1.5 cm2. Left ventricular diameters and function were normal, suggesting an acute/sub-acute onset. The overall clinical presentation strongly indicated an impending aortic rupture. On 4th day, the patient underwent ascending aorta replacement with a Bentall´s procedure using a 25 mm CarbosealTM mechanical prosthesis and a 28 mm Dacron aortic graft. The excised tissue was sent for pathological analysis, which revealed a thin aortic wall and histological evidence of medial degeneration and disorganization of elastic fibres . There were not intra- nor post-operative complications, and the patient was discharged from the hospital after 1 week.
Following discharge, the patient was assessed by the Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases Unit. While there was no significant family history, physical examination unveiled dolichocephaly with mild retrognathia, arachnodactyly, joint laxity, and a high-arched palate. The Gante’s systemic score was 4. A genetic study using next generation sequencing (NGS) encompassing 64 genes related to aortic and connective tissue disorders was conducted. The genetic variant c.409A > T, p.Ser137Cys, in EFEMP2 was identified in homozygous state. Cascade screening of first-degree relatives revealed that they were healthy heterozygous carriers.
Subsequent CT scan of the entire vascular system 1 year after surgery did not reveal aneurysms in other locations, although arterial tortuosity was noticed. After 2 years of follow-up, the patient has been managed with losartan 50 mg and acenocoumarol, with no further reported events.