A 34-year-old Iranian man presented to the clinic with redness and impaired vision in the right eye for many months, despite topical corticosteroid treatment. His prior medical history was unremarkable. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye was 4/10 (+5.00 sphere) and 10/10 (−0.50 sphere) in the left eye at the time of presentation. The examination of the left eye was normal. During a slit-lamp examination, the right eye revealed chemosis as well as a nodular salmon patch in the bulbar conjunctiva and 1+ vitritis. The fundus examination of the right eye revealed near-total shallow serous retinal detachment, multifocal yellow choroidal infiltrates, and widespread mid-peripheral retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) changes .
Enhanced-depth-imaging optical coherence tomography (EDI-OCT) showed macular retinal folds and a “seasick” appearance on the choroidal surface with compression of the choriocapillaris. OCT images also revealed intraretinal and subretinal fluid, as well as clumps of optically dense material at the level of the RPE .
Fluorescein angiography (FA) disclosed diffuse patches of choroidal hyperfluorescence. In the posterior pole, blue autofluorescence (BAF) and FA imaging exhibited a nonspecific “leopard-spot” appearance .
Incisional biopsy of the conjunctival lesion was performed; histological and immunohistochemistry studies revealed a dense infiltrate of small lymphocytes with positive staining for CD20 and CD79, with coexpression of BCL2. The diagnosis was atypical monoclonal lymphoid infiltration suggestive of low-grade extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbit was negative for extrascleral extension; his systemic workup for extraocular involvement including laboratory data, chest and abdomen computed tomography (CT) scans, and bone marrow aspiration results were all negative.
Ultra-low-dose radiation, termed “boom-boom radiotherapy” (4 Gy delivered in two fractions over two consecutive days) was used in conjunction with intravitreal injections of methotrexate and rituximab. To reduce radiation scatter to periocular tissue, orbital rim bones, and midfacial soft tissues, the beam was delivered through a bolus shell of 42-mm water-equivalent thickness placed 3 cm from the patient.
Intravitreal methotrexate injections were started at a dosage of 400 µg in 0.1 ml per week for 6 weeks, then monthly for 6 months. Rituximab was administered intravitreally once a month for 3 months at a dosage of 1 mg in 0.1 ml. The intravitreal injections were started just 1 week after the last radiotherapy session.
Serous retinal detachment was resolved 2 months following ultra-low-dose radiation, and subretinal fibrosis and widespread RPE alterations were observed at the location of the detachment. On EDI-OCT, the lymphoid infiltration, flattening of the macular fold, and resolution of subretinal and intraretinal fluid were all observed. Hyperreflective deposits were observed under the retina that correlated to fibrosis. The RPE–choroidal interface changed to a “calm sea” appearance. At 1-year follow-up, the results remained consistent, the subconjunctival lesions were regressed, and the BCVA improved to 6/10. During this time, there was no recurrence or radiation-associated complications. The patient was scheduled for regular follow-up visits.