A 30-year-old Han Chinese man was riding his motorcycle at 80.5km/hour when he collided with an oncoming car. He complained of back pain and right shoulder pain and was admitted to a local hospital. He sustained double inferior lung contusion with a few hemothoraces, fractures of right clavicle and vertebrae T6 to T7 inclusive. After 6 hours, he was transferred to our hospital. On clinical examination, there was no neurological deficit. A three-dimensional reconstruction of computed tomography showed spinal fracture-dislocation of T6 to T7 , a fracture of right clavicle whereas fracture of ribs was not found , magnetic resonance imaging showed spinal fracture-dislocation of T6 to T7 , horizontal computed tomography scans showed a large bilateral hemothorax , fractures of bilateral pedicles of vertebral arch , three vertebral levels in one cut , and anteroposterior thoracic spine plain X-ray showed spinal fracture-dislocation of T6 to T7 and realignment of his fractured-dislocated spine .
Despite the normal neurological systems below T7, the spine was considered unstable and an operation was planned. Chest drains were inserted bilaterally. A day later, the patient was put in the prone position under general anesthesia, the fascia was opened and his paravertebral muscles were dissected following a midline vertical incision of T4 to T11; the right pedicle of the T8 vertebra and the right lamina of the T6 vertebra were found to be fractured. Laminectomy of the T6 to T7 vertebra was done. The dura and spinal cord were found to be normal. Then the spinal canal was examined with a rubber catheter and found to be good. Transpedicular screws were put in the T5, T6, T9 and T10 vertebrae. Realignment of the thoracic spine was achieved with rods. Bony fusion of the transverse processes of the T5, T6, T7 and T8 vertebrae was done. The fracture of his right clavicle was also reduced and autologous bone graft was performed too. His nervous system was intact postoperatively. He was discharged on the 10th day after his operation. He was very well at the follow-up examination 3 months later.