A 56-year-old man developed decreased visual acuity and blurred vision without obvious cause or inducement that lasted for 15 d.
The patient presented to the Department of Neurosurgery, Clinical Medical College, Yangzhou University, with decreased visual acuity and blurred vision that lasted for 15 d. The neurological examination findings were normal, and he had previously been in good health without any infectious diseases or immune disorders. Enhanced pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple nodules in the suprasellar region with slightly shorter T1 signals, compression of the optic chiasma, and compression of the superior pituitary margin in a region of approximately 19 mm × 12 mm × 21 mm. The preoperative diagnosis was craniopharyngioma . The patient's routine laboratory results were normal. The tumor was removed by an endoscopic transnasal transsellar tubercle sphenoid platform approach. Intraoperatively, the tumor was located in the suprasellar suboptic space with cystic changes and was connected to the posterior part of the pituitary gland. Postoperative MRI showed a patchy mixed signal in the sellar region . Postoperative histopathology revealed hyperplasia, showing nests and a papillary arrangement of epithelial nests with a fenestrated arrangement of marginal cells in some areas; additionally, ghost cells were seen with calcification . The final diagnosis was craniopharyngioma of the sellar region (enamel-forming cell type). Postoperative review MRI showed a patchy mixed signal in the sellar region, and the sellar base was incomplete. A nodal shadow was visible in the sellar region, with significant enhancement; the shadow was approximately 10 mm × 9 mm in extent and poorly demarcated from the visual cross. The patient recovered well after surgery without special discomfort. Six months after the operation, the patient suffered from sudden hearing loss in the right ear, tinnitus in both ears, and numbness of the right side of the face and head, without any signs of infection. Physical examination revealed hearing loss in the right ear. Enhanced MRI of the inner ear showed multiple patchy and nodular, distinctly enhancing abnormal shadows around the right pontocerebellar horn, right cerebellum, and quadrigeminal cistern; the largest lesion was in the right pontocerebellar horn, approximately 17 mm × 14 mm in size, with gross margins and significant thickening of the right rocky meninges. Multiple IP were considered . The patient was treated with steroid pulse therapy, and he received an initial high-dose regimen of 80 mg of methylprednisolone for 4 d, followed by a one-day drug cessation and then a maintenance dose of 40 mg of methylprednisolone for another 4 d. Despite this treatment approach, the patient's primary symptoms remained unresolved, and subsequent cranial MRI indicated no significant change in the size of the pseudotumors. Ultimately, we opted for surgical resection to remove the tumor, and during follow-up and review, there was no recurrence of the IP. A lesion in the right cerebellum and pontocerebellar horn was resected under neuronavigation. Postoperative pathological examination showed fibrocollagenous tissue hyperplasia and extensive infiltration of inflammatory cells, including lymphocytes . Immunohistochemistry suggested the following: KP1 (scattered +), CD3 (scattered +), CD20 (scattered +), S100 (neural +), CD1a (-), GFAP (brain +), Ki67 (scattered 20%), SMA (vascular +), CD34 (vascular +), and MPO (scattered +). Special staining results were PAS (-), antacid (-), and silver stain (-). The postoperative diagnosis was IP. The patient was discharged 7 d after surgery and was reviewed 3 mo after surgery, without recurrence or significant abnormalities on neurological examination. The patient continues to be under close follow-up .
The patient had no previous history of infectious diseases, traumas, or bad habits (such as smoking or drinking).
The patient denied any family history of tumors.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.4 °C; blood pressure, 110/88 mmHg; heart rate, 88 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 19 breaths per min. Annual physical examinations (including various laboratory tests and imaging examinations) indicated that the patient was healthy.
The white blood cell count was 7.78 × 109/L, and neutrophil count was 7.37 × 109/L. Endocrine test results were normal.
Pre-operative pituitary MRI suggested that there were multiple nodules with abnormal signals in the sellar region. The diagnosis was craniopharyngioma.
Pre-operative contrast-enhanced MRI of the inner ear showed multiple patchy and nodular distinctly enhancing abnormal shadows around the right pontocerebellar horn, right cerebellum, and quadrigeminal cistern, with the largest lesion in the right pontocerebellar horn, approximately 17 mm × 14 mm, with gross margins and significant thickening of the right rocky meninges. MIP were considered.