A 65-year-old man presented to our hospital’s clinic with a 6-month history of orthopnea and worsening dyspnea on exertion. He also described having worsening leg swelling with painless sores and cellulitis with flaky skin for the past 3 months. His past medical history was significant for chronic left leg swelling which started when he was 15 years old. No other comorbid conditions were present, and the patient had no significant travel history. His father, elder brother, and nephew had the same history of chronic massive unilateral leg swelling starting in the teenage years. All of them were diagnosed as having lymphedema praecox.

During physical examination, the patient’s vital signs were blood pressure of 140/100 mm Hg, a regular pulse of 90 beats per min, oxygen saturation of 97% on room air, and a temperature of 36.7°C. The patient’s body mass index was 31.6 kg/ m2. He had jugular venous distension. The lungs were clear to auscultate, and no additional sounds were heard on cardiovascular examination. The left leg showed non-pitting edema with indurated, woody skin and lichenification, while the right leg had mild pitting edema. There were numerous verrucous folds and cobblestone-like nodules, and plaques and a painless ulcer on the left leg. The Kaposi-Stemmer sign (inability to tent the dorsal aspect of the skin at the base of the second toe) was positive. The temperature of both legs was the same.

The results of the laboratory evaluation, including blood count, cardiac enzymes, D-dimer, C-reactive protein, metabolic profile, and thyroid function test were normal. Abnormal values included B-type natriuretic peptide levels of 467 pg/mL (reference range, up to 100). Blood cultures showed no organisms. Chest radiograph images showed scattered pulmonary infiltrate with prominent hilar markings, and the electrocardiogram showed a partial left bundle branch block. Echocardiography showed an ejection fraction of 20% and dilated left and right chambers. There was also global hypokinesia with a thinned left ventricle and mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. Doppler sonography did not show any arterial or venous clots. Computed tomography angiography showed normal coronary arteries. The patient was admitted as a working diagnosis for dilated cardiomyopathy and presumed elephantiasis of the left leg. A skin biopsy was consistent with stasis dermatitis, and a diagnosis of ENV superimposed on lymphedema praecox with congestive cardiac failure was confirmed.

The patient began guideline-directed medical therapy for cardiac failure with high dose diuretics including eplerenone 25 mg once daily and furosemide 40 mg every 6 h, and intravenous amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 1.2 g 3 times daily as empirical therapy for cellulitis. His leg was treated with the help of compression stockings and inelastic multi-layer bandaging. The physiotherapist started the patient on limb decongestive therapy. After a week of guideline-directed medical therapy and physiotherapy, his swelling improved and there was a slight reduction of edema. He was prescribed oral amoxicillin 500 mg (twice per day for 7 days) and a retinoid cream. At the 1-week follow-up visit, the patient was satisfied, despite the treatment showing only a slight improvement. His shortness of breath and orthopnea had subsided. He was referred to a specialized dermatology center for further management.