A 5-year-old male neutered Persian cat was referred for investigation of a 4 week history of weight loss, inappetence and vomiting, following management of feline lower urinary tract disease, with repeated urethral catheterisations and assisted nutrition by an oesophagostomy tube. The nutritional support provided at that time was estimated at approximately 40% of its basal energy requirement (BER).
On examination, its body condition score was estimated at 4/9 and the body weight was 2.95 kg. A subcutaneous abscess was noticed at the level of the oesophagostomy tube insertion site. Mild pyrexia (39.6°C) and a left systolic parasternal heart murmur grade II/VI were also identified. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
A CT scan revealed a large left cervical abscess associated with the oesophagostomy tube, treated with surgical debridement followed by drainage and antibiotic therapy (amoxicillin-clavulanic acid). A naso-oesophageal tube was placed to allow continuation of assisted nutrition. Despite having received 100% of its BER for 10 days followed by 150% BER for 4 days using an energy-dense complete commercial diet (Royal Canin Convalescence Support), the cat continued to lose weight and remained anorexic. Energy requirement was calculated with the standard formula: BER (kcal) = 30 × body weight + 70.
Haematology and biochemistry revealed mild non-regenerative anaemia (haematocrit 25%; reference interval [RI] 28–52%) and elevation of symmetric dimethylarginine (20 µg/dl; RI 0–14) with creatinine within the upper range of the reference interval (112 µmol/l; RI 0–140), suggestive of International Renal Interest Society stage 1 CKD. The fasting serum bile acids, folate and cobalamin and feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity were within normal limits. Urinalysis revealed a urine specific gravity of 1.041, inactive urine sediment, borderline proteinuria (urine protein to creatinine ratio 0.37; RI <0.2) and negative urine culture. Faecal parasitology and culture for Salmonella and Campylobacter species were negative. Ultrasonography showed bilateral renal changes consistent with CKD and prominence of the jejunal muscularis layer, compatible with chronic enteropathy or – less likely – intestinal lymphoma. Endoscopy revealed oedema of the gastric and duodenal mucosae. Histology revealed mild eosinophilic, lymphoplasmacytic gastritis and marked neutrophilic, plasmacytic, histiocytic enteritis, with villous blunting .
Oral maropitant at 4 mg daily (Cerenia 16 mg tablets; Zoetis) along with mirtazapine (Mirtazapine 2 mg tablets; reconditioned tablets) at 2 mg every other day were provided as appetite stimulants during the hospitalisation. Immunosuppressive therapy was started 6 days after admission, with dexamethasone initially (0.5 mg/kg IV q24h for 7 days [Rapidexon 2 mg/ml injectable solution; Eurovet]), followed by prednisolone (1.8 mg/kg PO q24h [Prednicare 5 mg tablets; Animalcare]). Owing to a lack of improvement, another immunosuppressive drug was added 4 days after initiation of steroids: ciclosporin (Cyclavance 100 mg/ml oral solution; Virbac) at 5 mg/kg q12h on an empty stomach.
Seventeen days after admission, the cat became acutely subdued. This progressed rapidly to loss of consciousness, opisthotonos and bilateral light-responsive mydriasis, consistent with an intracranial neurolocalisation. The plasma ammonia was markedly elevated (>286 µmol/l) and likely responsible for the neurological signs. At that stage, the cat’s owners elected euthanasia, and consented to blood collections for plasma amino acids, serum organic acids measurement and post-mortem examination. This revealed low plasma concentrations of the urea cycle amino acids arginine, citrulline and ornithine, which was suggestive of acquired urea cycle amino acid deficiencies resulting in hyperammonaemic encephalopathy . Measurement of serum organic acids did not provide additional relevant information.
On necropsy, the following organs and tissues were examined histologically: heart, lung, liver, spleen, pancreas, intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum, colon), kidneys, urinary bladder, perioral skin and brain. Duodenal histopathological changes revealed minimal multifocal predominantly lymphocytic submucosal inflammatory reaction. Both kidneys presented with mild-to-moderate multifocal to global thickening of most glomerular membranes, which was suspicious of membranous glomerulonephritis . No relevant histological lesions were identified in any of the remaining organs.