A 5-year-old Persian, female cat was brought for investigation of progressive behavioral changes (loss appetite, loss weight, imbalance, and lethargy) at Albaittar clinic in Tripoli, Libya. The cat was mated 1 month before it was brought to the clinic. It showed vigorous behavior in a male during estrus. The cat’s owner visited the clinic for suspecting pregnancy. At presentation, the cat had a body weight of 2.5 kg and a body temperature of 38°C. Physical examination revealed an enlargement of the abdomen, with a palpable irregular-shaped mass on the right side of the mesogastric region. Abdominal Ultrasound examination (DRAMIŃSKI ANIMALprofi L, DRAMIŃSKI, Poland) revealed the presence of an echogenic irregular mass in the right ovary.
The cat subsequently underwent therapeutic ovariohysterectomy (OHE). Ovaries, uterus, contralateral ovary, and fallopian tube were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin within 48 hours and submitted for macroscopic and histopathological examination. The cat received 20 mg/kg of long-acting Amoxicillin for five consecutive days after the operation and the wound was dressed with wound disinfectant and antibiotic powder every 2 days. The cat started to eat on the next day of the operation.
Macroscopic examination revealed a uterus measured 11 cm in length, convoluted with corkscrew appearance, soft in consistency, and intact serosal layer . The right ovary showed an attached ovarian cystic tissue mass measured 6 × 5 × 3 cm, rounded in shape, dark red to tan in color, soft to firm in consistency with multilobulation and intact capsule . The specimen was inked and serially cut. The contralateral ovary measured 0.9 cm and fallopian tube measured 0.5 cm in length.
On cut section of the ovarian tissue mass, a well-circumscribed multilobular tumor mass, solid heterogeneous, greyish white to tan in colored areas with multiple foci of necrosis and cystic spaces were detected. The capsule is intact grossly. The uterine cavity showed thickened wall with variable cystic dilatations. The other ovary and fallopian tube showed no obvious pathological abnormality.
For histopathological examination, serial sections were taken from the ovarian tumor mass and from the uterus, as well as, from the contralateral ovary and fallopian tube, and were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for later processing and examination. All histological procedures were performed according to . The tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) following the standard procedures. The stained tissue sections were examined under a light microscope (ZEISS, Germany).
Histopathological examination of the ovarian tumor mass revealed a malignant tumor composed of diffuse atypical granulosa cells with spherical to oval nuclei, distinct nucleoli, and scant eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in different patterns (micro follicles, small nests, acinar formation, and alveolar-like) . Regions of the tumor exhibited Sertoli-pattern (Luteinization), while others showed sarcomatous spindle cells arranged in tight fascicles . The cells were separated by connective tissue septa along with areas of hemorrhage and necrosis . Mitotic count according to active foci of the tumor showed 2–3 mitosis / 10 hpF. The fibroconnective tissue capsule (FCC) revealed evidence of vascular invasion which showed blood vessels lined by endothelial cells .
The endometrium examination revealed thickened endometrial lining with elongated glands and prominent stroma. There was also a dilatation of glands with formation of variable sized cysts . No cytological atypia was seen, nor evidence of complexity or tumor deposits or invasion. The contralateral ovary and fallopian tube showed normal histological findings, with no evidence of malignant infiltrations.
Based on histological findings, the GCT of the ovary with evidence of vascular invasion associated with CEH was made and the contralateral ovary and fallopian tube were free.
The surgical intervention resulted in the complete resolution of clinical signs. However, 6 months following surgery the cat was brought to the Albittar clinic again with complaints of weakness, cachexia, ascites, off food, and lethargy with the presence of abdominal mass. Sings of pain were determined on palpation of the right abdominal region and ultrasonography examination was performed. According to the ultrasonography examination, a clear mass at the mesogastric region attached to the right kidney was determined and was suspected as a sequela of past tumor metastasis. Since the poor prognosis surgery was not performed, the cat had paralysis in hind limbs and massive weight loss after one week and eventually died. The owner of the cat rejected the euthanized decision and the postmortem examination.