A 55-year-old man, who received LT two years ago, developed diarrhea after an unclean diet 20 days ago and had difficulty breathing for five days. The patient's history included LT for cirrhosis two years ago and postoperative use of tacrolimus (2 tablets bid), Mycophenolate Mofetil (3 tablets bid), and sirolimus (1 tablet qd) to control immune-rejection with good results. The patient had recurrent diarrhea 20 days ago after an unclean diet, with symptoms of loose yellow stools with mucus 6–8 times a day, and did not improve after taking "berberine hydrochloride". Ten days ago, the patient's symptoms worsened, and he relieved dark green stools more than ten times a day, and gradually developed symptoms such as thirst, profoundly sunken eye sockets, palpitations and dyspnea. The patient's examination at the local hospital showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 15. 61 × 109/L, a significant decrease in potassium ions (2. 45 mmol/L), and a significant increase in creatinine level (337 umol/L). As a result, the local hospital discontinued the patient's immunosuppressive drugs and treated diarrhea and intestinal infections with Meropenem and Montmorillonite, but the results were poor. Because the patient developed symptoms such as dyspnea and oliguria, he was diagnosed with septic shock. However, after treatment with a ventilator and Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy (CRRT), diarrhea and infection were not effectively controlled, and the symptoms worsened. As a result, the patient was transferred to the Department of Intensive Care Unit of West China Hospital.
The patient was admitted with ventilator-assisted ventilation. A femoral vein placement tube for CRRT used outside the hospital was found at the root of the thigh. Patient's general condition on admission : temperature 38. 4 °C; pulse 130 beats/min; respiratory rate: 18 breaths/min; blood pressure 100/67 mmHg (on norepinephrine 0. 4ug/kg/min). The patient had a small number of wet rales on lung auscultation, an oxygenation index (PO2/FIO2) of approximately 110, and no significant abnormalities on abdominal examination. The patient's laboratory findings showed a significant systemic inflammatory response, renal impairment and immunosuppressive state. Inflammatory indexes: white blood cell count 19. 21 × 109/L; neutrophil ratio 92. 7%; CRP: 190 mg/L; interleukin 6: 336 pg/L, PCT: 3. 32 ng/L; abnormal biochemical indexes: creatinine 170umol/L; potassium: 5. 23 mmol/L; immune function: lymphocyte count: 0. 45 × 109/L. The patient's abdominal CT suggested a high amount of colorectal gas stool and a dilated bowel.
Based on the patient's admission examination and the external medical records, we initially determined that the patient was in septic shock caused by infectious diarrhea with abdominal and pulmonary infections and multiorgan functional impairment. The patient was then admitted to our hospital and immediately given imipenem cystatin 1 g q8h and voriconazole 0. 2 g q12h for anti-infection. The patient's immunosuppressive drugs continued to be stopped. The patient's routine stool test was sent to identify the pathogen causing the diarrhea, but no meaningful results were obtained. On the second day, the patient's blood culture suggested Gram-positive coccus infection and chest CT suggested fungal infection. We added amphotericin B 10 mg bid and tigecycline 100 mg q12h to strengthen the anti-infection. By day 5, the patient's temperature peak was gradually reduced, and the oxygenation index rose to approximately 300. We reduced the dose of paroxysmal sedative medication discontinue the ventilator and transfer it out of the intensive care unit. As the patient's lymphocyte count rose to 1. 58 × 109/L, we reintroduced him to Mycophenolate Mofetil 500 mg bid to suppress the patient's immune function.
On day 7, the patient again developed massive watery diarrhea and unstable blood pressure, a decrease in oxygenation index(PO2/FIO2) to 200, increased inflammatory markers, and abnormal liver function. We considered a drug-related liver injury and parasite-associated diarrhea. So we stopped the patient's enteral nutrition, added antidiarrhea (minocycline hydrochloride) and hepatoprotective drugs (polyene phosphatidylcholine) and adjusted the antibiotic regimen to ceftazidime avibactam (2. 5 g q12h), amantadine (1000 mg q8h), voriconazole (0. 1 g q12h) and mucilage sulfate (750, 000u q12h). To clarify the aetiology of the patient's diarrhea, we performed a gastroscopy on day 8. The stereoscopic presentation was : segmental mucosal changes in the cecum department and ascending colon, suspicious of specific infections. Because the patient's multiple stool tests were negative, we considered atypical pathogenic infections. Therefore, we stained the patient's stool specimen with antacid and performed high-throughput sequencing (NGS) on the blood specimen. After two days, a large number of Cryptosporidium was detected in the patient's stool . NGS detection of Cryptosporidium parvum sequence number 33 with the specific information that NGS detection covers a total length of 2951 (bp) on the genome with coverage of 0. 0332% and an average depth of 1. 00X, suggesting the presence of large amounts of Cryptosporidium in the blood of this patients . Furthermore, we immediately discontinued Mycophenolate Mofetil and looked for an anti-Cryptosporidium infection treatment option. According to previous reports, Cryptosporidium infection is frequently seen in children with primary immunodeficiency. Cryptosporidium infection causes symptoms such as sclerosing cholangitis and pulmonary Cryptosporidium infection in children with immunodeficiency. There was a high degree of similarity to the present case regarding both symptoms and findings. In a case report of a CD40L-deficient infant diagnosed with Cryptosporidium infection, after treatment with nitazoxanide and azithromycine, the patient was doing well, this report served as an important reminder for our treatment, and we immediately reviewed the instructions for NTZ [, ]. NTZ is the only approved anti-Cryptosporidium drug on the market. Because NTZ is not recommended in the instructions for use in an immunodeficient population, we used an anti-Cryptosporidium regimen of oral azithromycin (1000 mg tid) and alliin (500 mg tid). Five days after that, the patient showed a slight improvement in diarrhea, but liver and kidney function continued to deteriorate, and we administered continuous CRRT. On day 18, as the patient's glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase continued to rise, we considered Cryptosporidium retrograde biliary infection. To prevent the development of sclerosing cholangitis and immunorejection, we changed the anti-Cryptosporidium infection regimen to NTZ (500 mg tid) and allicin (500 mg tid) while continuously monitoring the patient's immune function and using cyclosporine to suppress immune function if necessary to keep CD4 + T cells were controlled at 100–300/mm3. The treatment plan had a good effect. The number of diarrhea gradually decreased, liver and kidney function gradually recovered, CRRT was stopped on day 22, and the patient was taken off the ventilator on day 23. On days 24 and 25, the patient underwent faecal antacid staining, and no Cryptosporidium was found. On day 28, the patient was transferred to the general ward and recovered well with his family. As the patient's renal function is severely compromised, we recommend that patients regularly review their renal function and pay attention to preventing infection from avoiding progression to the stage of renal failure.