A 14-year-old Han Chinese woman with a history of neurogenic bladder for more than 10 years was admitted to our Department because of coma for 12 h. The patient complained for diplopia without fever or diarrhea 4 days before her coma with no incentive. She had no limb weakness and was treated with Vitamin B1and mecobalamine. Her previous medical history included neurogenic bladder caused by spina bifida occulta for 12 years and hydronephrosis diagnosed 1 year before. Sometimes she had urine retention, but she received no treatment for the neurogenic bladder except for urethral catheterization occasionally. She had no seizures and no fever. On admission, physical examination revealed that she was unconscious. The pupils did not react to light and presented different sizes in each eye (left pupil diameter, 2.5 mm; right pupil diameter, 4 mm). On stimulation, she could move her 4 limbs spontaneously. There were exaggerated deep tendon reflexes over both legs and the right Barbinski sign was positive. However, her vital signs were stable: Blood Pressure (BP) was 120/81 mmHg; pulse rate, 76 beats/min; body temperature, 36.5 °C; breath, 12 times/min. Non-contrast brain computed tomography (CT) after the onset of her coma revealed diffuse brain stem hypodensity. Brain MRI acquired 4 h after the coma onset in the county hospital showed high signal at the dorsal part of the pontine base and the mid brain on fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery (FLAIR) imaging and T2-weighted imaging. However, diffusion-weighted images presented normal signal . The non- contrast abdominal CT preformed on the next day of admission showed chronic obstructive uropathy with a distended bladder, severe hydronephrosis and dual renal atrophy.
Blood analysis immediately after admission revealed renal failure [Urea nitrogen: 23.87 mmol/L, Creatinine: 566.8 μmol/L], and anemia [RBC: 2.5 × 1012/L, HGB: 79 g/L]. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed metabolic acidosis [pH 7.09 (7.35–7.45)]. Liver function was normal.
The patient was diagnosed with UE due to chronic renal failure and metabolic acidosis. She was immediately treated with 200 ml of bicarbonate at 5% conducted by quick intravenous injection, followed by 100 ml intravenous injection of bicarbonate at 5% once a day and 1.0 g of bicarbonate administered orally three times per day for 3 days. Simultaneously, she underwent urethral catheterization to relieve the urine retention. She was revived without diplopia 3 days after admission and the reviewed blood analysis after urethral catheterization showed that her renal function was returning to a normal level (Urea nitrogen: 13.10 mmol/L, Creatinine: 294 μmol/L); hence, dialysis was not necessary. She was treated with hypodermically administered erythropoietin 3000u twice a day, and ferrous sulfate 0.3 g orally thrice a day for the anemia. She was discharged 14 days after the admission without diplopia and any mental disturbance. She was still with the ureteral catheter because of the hydronephrosis. Two weeks after the discharge, the catheter was removed when abdomen ultrasonic showed decreased hydronephrosis. Follow-up MRI performed 2 months after the discharge revealed complete resolution of the brainstem UE . Reviewed blood analysis after 2 months of discharge showed that her renal failure still persisted (Urea nitrogen: 13.10 mmol/L, Creatinine: 190.3 μmol/L). However, she had no neurological disturbance or urinary retention. She underwent the comprehensive bladder-retraining program to avoid urinary retention and her renal function was regularly assessed once a month.