A 71-year-old man was referred to our clinic for treatment of an iatrogenic total iridodialysis. Just before the referral, his iris had been totally torn out and jammed into the hinge of a prechopper during the removal of an instrument during cataract surgery. Examination revealed a visual acuity (VA) of hand-motion in the left eye. A complete iris defect with remaining lens cortex, a ruptured posterior lens capsule with radial tear of the capsule, and an intraocular lens (IOL) implanted in the sulcus were noted . The totally dialyzed iris was sent to our clinic preserved in sterile cold balanced salt solution, packed in a sterile biopsy bottle surrounded by a towel to prevent direct contact with ice cubes, and was transported in an icebox.
We decided to perform surgery under general anesthesia considering the patient’s poor cooperation due to dementia. To minimize IOL decentration during scleral fixation, we used a toric axis marker and marked the fixation axis . After the scleral flaps were in two positions 180° apart, a 10–0 polypropylene suture was passed through the bed of half-thickness scleral flaps 2.0 mm posterior to the limbus . A sulcus positioned IOL (PC-60 AD, HOYA Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was repositioned and fixed by ab externo scleral sutures . We conducted a pars plana vitrectomy to remove the remaining lens cortex material and vitreous fibre anterior to the equator to avoid trapping the vitreous during the iris-fixating suturing . The preserved iris was examined. It did not show any signs of necrosis but kept its own color and morphology soundly . We spread out the iris on the patient’s cornea to estimate the range of damage and locate a wider part of the iris inferiorly to minimize the glare after iridopexy . A 10–0 Prolene on a CIF4 needle (Ethicon, Somerville, New Jersey, USA) was consecutively passed through the iris and sclera 1.0 mm posterior to the limbus at the 6’ O/C position . Properly using both an iris spatula and ocular viscoelastic devices (OVDs), we inserted the iris into the anterior chamber completely and unfolded it to its proper position . The estimated cool-to-anterior chamber insertion time of the preserved iris was 8 h. Four more points of ab interno scleral sutures (4’, 1:30, 10:30 and 8’ O/C positions in sequence) were made . Then, the remaining vitreous, OVDs, and dispersed iris pigments were removed using a vitreous cutter .
One week postoperatively, intraocular pressure (IOP) increased up to 30 mmHg because of hyphema from the torn root of the iris ; however, 3 weeks postoperatively, hyphema decreased with improved VA (20/200) and lowered IOP (15 mmHg) . At 4 weeks postoperatively, a much improved VA (20/100) and lowered IOP (14 mmHg) were detected . At 7 weeks postoperatively, VA was 20/63, IOP was 14 mmHg and there were no signs of inflammation in the anterior chamber . Until 6 months postoperatively, the engrafted iris did not have any signs of atrophic change, depigmentation, or inflammation; the patient complained of minimal glare, and the uncorrected VA was 20/25 with the IOP of 13 mmHg .