A 35-year-old female was diagnosed with type I DM at the age of 9 years. During childhood her DM was poorly controlled and the patient gained significant weight. At the age of 25 years her weight was 105 kg with a body mass index (BMI) of 40 kg/m2 and her renal function started to deteriorate with progression to requiring hemodialysis by age 30. With development of renal failure, secondary hyperparathyroidism was noted. Due to her obesity, she was not eligible for a renal transplant or a SPK. At this point it was decided to offer her bariatric surgery, and, after extensive discussion, it was felt that a RYGBP was the best option for her in terms of weight loss. At the age of 32 years, she underwent uneventful robotic-assisted surgery; the stomach remnant was attached to the abdominal wall for potential future access.
Over the next 2 years she lost 60 kg and underwent SPK during which the donor duodenal segment was diverted to a bowel loop distal to her Roux loop implant site into the common channel. Induction immunosuppression with alemtuzumab was followed by maintenance with tacrolimus (trough levels 5-7 ng/mL), mycophenolate-mofetil (2 g daily), and a steroid taper. She was CMV seronegative and received a graft from a CMV positive donor and received standard prophylaxis with oral ganciclovir (GCV) for 100 days. Within 100 days posttransplant, she was readmitted to the hospital with acute CMV disease, which was successfully treated with intravenous ganciclovir.
Shortly after this episode the patient was found to have skin lesions on her right leg, which were diagnosed as calciphylaxis. Her serum calcium at that time was 14 mg/dl and the diagnosis of tertiary hyperparathyroidism was made. A three-and-a-half-gland resection together with subtotal thymectomy was done without any complications; the left lower parathyroid gland was the only normal appearing and half of it was preserved taking care that blood supply remained intact. Intraoperative parathyroid hormone levels dropped from >1500 to 150. Calcium serum levels within 24 hours postoperatively were 9 mg/dl with ionized calcium of 3.5 mg/dl. She was discharged in good condition within 24 hours postoperatively with daily calcium supplementation of 4.5 g/day divided into three doses.
During the following week her calcium levels started to drop and on day 10 postoperatively at an outside hospital serum calcium was found to be critically low at 5.5 mg/dl with an ionized fraction of 2.1 mg/dl. However, the patient had remained clinically symptom free. She was admitted for intravenous calcium replacement. Pushes of calcium were unable to appropriately raise her calcium levels and, therefore, a calcium drip (85 mg/h) was started. Her calcium levels came up to 7.1 mg/dl. Oral calcium dose was raised to 15 g/day and hydrochlorothiazide was started. The calcium drip was stopped and the patient was discharged home in good condition.
Intense calcium supplementation was continued. Gradually the patient's gastrointestinal tract started to adapt and after two years her calcium levels started to stabilize. She has not experienced any additional complications from her transplant or gastric bypass. She is currently alive with excellent function of both grafts, normal calcium levels, stable weight, and an excellent quality of life almost five years after her last surgery.