A 77-year-old Korean woman, gravida 5, para 5, was admitted through the emergency room because of lower abdominal pain, poor oral intake, and a recent increase in abdominal size for 4 days. The symptoms had gradually increased in severity. She had no history of acute pain or previous operation. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness and rebound tenderness of the lower abdomen with a palpable mass in the left lower quadrant. Ultrasound examination showed an enlarged left ovarian cyst measuring 14.3 × 14 × 8.6 cm with diffuse internal echoes, including a 6.1 × 6.0 cm hypoechogenic component without significant vascularity. The right ovary was not seen and the uterus was normal and atrophied. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed an approximately 12-cm well-circumscribed mass (of fat and soft tissue density) in the pelvic cavity and a 9-cm well-circumscribed mass (of fat and soft tissue density) with calcification in the right subhepatic space . The suggested preoperative diagnosis was benign teratoma of the left ovary and right subhepatic space. With regard to preoperative examination, the laboratory tests, biochemical tests, complete blood counts, blood coagulation profile, and urinalysis were all normal. The C-reactive protein (CRP) level was elevated at 6.87 (normal range 0–0.3 mg/dL), CA-125 was elevated at 50.76 (normal range 0–35 U/mL), and CA 19-9 was normal at 22.06 (normal range 0–37 U/mL). We decided to proceed with laparoscopy. Laparoendoscopic single-site surgery (LESS) was performed through a 20-mm intraumbilical incision using a Glove port (NELIS, Bucheon, South Korea). During laparoscopy, torsion of the left adnexa due to an approximately 12 × 10 cm left ovarian cyst was visualized, with an atrophied normal uterus. The left adnexa was rotated 1440° clockwise with multifocal purple discoloration and severe adhesion to the sigmoid colon . The right ovary and tube could not be identified in the proper anatomical location . A second cystic mass of about 10 × 7 cm was noted in the right subhepatic space. It was surrounded by thin filmy adhesions to the omentum, bowel, and appendix . Left adnexectomy, intra-abdominal mass excision, and appendectomy were performed by LESS. The abdominal mass was carefully dissected from the surrounding omentum and bowel using a monopolar hook dissector and harmonic scalpel (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA). There was no pedicle that needed to be clamped and no identifiable blood supply. The mass was removed intact. The entire specimen was removed through the umbilical incision without leakage of content using an EndoBag (LapBag, Sejong Medical, Paju City, South Korea). The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged 4 days after surgery. The histopathological examination confirmed MCTs in the left ovary and right subhepatic space. The abdominal mass included ovarian tissue. These findings could also be interpreted as an autoamputation of the adnexa due to torsion of a previous ovarian cyst arising from the right ovary.