A 50-year-old female patient, known case of hypertension (HTN) and taking normatin as a medication, was in her usual state of health until 6 months prior to admission when she started to complain from headache, tinnitus and vertigo. She sought medical advice and was treated as otitis media (according to the patient).
Before ten days from her admission to our hospital, she had episodes of imbalance while she was walking and recurrent vomiting.
Once again, she sought medical help and, after a brain CT and a brain MRI were done, the doctors found a left cerebellar tumor . In the upcoming days, she was referred to our hospital in April 2019 for further evaluation and surgical management.
The patient came to our hospital by her own (using public transportation) because there were no facilities for the tumor management in other places and there was no need to being transported by ambulance.
We did a physical examination focused on a neurological examination due to her symptoms and diagnosis. The patient was conscious, oriented and alert, with a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) of 15/15.
The cranial nerves were intact, and she was positive for cerebellar signs. She also was positive for the Romberg sign, had an ataxic gait and could not perform the tandem gait.
The patient then underwent surgery in which a midline suboccipital craniectomy with microscopic gross total resection (GTR) of the left cerebellar tumor and a cranioplasty under neuromonitoring was performed successfully.
The surgery was smooth and without intraoperative complications with an estimated blood loss of 500 cc.
After the surgery, the patient was transferred to the ICU in good conditions with stable vital signs, conscious, oriented, alert and a GCS of 15/15. The cranial nerves were intact, she was able to move all limbs freely and the wound was dry and clean. Afterwards, she was discharged in good conditions, with stable vital signs and no complications or sequela.
According to the histology department, the specimen that they received in formalin consisted of a multiple pieces and fragments of a grayish tissue measuring in aggregate 7.5 × 5 cm grossly. Further microscopic investigations of the histologic sections showed a biphasic tumor with a mixture of neurocytes and lipidized cells in which the neurocytes were arranged in density cellular sheets of monotonous cells with scanty and often clear cytoplasm, rounded to oval nuclei and salt-and-pepper chromatin. Lipidized cells were clustered and resembling mature adipocytes.
Rare mitotic figures were noted and were investigated. The tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin and neuron specific enolase (ESN) immunostains, focal for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA).
With all these histological findings, it was concluded that the sample was consistent with a cerebellar liponeurocytoma, WHO grade 2.
After a month from the operation, the patient came to the out-patient clinic for follow-up in which we could see that she was in good conditions, with no complains and the cerebellar signs were gone. Since there was no residual tumor left after the surgery and there were no symptoms showing us cerebellar involvement, there was no need for our patient to take radiotherapy once she was discharged.
Since the patient did not come to us again, we suspect that she is not complaining from any other symptom in the neurosurgical field.