A nine-month-old male infant, was admitted with an 8-day history of watery, non-bloody diarrhea, vomiting and decreased oral intake. The baby was previously healthy and had a negative medical history.
On physical examination, the patient was pale and irritable with generalized body edema, tachypnea (rate 36/min) and tachycardia (HR140/min) but no rales or murmurs were heard. No other abnormalities were noted.
Initial investigations revealed leukocytosis (19 × 103), anemia (hemoglobin 7.7 g/L, hematocrit 22%) and thrombocytopenia (platelets 62× 103). Serum creatinine was 2.5, BUN, 57 uric acid, 7.6 mg/dl respectively, LDH 2293 IU/L. (reference value 265 I U/L). Peripheral blood smear revealed evidence of microangiopathic hemolysis with schistocytes and helmet cells. Abdominal ultrasound showed echogenic but normal sized kidneys. The patient was admitted to the pediatric intensive care with the diagnosis of hemolytic uremic syndrome for possible dialysis.
During his stay, the patient had persistent diarrhea, decreased oral intake, oligoanuria and generalized body edema and hypertension. There was no response to high doses of intravenous furosemide (urine output less than 0.5 ml/kg/hour). Because of progressive deterioration in kidney function (creatinine reaching 5.2 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen 88 mg/dl), persistent oligoanuria and worsening microangiopathic hemolysis and thrombocytopenia (hemoglobin of 5.4 g/dl and platelets of 23× 103) peritoneal dialysis was started after 48 h of hospitalization. The patient also received one unit of packed RBC transfusion.
Stool studies with Multiplex Qualitative reverse transcriptase PCR were negative for Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, Yersinia, enterohemorrhagic E coli; enteropathogenic E coli (EPEC), enterotoxigenic E coli (ETEC), enteroinvasive E coli (EIEC) and Shiga-like toxin-producing E.coli (STEC) stx1/stx2, Rotavirus A, Adenovirus, Astrovirus, but were positive for Norovirus GI/G II.
Additional relevant laboratory studies included massive albuminuria with an Ualb/Cr 97 mg/mg (ref value < 0.2), low C3 and C4 complement of 0.56 g/L (ref value 0.9–1.8 g/L) and 0.07 g/L (reference value 0.1–0.4 g/L) respectively.
After 48 h of continuous peritoneal dialysis, the patient improved clinically with progressive decrease in edema and gradual increase in urine output. Peritoneal dialysis was continued for 5 more days and his kidney function improved steadily and normalized by the 10th day when his serum creatinine was 0.3 mg/dl, and albuminuria was down to 0.13 mg/mg creatinine. Three weeks after the onset of the disease, C3 and C4 had returned to normal levels at 1.16 g/L and 0.31 g/L respectively. The patient’s hospital course and laboratory data are depicted in Figs. a and b. The patient has been followed for 11 months since the onset of his illness and shows no evidence of residual damage with normal renal, hematologic and complement profile. He is normotensive and has no microalbuminuria.