A 26-day-old boy was referred from a peripheral hospital with a right-sided incarcerated congenital inguinal hernia. The referring pediatrician told his father that he has a palpable testis in his right inguinal canal but no palpable testis on the left side. Apart from a clinically evident right irreducible hernia and empty both hemiscrota, the rest of the examination was unremarkable. After initial resuscitation with intravenous fluids and antibiotics, an urgent operation was undertaken. On inguinal exploration, the hernia sac was found to contain a viable cecum and small bowel loops. After reduction of the contents to the peritoneal cavity, the right testis was found in the inguinal canal. However, a second testis was unexpectedly delivered through the deep inguinal ring. Both testes have independent spermatic cords, i.e. two separate sets of vas deferens and testicular vessels on either side of a T- shaped structure resembling an infantile uterus and fallopian tube . Because of the shortness of the spermatic cord and the vague nature of this anomaly for the operating surgeon, only a biopsy was taken from both testes and all the structures were returned back to the peritoneal cavity followed by herniotomy.
Postoperative pathology showed normal testicular tissue bilaterally with absent ovarian structures. Karyotyping was done for the patient and revealed a normal 46XY male karyotype. Diagnostic laparoscopy was performed at the age of 6 months, which showed a closed left internal ring on the left side and a widely open internal ring on the right side. In addition, the left sided testis and spermatic cord were found joining their counterparts on the right side through the rudimentary uterus close to the right internal ring. The rudimentary uterus as well as the fallopian tubes were partially excised. Peritoneal dissection was made to gain extra length for both spermatic cords. Orchiopexy was done, with each testis fixed into its corresponding hemiscrotum. The patient had an uneventful recovery. Throughout the 6-month follow-up period, the size and the blood flow of both testes were normal as evaluated by Doppler ultrasound.