A 31-year-old woman, gravidity three, parity zero, was admitted because of a suspected intramural pregnancy after IVF-ET.
The patient was completely asymptomatic. She had regular menstruation, a moderate amount of menstruation and no dysmenorrhea. Her last menstrual period was November 17, 2020. The endometrium was prepared using hormone replacement therapy following 1.875 mg of subcutaneous gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (Leuprorelin Acetate, Livzon Pharmaceuticals, China) on day 3 of the menstrual cycle. In addition, 90 mg of vaginal progesterone (Crinone, Merck Serono, United Kingdom) once a day and 10 mg of dydrogesterone three times daily were administered (P + 0). A frozen day 6 embryo which had undergone preimplantation genetic screening was transferred on the 7th day of progesterone exposure (P + 6) under sonographic guidance.
She received laparoscopic salpingotomy in 2014 due to a right tubal pregnancy. She had suffered secondary infertility since December 2015 and her hysterosalpingography results showed an obstruction in the right fallopian tube and adhesion of the distal end of the left fallopian tube in June 2016. As spontaneous pregnancy did not subsequently occur, she was referred to the reproductive center of our hospital for IVF-ET in June 2018. The patient underwent laparoscopic bilateral salpingectomy for bilateral tubal pregnancy after two frozen day 3 embryos were transferred in December 2018. Of the other three frozen-thawed embryo transfer cycles, a total of 5 embryos were transferred, but pregnancy was not achieved. In addition, the patient had a history of hysteroscopy three times to remove endometrial polyps and separate uterine adhesions.
Her personal history and family history were unremarkable.
The patient’s vital signs were normal. Physical examination revealed a 7-week sized uterus with no tenderness and no abnormalities in the uterine cervix and abdomen. There was no vaginal bleeding or fluid.
At day 14 after ET, her serum β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) level was 111.54 mIU/mL and then increased from 290 mIU/mL to 1759 mIU/mL. On day 32 after ET, her serum β-hCG level was 3819 mIU/mL.
A transvaginal ultrasound examination revealed a suspected intramural pregnancy. When admitted on day 33 after ET, three-dimensional transvaginal ultrasound indicated a heterogeneous echogenic area measuring 1.40 cm × 1.26 cm in size arising from the uterine fundus which had a 0.48 cm × 0.37 cm anechoic region inside and was surrounded by myometrium . Color Doppler ultrasound showed abundant blood flow. This region seemed to have a slender and extremely hypoechoic area stretching to the uterine cavity . In addition, a hypoechoic structure with an indistinct boundary measuring 2.74 cm × 1.61 cm in size was observed in the anterior myometrium near the uterine fundus, which was thought to be a uterine adenomyoma.