A 57-year-old woman presented with a 6 month history of increasing pain in the right side of her groin radiating down to the medial thigh, to the anterior aspect of the knee and to the medial side of the lower leg and foot. The pain worsened when climbing stairs and walking and could not be relieved by non-steroidal medications. She became unable to climb stairs and walk long distances for the preceding 2 months, due to paresthesias and hypoesthesia of the medial side of the right lower leg and foot.
Physical examination revealed tenderness over the anterior hip, no palpable mass and there was no muscle atrophy. Neurological examination revealed an altered sensation to light touch in the medical side of the right lower leg and foot. Internal rotation, external rotation and extension of the right hip were painful and were markedly limited. Vascular examination of her lower limb was intact. The result of the straight-leg-raising test was negative.
Laboratory investigation included blood sugar, serum electrolytes, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, corpuscular blood count with differential count, rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies. The results were all normal. Radiographs of the hip and lumbar spine were also normal. Computer tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right hip region revealed a cystic lesion of 2.6 × 1.4 cm in diameter, both in high-T2- and low-T1-weighted signal intensity, arising from the antero-medial aspect of the acetabulum, displacing the femoral nerve as well as the femoral vein and the artery . A colour duplex Doppler ultrasonography excluded the possibility of aneurismal lesion. Electromyography (EMG) revealed evidence of muscle denervation.
At the time of surgery, a cyst measuring 3.3 × 2.4 × 1.8 cm was identified which was adherent to the anterior surface of the hip joint capsule. No communication was found between the joint space and the cyst. The joint capsule appeared intact. The cyst was removed totally and the base of the cyst was cauterized. The cyst was opened in the operating room and was found to contain thick, lucent gelatinous material .
Histological evaluation identified fragments of benign cyst wall composed of variably dense fibroconnective tissue with no lining cells, consistent with a ganglion cyst .
Postoperatively, the patient was pain-free and showed almost normal strength and sensation in the right leg. On clinical and ultrasonographic examination, no recurrence has been observed up until the time of writing this report.