27-year-old female patient, native and resident of Mexico City, who presented with symptoms 18 days prior to admission. She presented a clinical picture characterized by odynophagia accompanied by non-productive, non-dyspnoeic, non-emesis inducing cough, no fever, treated symptomatically (not specified), no clinical improvement. Eleven days prior to admission, she reported paresthesia of the right pelvic limb, hypoesthesia and weakness of both pelvic limbs and the right thoracic limb, as well as clumsiness in the right upper limb, which prevented her from performing her daily activities, as well as a decrease in the fluency of speech and dysarthria. Eight days prior to admission, in addition to the previous symptoms, she presented gait instability, requiring unilateral support for ambulation. On the night of that day, she presented loss of postural tone with palpebral opening, tonic gaze to the right, no response to verbal or tactile stimuli, no loss of control of sphincters. Subsequently, she presented flexion of the left arm and extension of the right arm, with forced cephalic version to the right, followed by guttural sounds and generalized tonic-clonic movements, with postictal period without recovery of alertness. The patient presented several events, with an estimated duration of 60-90 minutes, for which she was taken to the hospital, where she was admitted on suspicion of status epilepticus, advanced airway management and sedation were performed. During her hospital stay, a simple skull tomography study was performed, and an approach was initiated as a probable cerebrovascular disease, due to hypodens and hyperdense cortical and subcortical lesions. On physical examination, the Glasgow scale was 4 points, the nociceptive stimulus was the absence of ocular opening, bobbing of the eye, absence of oculocephalic reflexes, photomotor and consensual bilateral reflexes, absence of corneal and nasal reflexes, no response to the Marie-Foix maneuver, generalized decreased tone, dense pyramidal syndrome, bilateral and incomplete, muscle stretch reflexes (REMs) 3 (+++) in the thoracic and left pelvic limbs, REMS 1 (+) right patellar reflex, decerebration posture to the nociceptive stimulus. The cerebellum was not assessable due to neurological status.

The MRI study showed multiple lesions in the white matter, cortical and subcortical of both cerebral hemispheres, diffuse hyperintensity in subcortical white matter, multiple hyper and hypointense cortical and subcortical lesions in both cerebral hemispheres in the T2 sequence and attenuated inversion recovery of fluid (FLAIR).

In addition, there were infratentorial lesions in both cerebella and the right cerebellar peduncle, which were hyperintense on T2 and FLAIR.

With contrast administration, enhancement is observed in various cortico-subcortical lesions of both cerebral hemispheres, with no enhancement in infratentorial lesions.

Multiple areas of absence of susceptibility consistent with hemorrhages are observed in the T2-weighted gradient echo sequence, and areas of restriction in several subcortical lesions in both hemispheres are observed in the diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) sequence.

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed non-infectious inflammatory characteristics: colorless, leukocytes: 0-1, erythrocytes: 1-2, glucose: 61 mg/dL, microproteins: 2775 mg/dL. Gram stain and Chinese ink were negative. Bacteriological cultures, by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), for tuberculosis and for viruses in CSF were negative. Studies of blood count, blood biochemistry, chest radiography, coagulation parameters, toxoplasmosis profile, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex (TORCH) and immunological profile were reported normal.

Based on the above, an immunological origin was suspected, so treatment with methylprednisolone was initiated, and although there was no major progression, there was no clinical improvement, so it was decided to initiate treatment with immunoglobulin, with which the patient presented discrete clinical improvement in the motor system, but no improvement in mental functions. A control skull tomography was performed 12 days later, and a decrease in hemorrhagic lesions was identified. A brain biopsy was taken 15 days after admission and infiltration of macrophages, necrosis of small vessels and non-specific hemorrhage was found. The convulsive state subsided after 72 hours, so sedation was withdrawn, keeping the patient awake, without interaction to the environment and without response to the pain stimulus. With persistence of supplemental oxygen. In the follow-up, the patient continued in the same neurological state, and in persistent vegetative state.
