A 24-year-old female, gravida 2, para 2, who had previously undergone a Caesarean section at a rural hospital two years ago, arrived at the emergency room with a gradual onset of abdominal distension, abdominal pain, and absolute constipation for two days. She also experienced nausea and frequent vomiting of greenish material however, there is no fever, burning urination, or chest pain. There was no history of renal colic or intestinal obstruction.
The patient was vitally stable upon examination. The abdomen was distended with mildly generalized tenderness, but there was no guarding or rigidity. Superficial palpation revealed no abnormalities, but deep palpation revealed a globular mass on the left iliac fossa (pedunculated) with clearly defined edges. On auscultation bowel sounds were present.
TWBCs were 8.1, hemoglobin was 9.8, random blood glucose was 99 mg/dl, platelets were 329, blood urea was 27, serum creatinine 0.7, the c-reactive protein was 27, serum potassium was 3.3 mmol/l, abdominal ultrasound was normal, erect abdominal x-ray revealed multiple air-fluid levels , while supine revealed a dilated loop of the small intestine. A diagnosis of intestinal obstruction was made, and the patient was optimized before being taken to the theatre. under general anesthesia with tracheal intubation, a midline incision was made with a scalpel, and unipolar diathermy subcutaneous tissue was cut, the muscle was separated, and intraoperative findings showed that the small intestines were found to be adhesively obstructed by a pink mass attached to the jejunum on two closed sites (hanging on it) with serosal attachment, it was firm on consistency measured 10 × 10 cm as illustrated in Fig. . The adhesion was released by scissors and the serosal layer was closed by interrupted sutures, then the intestinal and the abdominal cavity was washed, after which, the drain was placed on the pelvic cavity and then the wound closed in layers.
The macroscopic examination revealed a cyst filled with gauze, while the histopathological examination demonstrated gauze material surrounded by fibromuscular connective tissue and mature adipose tissue, with foci of mixed inflammatory cellular infiltration and foreign body giant cell reaction but no malignant features.
The patient received one unit of blood without complications, in the postoperative course the patient was nill per mouth, and receive intravenous fluids and antibiotics for five days. The patient was vitally stable on follow up, with good urine output, and the drain was removed on the fourth day. The patient was discharged on the fifth day and scheduled to see a referring clinic two weeks later.