A 59-year-old Malay lady presented with a fever of 40 °C and left parotid swelling of 2 days history. Her medical history was significant for recurrent bilateral parotitis with a background of limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis and Sjögren’s syndrome for 4 years. At the time of presentation, she was not on chronic immunosuppressants. There was no recent history of pneumococcal vaccination.
She had recurrent parotitis that had occurred four times from 2012 to 2014. All episodes required hospitalization for intravenous antibiotics. She previously had Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella pneumoniae isolated from fluid culture from the parotid duct for the recurrent parotitis in 2012. A previous computed tomographyscan of her parotid area performed in 2012 showed left parotitis without evidence of sialolithiasis or abscess.
On examination, there was swelling in the left parotid area without erythema or fluctuance. There were no palpable stones and there was no dental infection or discharge from the parotid duct. Salivary pooling was poor. Systemic examination was otherwise normal.
On admission, she had a white blood cell count of 10.78×109 cells l−1 (normal range 4.0–11.0×109 cells l−1) and a C-reactive protein level of 14.9 mg l−1 (normal range 0.2–9.1 mg l−1). Ultrasound of the left parotid gland showed non-specific inhomogeneous echotexture with multiple small hypoechoic areas and a slight increase in vascularity representing an inflammatory/infective process.
Blood cultures collected on admission were flagged positive after 10 h incubation with Gram stain demonstrating Gram-positive cocci in chains. Small α-haemolytic colonies with a central naval-like depression were isolated on 5 % sheep blood agar after 24 h incubation at 37 °C in 5 % CO2. These were identified as S. pneumoniae based on their being catalase negative, optochin susceptible and bile solubility test positive . Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed and interpreted using Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines , which found the S. pneumoniae to be sensitive to penicillin (MIC = 0.032 mg l−1) and ceftriaxone (MIC = 0.064 mg l−1) via Etest, and sensitive to clindamycin, levofloxacin and vancomycin via disc diffusion. In view of the pneumococcal bacteraemia, a transthoracic echocardiogram was carried out and was negative for vegetations. The patient received empirical intravenous ceftriaxone 2g OM initially for 3 days, and this was later changed to intravenous benzylpenicillin 4 megaunits every six hours when blood culture sensitivities were available.
Her fever and parotid swelling improved with antibiotics and subsequent blood cultures were negative. She had received a total of 1 week of antibiotics upon discharge. Outpatient therapy with intravenous ceftriaxone was continued for an additional 2 weeks, with complete resolution of her parotitis. Pneumococcal vaccine was administered to her in the outpatient clinic.
A retrospective review of bacteraemia cases in the Singapore General Hospital from January 2011 to April 2016 revealed 116 cases that were due to S. pneumoniae. The majority of these were attributed to pneumonias (94 cases, 81.0 %), followed by meningitis (7 cases, 6.0 %), with isolated episodes attributed to otomastoiditis, retropharyngeal abscess, septic arthritis, spondylodiscitis and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (5 cases, 4.3 %). None were due to acute bacterial parotitis and no obvious source was found in the rest (10 cases, 8.6 %).
Most cases resolved with treatment and did not develop any complications (93 cases, 80.2 %). Complications such as epidural abscess, spondylodiscitis, and psoas abscess with osteomyelitis and discitis were found in 3 cases (2.6 %), but these patients eventually recovered following surgical intervention and a prolonged period of antibiotic therapy. Twenty patients died, most of these cases were due to pneumonia, whereas only one case was due to meningitis.
A large proportion of the S. pneumoniae isolates were sensitive to penicillin, ceftriaxone, clindamycin and vancomycin (71 cases, 61.2 %). Mono-resistance to clindamycin was most commonly encountered (35 cases, 30.2 %). Resistance to β-lactams was infrequently encountered, with intermediate sensitivity to ceftriaxone in 3 cases (2.6 %) and resistance to penicillin in 2 cases (1.7 %). In addition, there were 4 cases (3.4 %) that were intermediately sensitive to ceftriaxone and resistant to clindamycin, as well as 1 case (0.9 %) that was intermediately sensitive to ceftriaxone and resistant to clindamycin and penicillin.