A 31-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital emergencies referred from the Medical Center of Santorini Island with a preliminary diagnosis of acute abdomen, after a penetrating trauma in the upper right abdomen by a swordfish. Whilst she was swimming close to the seacoast, only three meters away from the beach yet in waist-deep water, she felt a stab to her right hypochondrial area. After the first shock, she realized it was a fish that had attacked her and she pulled it out of her body. Neither she nor any other bather swimming nearby saw any fish approaching her. However, after her injury, some of the bathers dived and saw the fish running away towards deeper water. The patient was withdrawn from the sea and, having received first aid by the local lifeguard, she was immediately transferred to the island's Medical Center by her companions. Witnesses' testimony, which was enforced by a part of the fish bill, measured to be 20 cm, found at the bottom of the sea in the area of the incident by the Coast Guard of Santorini Island led ichthyologists to identify the fish as a billfish, Xiphias gladius (swordfish).
Her vital signs on presentation to our hospital were: blood pressure 113/71 mm Hg, heart rate 81 beats/minute, arterial blood oxygen saturation 100% and temperature 38.6°C. Physical examination was remarkable only in the abdomen which was scaphoid, tender to palpation with diminished bowel sounds and a 4 cm trauma at the mid-axillary line below the right costal margin. The patient received a broad-spectrum antibiotic and a prophylactic tetanus toxoid injection. Laboratory tests showed a haematocrit of 28.5%, haemoglobin levels of 9.7 g/dL, white blood cell count of 25 × 109/L (with 94.10% polymorphonuclear cell type), and platelet count of 152 × 109/L. The coagulation profile was within normal limits. Thoracic and abdominal X-rays performed at the island's Medical Center did not reveal any pathology whilst F.A.S.T (Focused Assessment Sonography in Trauma) performed there marked out free intraperitoneal fluid at the right circumrenal and Duglas areas. An abdominal Computed Tomography (CT) scan in our hospital revealed: laceration of right liver lobe, distension of inferior vena cava, distension of right renal vein and a hyperdense bone-type foreign body (swordfish bill tip) retroperitoneally. The latter had entered the spinal canal through the body of the second lumbar vertebra (L2) after crossing the abdominal cavity . CT reconstruction images demonstrating the tip of the swordfish bill lodged within the spinal canal were produced . The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the lumbar region indicated a longitudinal foreign body, which had reached the interspinous space of the second and third lumbar spinous processes, through the body of the L2 and the spinal canal . Myelography showed that the foreign body penetrated tabular roots and spinal canal at the area mentioned above and further neurological examination was recommended. The neurological (sensory and mobility) examination of both legs, as well as the sensory examination of the perineum did not reveal any neurological deficit.
After all diagnostic tests had been completed and interpreted, the patient was transfused with one unit of blood and assigned to surgery for intra-abdominal bleeding. Penetration of the abdomen was present at the mid-axillary line, below the right costal margin. The abdomen was explored through bilateral subcostal incision. Approximately 1 litre of blood was aspirated from the abdominal cavity and a large right retroperitoneal hematoma was identified. The right liver lobe was mobilized and the portal triad was controlled with a sling. Liver had been penetrated from segment IVa posteriorly and the inferior vena cava (IVC) had been lacerated medially. The duodenum was mobilized and the retroperitoneum was opened. Blood and clots were evacuated from the retroperitoneal space and the IVC was repaired with proline 4-0. Cholecystectomy was performed at this stage because of laceration of the cystic duct. The gastrocolic ligament was subsequently divided and the pancreas and aorta were explored. An unsuccessful effort was done in order to find the foreign body (sword fish bill tip) at the level of L2 vertebra, which was revealed at the CT and MRI scan. A penrose drainage was placed below the liver and the wound was closed.
After the completion of the surgery, the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit for monitoring and planning of the foreign body removal in future. She was hospitalized there for three days. The patient's clinical state and laboratory parameters were evaluated from orthopedics of our hospital who recommended the patient's mobilization. After that she was transferred to the Third Surgical department for further medical attendance and laboratory tests. On the third postoperative day, she exhibited fever up to 38.5°C which was resistant to antibiotic therapy. Blood cultures were taken and lumbar puncture was performed; the collected sample of cerebrospinal fluid was sent for biochemical and microbiological analysis. Both examinations were negative for bacterium growth. The new thoracic and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan did not show significant changes compared with CT on her admission to the emergency with the exception of subcapsular fluid collection of increased density at left liver lobe, which was found increased in new CT examination 4 days later. CT- guided drainage of that fluid, which was a biloma, was performed and drainage tube was left at the collection's area. The Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), that was performed three days later, did not reveal any pathology of bile ducts or bile leak. The new MRI scan of lumbar region indicated L2 inflammation and arachnoiditis of some tabular roots (Arrow; Figure ). The patient then was transferred to the Neurosurgical department of our hospital and underwent an operation in order to remove the swordfish bill tip by approaching it from the spinal canal (posteriore approach). Laminectomy of the second and third lumbar vertebra was accomplished and the foreign body was removed intact easily . There was L2 vertebral decomposition as a result of local osteomyelitis. Osteomyelitis of these vertebras was the result of bone infection by bacteria of the epithelium of swordfish bill which invaded the bone directly after the swordfish attack. Consequently, when the cause of osteomyelitis - tip of swordfish bill - removed surgically, patient's fever declined since the first postoperative day and the overall condition improved significantly. Patient was mobilized on the third postoperative day. However, she was hospitalized further in order to receive intravenous antibiotic therapy. She left the hospital on the thirty fifth postoperative day, fourteen days after the abdominal drainage was taken out. Antibiotics were continued for further four more weeks.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of the case report.