A 20-year-old woman with a history of epilepsy became aware of left hip pain radiating down to the back of her leg for 3 days. The pain progressed gradually and became so severe that she could not move. Thus, she was admitted to the local hospital and received intravenous antibiotics, cefazoline 6 g/day for her possible infection. However, her hip pain worsened, and she developed fever the following day. A pelvic computed tomography scan showed a fluid collection at the left sacroiliac joint (SIJ) and a small abscess in the left iliac muscle . The next day, her hemodynamic parameters also deteriorated despite the antibiotic treatment, and consciousness disturbance developed. She was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital.
Upon hospital arrival, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: heart rate, 122 beats/min; blood pressure, 95/34 mmHg (norepinephrine 0.16 mcg/kg/min, dobutamine 4.0 mcg/kg/min); body temperature, 36.4 °C; and oxygen saturation while on oxygen therapy at 2 L/min via nasal cannula, 98%. Further, the following are the laboratory test results: C-reactive protein level, 16.8 mg/dL and arterial blood gas lactate level, 4.4 mmol/L .
Based on the examination results and clinical symptoms, the patient was diagnosed with septic shock caused by SIJ infection. Ultrasonography-guided abscess aspiration was performed to drain the joint fluid and identify the bacterial species. Later, the blood and aspiration fluid culture and genetic analysis revealed the presence of S. schwarzengrund.
Broad spectrum antibiotics (meropenem 3 g/day and vancomycin 2 g/day), vasopressors, and oxygen therapy were administered initially. The patient’s hemodynamic and respiratory status gradually improved. After obtaining the culture results, antibiotic treatment was changed to levofloxacin. Ten days after the first drainage, the fever pattern and inflammation markers such as C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate significantly improved.
However, after the first drainage tube removal, the patient exhibited persistent fever and inflammation again, and hip magnetic resonance imaging revealed a growing abscess . Thus, we performed the second drainage from days 26 to 35. The patient was discharged on day 38 with oral ampicillin treatment for eight more weeks. Upon discharge, she had neither any symptoms nor sequelae .
To validate the entry route of S. schwarzengrund, we interviewed the patient in detail. Except for keeping one dog and two cats, she did not have any specific medical history, such as intravenous drug usage, recent overseas travel, diagnosis of sexually transmitted diseases, or consumption of suspicious food. She did not complain of any preceding gastrointestinal symptoms. The screening test results for immunodeficiency diseases, including HIV infection and autoimmune disorders, were negative. Genetic analysis of congenital immunodeficiency also revealed no significant findings. These results indicated that she did not have any immune system disorders.