A previously healthy 62-year-old woman (BMI = 28.1) experienced progressive low back pain with bilateral hip pain soreness for the past 1 year. The patient's symptoms did not improve significantly after conservative treatment. She complained of back and pelvic pain, which had persisted for the past year. The pain in the lower back was aggravated when standing for a long time and when tired, and the pain was relieved when resting. Japanese orthopaedic association (JOA) score was 19 points, and the low back pain visual analogue scale (VAS) score was 5 points. The neurological examination was normal. Lumbar X-ray positive lateral position, lateral and overextension, overcurved slices showed lumbar 4 (L4) vertebral body instability and slipped forward I degree . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed lumbar degeneration and L4 vertebral body slip forward (I degree), corresponding to segmental spinal stenosis, spinal cord and nerve root compression . Lumbar computed tomography (CT) showed: lumbar vertebrae 4 degenerative spondylolisthesis, no fractures in the lumbar isthmus . According to the patient's symptoms, signs and imaging findings, the patient was diagnosed with lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis (I degree). After completing the preoperative routine examination to eliminate contraindications, the patient underwent elective OLIF surgery under general anesthesia.
Under general anesthesia, the patient underwent routine catheterization, and was placed in the right lateral position. Then the skin was shaved and prepared with povidone iodine and draped in a sterile manner. With the L4/L5 intervertebral space as the center, a vertical incision (approximately 4 cm) was made at the level of the left anterior axillary line. The skin and subcutaneous tissue were cut, and the muscle tissue was bluntly separated layer by layer. The peritoneal fat was pushed forward to protect the viscera and other tissues until it touched the psoas muscle. The psoas muscle was pushed backward and the guide needle was placed on the leading edge of the psoas muscle. The expansion cannula was placed step by step, and a fixation screw was placed in the L4/L5 intervertebral space. When placing the self-retaining retractor onto the L4/L5 intervertebral disc, a thread pin, which fixates the retractor through a small hole, went deep into the anterior space of the spinal column. After confirming that the CAGE position was good during the operation, the expansion sleeve was removed, and a large amount of saline was used to rinse the incision. Then double-click electrocoagulation was used to stop the bleeding. It was found that there was a clear liquid flowing out of the peritoneum at the level of the L4/5 segment, and hematuria was found in the catheter . These phenomena indicated that the left ureter may have been damaged. A urinary surgeon was consulted urgently during the operation, and left ureteral injury was definitively diagnosed. Then the patient underwent left ureteral injury exploration and ureteral stent (double pigtail stent, Cook, USI-626-B) placement into the ureter . The original incision was expanded along about 6 cm, and the shape of the left ureter was explored. There was a ureteral leak at the level of the L4/L5 segment. Both ends of the ureteral injury were freed, and the F4.5 short-term ureteral stent (double pigtail stent, cook, USI-626-B) was implanted from the ureteral leak. A 5–0 absorbable thread was used to suture the ureteral end without tension of the ureter. Then, the abdominal incision was closed, and the patient was changed to the prone position. Under the guidance of the C-arm, percutaneous pedicle screws were placed into the L4 and L5 bilateral pedicles. The intraoperative plain film showed the height recovery of the intervertebral disc and the left ureter stent was in a good position . The left ureteral stent was removed 2 months after surgery, and the lumbar spine X-ray showed good spine stability 1 year after surgery .
The patient was indwelled with a catheter for 2 weeks, and regular oral administration of levofloxacin to prevent urinary tract infection. After 2 months, the ureteral stent was removed by using cystoscope. One year after surgery, the symptoms of lumbar back were significantly improved (JOA score of 25 point, low back pain VAS score of 1 point), and there were no urinary system symptoms 3 years after surgery. However, the patient still needs to regularly check the left ureter and the left kidney by ultrasound annually.