A previously healthy 13-year-old Caucasian boy presented with testicular trauma to a community hospital and was transferred to the University of Kansas Hospital (KUHA) pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for management of hypotension and swollen painful testicles. Five days prior he had been kicked in the groin during a football game and presented to his primary care physician with scrotal pain and swelling of his scrotum. Initial treatment consisted of rest and watchful waiting.
Two days post-trauma he developed fever and nausea while at home and was taken to the emergency department of an outside facility. On examination the patient's scrotum was extremely swollen and tender, and his testes were firm to the touch. Urinalysis showed an elevated white blood cell count (WBC) and red blood cell count, and was positive for ketones, hemoglobin, leuko-esterase, and bacteria; however, gram stain and urine culture revealed no organisms. Blood culture also showed no growth of organisms. Ultrasound at this time showed findings suggestive of bilateral epididymitis with no evidence of testicular torsion or mass. The patient was discharged in stable condition on hydrocodone for pain and doxycycline for epididymitis with instructions to follow up with urology if symptoms worsened.
Four days post-trauma, the patient presented to the urologist complaining of blood in his urine, lightheadedness, nausea, vomiting, and shortness of breath secondary to severe scrotal pain. On physical examination his scrotum was enlarged, warm, tender, and firm. He was admitted with a WBC of 38,600/mm3 with a left shift, and normal blood chemistry. The patient also had a temperature of 38.8°C, C-reactive protein (CRP) of 20 mg/dl, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 80 mm/hour. Urinalysis was unchanged from the previous results. Ultrasound showed findings of bilateral epididymitis and echogenic material surrounding both testes, which was slightly more prominent in volume compared with the study done 2 days prior. Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography scan found shotty inguinal and periaortic nodes, as well as, mesenteric adenopathy. No discrete abscess or diffuse abnormal inflammation was seen. Doxycycline was discontinued and IV ceftriaxone was started empirically, although no microbiological organism was cultured from the patient's blood or urine. He was later switched to vancomycin and meropenem for broader antimicrobial coverage.
On the fifth day post-trauma the patient remained febrile with progressing scrotal swelling and pain. The patient subsequently developed hypotension with a blood pressure drop as low as 87/22 mmHg, at which time; he was started on a dopamine drip at 13 mcg/kg/minute. An electrocardiogram performed at the time showed normal sinus rhythm. Once stabilized, he was transferred to KUHA's PICU for further management. Upon arrival his temperature was 39°C and heart rate was 108 beats per minute. The patient's blood pressure dropped again to 84/20 mmHg but was stabilized with dopamine and fluids. The patient's scrotum was swollen, erythematous, and his left testicle was more tender than his right. He had a WBC of 34,600/mm3, and CRP of 33 mg/dl. Doppler ultrasound scan of the scrotum showed focal heterogeneity with decreased vascularity in the left upper testicle consistent with a small laceration, subscapular hematoma and intraparenchymal hematoma.
Blood and urine cultures at presentation to the PICU were negative for organisms. Ceftriaxone was restarted as his antibiotic regimen. The patient's WBC and CRP gradually declined while his scrotal sonograms showed little change during hospitalization. The patient's clinical condition gradually improved with continued antimicrobial therapy, scrotal elevation, ice and rest. The urological consult did not find evidence of abscesses or torsion and therefore did not recommend surgical intervention.
By day 10, the patient's scrotal exam had dramatically improved, his WBC had normalized, CRP was 4.38 mg/dl and he had been afebrile for 4 days. His blood and urine cultures at initial presentation to the community hospital and at our facility were all negative. He was discharged on Levaquin 750 mg for 11 days to complete 21 days of therapy.
At the 6-week follow up appointment the patient had significant improvement in scrotal appearance and swelling with some continued mild edema of the scrotal subcutaneous tissue and firm testes. His WBC was 9600/mm3 with a normal differential and on ultrasound there was interval decrease in bilateral testicular size with persistent diffuse moderate heterogeneity. These findings were consistent with resolving swelling and edema from post-traumatic orchitis and/or intraparenchymal hematoma and/or injury. Three months after the initial testicular trauma, the patient's testes were smaller and softer on examination and findings on ultrasound were consistent with post-inflammatory scarring.