This is a retrospective case study of a 56-year-old white man diagnosed as having an AOP infarct admitted to Umeå University Hospital, Sweden. The relevant radiology images were obtained from the hospital’s database (PACS) and evaluated by a neuroradiologist as bilateral paramedian thalamic infarcts as a result of an AOP occlusion. The medical records (SYStem Cross) at Umeå University Hospital were accessed and reviewed for his medical history, neurological work-up, and laboratory work-up (ROS). The diagnosis was based on symptoms of AOP infarction as described in the literature, radiological signs of AOP infarction, as well as exclusion of differential diagnoses.
He was taken to our emergency department (ED) after he was found unconscious in his home with open doors and windows. He developed ventricular fibrillation on arrival at our ED. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was immediately initiated and sinus rhythm (SR) was achieved on second defibrillation. He was then put on cardiopulmonary bypass for rewarming. A third ventricular fibrillation then occurred and SR was achieved on first defibrillation within seconds of onset. The total estimated duration of ventricular fibrillation was less than 2 minutes.
His medical history included overconsumption of alcohol. He smoked 20 cigarettes per day. On admission to our hospital there was no information available concerning his medication. On arrival at our ED his body temperature was 24.5 °C, blood pressure 145/70, heart rate 35 beats/minute, and respiratory rate 8 to 10 breaths/minute. Auscultation of his heart and lungs was unremarkable. He was unconscious with a Reaction Level Scale 85 (RLS-85) score of 4. RLS-85 gives a score between 1 and 8. An RLS-85 score of 4 indicates an unconscious patient who localizes but does not ward off when pain stimulated. He exhibited a slight anisocoria with his right pupil slightly bigger than his left.
The laboratory work-up at admission included moderate electrolyte disturbances and elevated liver enzymes. Drug and alcohol screens were negative.
An emergency CT of his head was performed and initially misinterpreted as normal with no signs of hemorrhage or acute infarction . In our intensive care unit (ICU), he was initially sedated and intubated with ventilator treatment. An attempt to extubate and wake him was made on day 3, but he still required ventilator support. He was re-intubated and sedated, and later given a tracheotomy. A complicated disease course followed with pneumothorax after CPR, pneumonia treated with antibiotics, bilateral pleural effusion requiring drainage, intestinal paralysis, acute pancreatitis, and ascites requiring paracentesis. The sedation was discontinued 2 weeks after admission to our ICU. He still required ventilation support. At this stage he could open his eyes when spoken to but otherwise he gave no contact. On neurological examination he withdrew his arms, moved his left foot, and grimaced upon pain stimulation. He had slight anisocoria, this time with his left pupil slightly bigger than his right. His pupillary reflexes were, however, symmetrical on direct and indirect stimulation. A follow-up CT performed on day 24 revealed bilateral ischemia in the medial areas of the thalami, as well as a smaller ischemic area in the left part of pons . At this point a senior neuroradiologist re-evaluated the first CT performed on admission and concluded that bilateral thalamic ischemia was discernable also on this CT . Electroencephalography (EEG) was pathological and showed an irregular theta/delta activity. However, there was no epileptiform activity.
Four weeks after admission it was possible to extubate him. His neurological function remained unchanged. He was transferred to our medical acute ward. On day 35 of hospitalization he died and the postmortem examination revealed pulmonary infarctions and pneumonia. A timeline of events is given in Fig. .