A 59-year-old white European man with a history of epilepsy, treated with valproic acid and carbamazepine, was admitted to our emergency department for a serious head injury after falling down the stairs at home. His family contacted our emergency department soon after the accident. An initial medical examination found a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 9/15 with no pupillary defect. His heart rate was 50 beats per minute. His blood pressure was 100/50 mmHg and his blood oxygen was 80 %.
He underwent orotracheal intubation and vascular filling. A clinical examination revealed a large scalp wound, which was responsible for a significant blood loss, which continued until his arrival at our hospital despite a compression bandage. He was transferred to our emergency neurosurgery unit.
On admission, he underwent a vascular filling (1.0 L of saline). A neurological examination found a GCS of 3/15 and his pupils were intermediate, symmetric, and reactive. The admission laboratory tests, summarized in Table , showed anemia, thrombocytopenia, hypoproteinemia and coagulation disorders.
A brain scan without contrast (performed 2 hours after his head injury) showed an isodense, extracerebral, homogeneous SDH, 40 Hounsfield units (HU) approximately, with an estimated maximum thickness of 20 mm, situated along the right convexity . There was also a subarachnoid hemorrhage in the fold of the left convexity . The SDH had a mass effect with a 15 mm deviation of midline structures to the left and cerebral compression. In the bone window, the scan showed multiple fractures of the cranial vault in the layers above and below . This initial damage assessment revealed no other lesions. The patient became hypotensive. His blood pressure was 70/40 mmHg. He underwent hemodynamic support by continuous administration of norepinephrine (1 mg/hour) associated with 1.0 L of saline and 500 mL of Gelafundin (succinylated gelatin). Four units of packed red blood cells were administered with six units of fresh frozen plasma.
He was immediately transferred to our operating room. A burr hole was first drilled through his right parietal bone to assess the consistency of the hematoma and relieve the cerebral compression as quickly as possible. Correction of coagulation disorders was carried out at the same time by our anesthetists. Fresh blood mixed with clots flowed through the burr hole, thus confirming the acute nature of the hematoma.
In order to evacuate the hematoma, the incision was extended to carve a frontotemporoparietal flap giving access to the entire convexity and confirming the clotted appearance of the acute SDH. The flap was not put back in place when closing due to a life-threatening cerebral edema.
He was admitted to our neurosurgical intensive care unit. The evolution was marked by the appearance of intracranial hypertension, which was refractory to medical treatment and led to the appearance of clinical signs of encephalic death, which was confirmed 72 hours after admission to our intensive care unit.