A 33-year-old woman, G2L2P2, presented with abnormal vaginal discharge. Gynecologic examination has revealed a cervical mass with grape-like feature protruding into vagina with posterior-superior vaginal wall involvement. She had normal menstrual cycles and her past medical history was unremarkable. Cervical mass biopsy has performed and pathologic examination was consistent with embryonal botryoid type rhabdomyosarcoma which has confirmed with pathologic review. Transvaginal sonography has shown a 38 × 27 × 60 mm cervical mass at inferior-posterior portion of cervix with superior vaginal wall infiltration. She has undergone the staging work up measurements including thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan, bone scan and bone marrow examination. In abdominopelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), in addition of cervical mass, 2 suspicious pelvic lymph nodes have revealed. All other measurements were normal. Radical hysterectomy with lymph node debulking and ovarian preservation has performed. There was a grossly huge cervical mass protruding into vagina with surface irregularities measuring 10×10 cm. On sections, there was a gray tumor with spindle cell proliferation, measuring 8×5×2.5 cm. On microscopic examination, tumor has covered by attenuated epithelium with condensed neoplastic cells layer beneath epithelium (cambium layer) and consisted of the spindle shaped embryonal rhabdomyoblasts cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and atypical nuclei. Final results have shown embryonal botryoid type rhabdomyosarcoma of cervix, consistent with the intergroup RMS study Group I. Ovaries, endometrium, parametrium, and follopian tubes were unremarkable. Pelvic lymph nodes pathology and intraabdominal fluid cytology were negative for malignancy. Lymphovascular invasion has identified. She has advised for adjuvant chemotherapy.
Based on medical ethics committee of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, a written informed consent has obtained from the patient for publication of this manuscript and accompanying images.