A 28-year-old Caucasian woman, gravida 4, para 1, was referred to our high-risk obstetric unit at 24 weeks' gestation for fetal ascites detected during a routine ultrasound examination. Her personal and family history did not reveal any pathology of note. Her first pregnancy ended with an intra-uterine death at 23 weeks' gestation caused by chorioamnionitis. In the second pregnancy, a live baby girl was delivered at 40 weeks' gestation. Four years later our patient had a spontaneous miscarriage. Our patient denied any fever, rash, cold symptoms, or joint pain before and during pregnancy. She did not refer to any vaginal bleeding. Laboratory tests for Toxoplasma and rubeola showed negative immunoglobulin M (IgM). An ultrasound examination performed during the consultation confirmed the presence of abdominal ascites . A borderline monolateral dilation of the cerebral ventricle was also seen. Biometry of the fetal limbs was below the mean in relation to gestational age, while cephalic measurements were normal. No other fetal anomalies were observed. Amniotic fluid was present in adequate quantity, but fetal movements were poor. For these reasons, the woman was admitted to our institution for close pregnancy monitoring. During hospitalization, her blood pressure and heart frequency were measured several times during the day, while cardiotocography was performed twice a day. Maternal blood pressure was normal, and there was no proteinuria. Investigation about the etiology of the fetal ascites were carried out, and a fetal paracentesis was also performed. Both parents had normal mean corpuscular erythrocyte volume with no sign of microcythemia and they both had positive blood group Rh without any pathologic antibodies. A routine blood laboratory assessment did not show any kind of abnormalities. Viral serology markers (cytomegalovirus IgG and IgM, parvovirus IgG and IgM) were negative in the maternal blood, and no viral genome was isolated in her amniotic fluid or the fetal ascites sample. The fetal karyotype was normal (46, XY). A Kleihauer-Betke test showed no evidence of fetal erythrocytes in the maternal circulation. Immunologic markers, lupus anticoagulant anticardiolipin, antinuclear, and anti-RO antibodies were negative; G6PD was also excluded. There was no evidence regarding the cause of fetal ascites (then considered non-immune or hydiopatic). Only a mild increase in inflammation indices was noted (VES 40, PCR 7.325); an antibiotic preventive treatment was performed for five days (sulbactam/ampicillin 1.5 mg three times daily, gentamicin 80 mg three times daily, metronidazole 500 mg three times daily). During hospitalization, detailed ultrasound scans were performed at least every two days to monitor the ascites and general condition of the fetus. Fetal middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity (PSV) was measured to diagnose fetal anemia. Pulsatility index (PI) of either the umbilical artery (UA) or the MCA as well as the resistance index of uterine arteries were assessed to better evaluate the materno-fetal perfusion. Monitoring scans showed a deterioration of fetal condition. Paracentesis was performed at 25 weeks' gestation, but two days later the fetal ascites occurred again. A restriction of fetal growth and progressive reduction of amniotic fluid were also registered. The value of PSV in the MCA was borderline for moderate to severe anemia according to Mari's chart , whereas fetal Doppler ultrasound parameters were normal. At 27 weeks' gestation, a reverse end-diastolic flow in the MCA occurred . This abnormal waveform pattern persisted for all the ultrasound examinations, and it was not associated with other Doppler abnormalities (PI UA 1.15, PI MCA 1.54). The condition was interpreted as 'at risk', and our patient was submitted to closer monitoring. Fetal echocardiography showed cardiomegaly without significant abnormality of heart structures and a mild tricuspid regurgitation. Cardiotocography monitoring showed fetal bradycardia (fetal heart rate 100 beats per minute). Our patient was submitted to fetal magnetic resonance imaging to investigate in particular the brain edema, and this confirmed the presence of fetal ascites without showing any abnormality of fetal cerebral tissue or signs of hypoxia. Corticosteroid treatment (betamethasone 12 mg for two days) was started because of a high risk for preterm delivery. After one week, ultrasound parameters showed a severe decrease in fetal weight (<fifth percentile), an increase in fetal ascites, and subcutaneous edema. The reversed end-diastolic flow in the MCA persisted, and an increase of PI UA was detected. Alterations of ductus venosus waveform appeared, and an inversion of "a" wave was identified. The amniotic fluid index was below the mean for gestational age. The biophysical profile examination was unsatisfactory. The severe prognosis was explained to the couple, and an active intervention was ruled out. The fetus was in breech presentation at this time. Our patient was submitted to an emergency cesarean section at 28 weeks' gestation. A live baby boy in poor general condition was delivered. The Apgar score was one and five. Intubation was necessary, but despite neonatal intensive care, the baby died a few hours after birth. An autopsy revealed a rare malformation of IHBDs known as DPM. No other anomaly was identified.