We report the case of a 14-year-old male sportsman (contact sport), without significant personal pathological history, who presented in the emergency room with the following symptoms: headache, dizziness, and tinnitus, and a clinical exam revealed elevated BP values (180/115 mmHg). It is worth mentioning that approximately 5 months ago elevated BP values were recorded at school but without any measures taken at that time.
The clinical exam at the time of admission revealed extreme anxiety, warm extremities, rhythmic heart sounds, grade III systolic murmur, with interscapulovertebral and bilateral carotid irradiation, the bilateral absence of femoral pulse, BP differences between the upper and lower limbs of up to 50 mmHg (right upper limb BP 180/115 mmHg, left lower limb BP 131/91 mmHg). We found no changes in the blood parameters, and the surface electrocardiogram pointed out left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) . The 24 h BP Holter revealed BP values >95 percentile for age and height. The abdominal ultrasound showed no blood flow in the lobar and segmentary renal arteries.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a continuous curve on the Doppler interrogation of the abdominal aorta, concentric LVH, preserved systolic function of both ventricles, narrowing of the aortic isthmus, with a maximum gradient of 85 mmHg and diastolic run-off, and a severely dilated left subclavian artery .
We performed a CTA in order to accurately assess the descending aorta, and we identified a focal narrowing of 0.7 cm diameter, multiple periscapular collateral arteries, and bilateral dilated intercostal and subclavian arteries .
Based on the clinical and paraclinical data, we established the diagnosis of isthmic CoA and severe secondary AHT.
In terms of AHT, we decided to initiate antihypertensive drugs (beta-blockers) before the procedure, taking into account the result of the abdominal ultrasound, which were well tolerated hemodynamically.
The case was discussed by a multidisciplinary team and accepted for interventional treatment—implantation of covered stent under general anesthesia, with the patient ventilated with positive pressure using a laryngo-tracheal mask. The first contrast injection in the aortic arch was performed in the antero-posterior and latero-lateral projection, based on which, we identified a narrowing of the isthmic area of 7 mm, with a peak-to-peak gradient at this level of 23 mmHg, as well as a dilated left subclavian artery and multiple aorto-aortic collaterals. During the procedure, a Cheatham-platinum (CP)-covered stent of 4.5 cm was implanted on a balloon in balloon (BIB) of 20 mm × 5 cm inflated up to the burst pressure of 4 atm, which allowed the gradient reduction to 2 mmHg. The last three injections were performed in the antero-posterior and latero-lateral projection in the aortic arch, visualizing the normal position of the stent, without impairing the left subclavian artery’s emergence and without suggestive images for dissection or periaortic hematoma. These findings were also confirmed by the control native chest CT ( and ).
The postprocedural echocardiographic assessment visualized the stent placed at the isthmic level with a maximum residual gradient of 22 mmHg and a mild persistence of the gradient in diastole along with an improvement in the pulsed color Doppler aspect of the abdominal aorta. On the 1st day after the procedure, the patient presented hypertensive episodes accompanied by severe anxiety resulting in the decision to adjust the dosage of the betablocker therapy and to associate an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, with subsequently controlled BP values.
The clinical exam pointed out bilaterally present femoral pulses, and no BP differences between the upper and lower limbs. The 24 h BP Holter monitoring indicated the persistence of stage I AHT, and therefore, we recommended the continuation of the antihypertensive therapy. The echocardiographic examination showed findings similar to those of the immediate postprocedural evaluation.