A 58-year-old male smoker with known heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, renal insufficiency, hypertension, and obesity presented with a two-to-three month history of dyspnea, lower extremity edema, and intermittent angina. He was admitted to a referring hospital with a three-to-four-day history of persistent back pain, worsening exertional dyspnea, and orthopnea. He had mild troponinemia and an elevated B-type natriuretic peptide. Chest plain-film radiography demonstrated cardiomegaly, vascular congestion, and pleural effusion. Electrocardiogram showed new-onset atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response, and he was started on apixaban. He was worked up for an acute-on-chronic heart failure exacerbation and underwent a myocardial perfusion imaging showing a large anterior septal and apical region scar without reversibility. This was consistent with a former myocardial infarction in the left anterior descending (LAD) artery territory, and the patient corroborated that years ago he had an episode of severe chest pain radiating to the right shoulder which left him bedridden. A transesophageal echocardiogram for cardioversion was performed, which diagnosed an acute TAAD and demonstrated an ejection fraction of 30%. He was initiated on anti-impulse control and promptly transferred to our facility.
Given that the patient was approximately six days post-dissection, without malperfusion, contained rupture, pericardial or pleural effusions, with a well-controlled blood pressure on anti-impulse therapy, and had received five days of anticoagulation, the decision to delay definitive repair was made in order to let the apixaban metabolize and decrease the bleeding risk. While plausible that his heart failure and scar were related to coronary malperfusion secondary to his TAAD, emergent revascularization would have had limited benefit to the infarcted tissue considering the time from infarct. Given preserved GFR and no clinical renal malperfusion, CCTA was performed to assess the need for concomitant revascularization with a moderately obstructive proximal LAD lesion and complete occlusion of the mid-LAD after take-off of a large diagonal branch consistent with known prior infarction , occlusive disease of the left circumflex artery as well as diagonal and obtuse marginal branches, and nonobstructive disease in the right coronary artery. Additionally, the CCTA demonstrated the dissection flap extending proximally to the sinotubular junction (STJ) . Left heart catheterization was not performed, given concern for wire and catheter manipulation within a fresh dissection including navigating a multi-fenestrated flap.
Four days after his last apixaban dose, the patient was taken to the operating room for an ascending aorta hemiarch replacement with aortic valve resuspension, two-vessel CABG, and left atrial appendage clipping. Following sternotomy and pericardiotomy, the left internal mammary artery and saphenous vein graft conduits were harvested, and the patient was heparinized. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was instituted with central arterial and dual venous cannulation and left ventricular vent. The heart was arrested, and the patient was cooled to 18 °C. The aorta was transected at the STJ, where a circumferential tear was noted at the level of the STJ. The aortic valve was resuspended, and the intimomedial tear was plicated circumferentially to the true lumen.
After deep hypothermic circulatory arrest and the initiation of retrograde cerebral perfusion, as is routinely performed by the aortic surgeon at our institution, the diseased segment of the aorta was resected from the base of the innominate artery to the inner curvature of the proximal descending thoracic aorta. A 28-mm Gelweave graft was beveled and anastomosed to the native aorta to complete the distal anastomosis. An aortic cannula was placed into the side-arm for resumption of CPB. The proximal ascending aorta was resected to the level of the STJ, and the graft was sewn end-to-end to the STJ. The left atrial appendage was clipped with a 45 mm AtriClip (Atricure, West Chester, OH). The saphenous vein graft was anastomosed to the first obtuse marginal, and the left internal mammary artery was anastomosed to the LAD. The proximal vein graft was then anastomosed to the aortic graft. The patient was rewarmed, weaned off CPB, and chest closure was performed. There were no complications, and the patient was transported to the cardiovascular intensive care unit in stable condition.
Postoperatively, the patient was quickly extubated and weaned from vasopressors. The post-operative course was complicated by delirium and atrial fibrillation requiring direct current cardioversion. The patient was discharged home on post-op day 8; however, required readmission for volume overload which rapidly improved with diuresis and blood pressure control. Follow-up appointment ten days after readmission showed resolution of symptoms and normalization of blood pressure.