We report the case of a 52-year-old patient from Bangladesh, diabetic and hypertensive, referred for exertional angina Canadian Cardiovascular Society III. A stress myocardial scintigraphy was performed and revealed deep hypoperfusion in the antero-apical, septo-apical, and lateral walls with electric positivity on the stress test; resting left ventricle ejection fraction was 61%. His clinical examination revealed a blood pressure of 127/85 mmHg, a heart rate of 92 b.p.m., and a normal oxygen saturation. No murmurs were detected, and there were no signs of heart failure. His electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm without significant repolarization abnormalities.

We performed a diagnostic coronary angiogram in this context. Left injection revealed a stenosis on a third significant diagonal branch and a circumflex of very poor calibre. However, we were struck by the appearance of the LAD, which seemed to stop at its mid-segment without wrapping around the apex and did not present a stump that could suggest a chronic occlusion.

The injection of the right coronary sinus revealed a dominant RCA free of stenosis. At the end of the injection in right anterior oblique and left anterior oblique views, we noticed a vessel opening into the ostium of the RCA and following the classic path of an LAD. A non-selective injection into this artery with a diagnostic JR 4 catheter (Judkins Right) identified an ostial-proximal stenosis of this artery but did not allow complete opacification of the distality of the vessel. Percutaneous coronary intervention of the third diagonal was performed during this procedure.

The coronary CT scan performed for a better characterization of this AAOCA identified an artery whose course is compatible with a mid and distal LAD. This artery connects in the right coronary ostium and joins the interventricular groove to wrap around the apex of the heart.


Intervention
Given the evidence of ischaemia on stress myocardial scintigraphy in the apical territory, we decided to perform angioplasty on this AAOCA. We used a 6F IM guiding catheter (Internal Mammary) through a right radial access to engage the ostium of the RCA. We first positioned a workhorse wire (RUNTHROUGH® NS Extra Floppy) in the right posterolateral artery to stabilize the guiding catheter, and then navigated within the AAOCA using a polymerjacket wire with a hydrophilic coating (ASAHI SION® black).

Since the proximal injection did not allow the visualization of the distal part of the AAOCA, we performed a distal injection through a microcatheter, which revealed a severe stenosis in the mid LAD.

We treated the distal lesion with a drug-eluting stent (DES) 2.25 × 15 mm and the mid lesion with a drug-eluting balloon (DEB) 2.0 × 15 mm. The ostial-proximal segment was treated with a DES 2.5 × 15 mm.


Outcome
The final angiographic result was satisfactory. At the end of the procedure, a contralateral injection was performed, confirming the discontinuity of the AAOCA with the native LAD. The post-procedural course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged the following day.