A one-year-nine-month old Chinese girl with symptoms of hearing loss and retrogression of speech and movement since one-year-old presented in our out-patient service. The patient was responsible to teasing, and her neck stood firmly at the age of 5 months. She was able to flip over her body at the age of 8 months, responded when her name was called, and was able to call mom and dad at the age of 9 months. However, her motor development lagged behind her peers obviously. She was not able to sit and crawl independently at one-year-old. Since then, the patient gradually lost her response to surroundings and had lack of facial expression and hypotonia, especially weakness in upper limbs, including loss of hand agility and lack of grabbing. Other symptoms included choking when drinking and swallowing difficulty, but seizure was not observed. Her body weight decreased from 10.5 kg to 8 kg after the symptoms manifested. She started holding her breath for 1–2 min frequently after crying, starting at the age of 10 months. Cyanotic breath holding spells (BHS) occurred on an average of 10 times/day. She was the first child of non-consanguineous parents. The first and second pregnancies were ceased by her parents, and the 3rd pregnancy was aborted because the embryo stopped developing. She was born at 32+ 6 weeks of gestation through cesarean section because her mother suffered from pregnancy-induced hypertension. Her birth weight was 1.36 kg, and her newborn hearing screening result was unremarkable. When she came to the clinic at one-year-nine-month, her height was 77 cm, her weight was 8 kg, and her head circumference was 45 cm, all lagging behind children of the same age. She could only control her head, and she showed poor visual fixation and sound tracking. Physical examination showed generalized weakness, especially the upper extremities, hypotonia of limbs, weak gag reflex, absent of patellar tendon reflex, and negative bilateral Babinski sign. Ammonia, serum lactic acid, hepatorenal function, microelements, and serum amino acids were normal. Acylcarnitine profile showed mild abnormalities including mild elevation of octanoyl carnitine (C8): 0.33 μmol/L (0.01–0.30 μmol/L) and decanoyl carnitine (C10): 0.50 μmol/L (0.01–0.35 μmol/L). Other acylcarnitine species were within the normal ranges. Her urine organic acid analysis showed mild elevated pyruvic acid and lactic acid.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed no contrast and visual-evoked response. Video electroencephalogram and echocardiography were normal. Electromyogram was neurogenic with fibrillation activity. Nerve conduction studies showed denervation without sensory response of the sural and median nerves but normal motor velocities. Brainstem auditory-evoked responses revealed severe sensorineural hearing loss. The ophthalmologic examination was normal. With the consent of the child’s parents, genetic testing was performed. No variant was found in the SMN (survival motor neuron) gene, which encodes survival motor neuron protein. Her karyotype analysis was normal.