A 59-year-old man, farmer, living in a rural area of Cartagena, ​​Colombia (elevation 17 m / 55.77 ft above sea level) was initially admitted to a peripheral hospital for decompensated heart failure. He has a history of hypertension, well-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus (last HbA1c 2 months before admission was 6.6%), and congestive heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (LVEF 30%). At home, he takes carvedilol, spironolactone, furosemide, aspirin, and metformin.
Vitals at the other institution were unremarkable but had signs and symptoms of decompensated heart failure (dyspnea, fatigue, pitting edema, wheezing). Post-admission day 20, he was transferred to our ICU for hemodynamic monitoring due to high risk of shock and complications. On admission, his blood pressure was 106/84 mmHg, heart rate 116 beats/minute, 75% on room air returning to 96% with high-flow nasal cannula at 6 L/minute.
On physical examination he was afebrile, had no skin lesions, toxic appearance, or signs of systemic inflammatory response. He had jugular engorgement, normal cardiopulmonary auscultation, and Grade + 2 pitting edema of lower limbs. Chest x-ray showed signs of pulmonary congestion. Echocardiogram revealed a dilated heart disease, left ventricle with severe global systolic dysfunction, depressed ejection fraction 18%, severe biatrial dilatation and moderate mitral valve regurgitation without thrombi or vegetations.
Laboratory tests revealed acute kidney injury and mild metabolic acidosis . His management was continuing home medications and adding angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB) and intravenous loop diuretic.
The patient presented a torpid evolution with the development of a febrile illness (temperature 38.6 °C) 3 days after admission to the ICU (23 days of hospitalization), associated with sustained ventricular tachycardia reaching values of 198 beats/minute and sustained hypotension with mean arterial pressure 63-66 mmHg. He was prescribed digoxin without improvement, followed by amiodarone infusion and full anticoagulation. Labs revealed severe leukocytosis with neutrophil predominance, and mild hepatitis.
Suspecting a possible infectious focus that decompensated the patient, septic workup was initiated and a carbapenem and antifungal (Fluconazole) were started given risk factors (comorbidities and prolonged hospitalization in another institution). Finally, blood cultures in two sets at 120 hours of incubation revealed the presence of achlorophyllic algae, confirmed as Prototheca wickerhamii by MALDI-TOF system. No other evidence of disseminated infection was documented. In this patient, the suspected source of infection was his home surroundings and occupation (farmer living in a rural area) along with risk factors such as diabetes.
The patient was assessed by Infectious Diseases who recommended fluconazole 400 mg IV/day and repeat blood cultures. Repeat blood cultures taken at 96 hours after initiating antifungals showed persistence of the microorganism, treatment was changed to liposomal Amphotericin B (5 mg/kg IV/day) for 14 days. Subsequent repeat blood cultures documented clearance of the algaemia post-treatment. Once the treatment was completed, he presented clinical and biochemical improvement, allowing hospital discharge.
In outpatient follow-up after discharge from hospital, he remains well off antifungals and asymptomatic.