A 31-year-old man has been reported to our clinic with symptoms of blurry vision in the left eye, which occurred during the past year. We started with essential examinations such as visual acuity testing, intraocular pressure measurements (IOP), slit-lamp examination, and indirect ophthalmoscopy (fundus examination). We found normal findings of the anterior segment: clear cornea, deep and clear anterior chamber, normal iris and pupil reaction, and clear lens. Distance visual acuity was measured using a standard Snellen acuity chart at 6m and presented in decimals. Corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) in the left eye was 0.55 Snellen lines, and IOP was 15 mmHg. In the posterior segment, there were no signs of vitritis and retinitis. The optic disc had regular sharp-shaped borders with no edema; the macula showed no clinical edema, blood, or exudation. The OCT (SOCT Copernicus REVO, Optopol, Zawiercie, Poland) scan showed significant edema that measured 397 microns in central foveal thickness, with a slight disorder of the retinal pigment cell layer . Macular edema persisted during all control exams, with slight vision deterioration with a CDVA of 0.35.
We treated the patient with topical corticosteroids, Dorzolamide, Bromfenac sodium-sesquihydrate, and periocular corticosteroids (Triamcinolone acetonide). Therapy was repeated for nine weeks, and there was no improvement. We initiated laboratory searches, such as blood, serology, and immunology testing. Testing was done for rheumatoid arthritis, paranasal sinusitis, HLA b27 typing for ankylosing spondylitis, testing for venereal diseases (VDRL), CMV, Toxocariasis, HIV, and EBV. We got the results Reactive 20.96 S/CO for Syphilis, Toxocara canis IgG:11.5 Positive, EBV:). Guided by the findings, we took the best decision and recommended further treatment with the intravitreal application of a sustained-release Dexamethasone implant in the left eye. Seven days after treatment, we had satisfactory results: macular edema (central foveal thickness of 288 microns), slight retinal pigment cell layer disorder, and improved CDVA of 0.75 Snellen lines .
OCT imaging was an essential and central significant diagnostic procedure. In figures one and two, we can establish and monitor the stages of macular edema for an extended period and evaluate its treatment by showing how it affects improvement. However, this doesn’t show any other significant diagnostic feature that can be very significant to assessing other treatment improvement signs.