This was a 53-year-old patient with no particular medical history or knowledge of herbal medicine, who had been followed for 3 years for a Biermer's disease with vitamin B12 who was admitted urgently for diffuse abdominal pain with postprandial vomiting, evening fever and intense physical asthenia, with an acute evolution. No diarrhea or delayed stool was reported. Physical examination revealed a slightly swollen abdomen with painful hepatomegaly to the touch and epigastric tenderness with guarding, jaundice and a World Health Organization performance index of grade 3, all in a context of fever at 38.6 - 39 °C with a good haemodynamic state. No other obvious clinical point of call was identified. An abdominal-pelvic tomodensitometry (AP TDM) performed urgently revealed multifocal hepatic abscesses (88 × 76 × 72 mm for segments II and IVa; 22 to 27 mm for segments I and III), with a dominant lesion straddling segments II and IVa.

Initial treatment consisted of a scan-guided drainage of the abscesses and empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone 2 g daily, gentamicin 3 mg/kg (180 mg for 60 kg of weight) once daily for 3 days and metronidazole 500 mg every 8 hours, associated with adjuvant measures.

Microbiological analysis of the pus taken during drainage showed many neutrophils and the presence of rare Gram negative bacilli with some Gram positive cocci and the absence of fungal elements in Gram staining. A first culture performed was non-contributory, a second analysis performed 72 hours later was sterile. Two haemocultures performed were negative. The evolution was marked by the persistence of the clinical picture with worsening of diffuse abdominal pains, more marked in the epigastrium and the right hypochondrium.

This led to a second thoraco-abdomino-pelvic scan. This showed a persistence of a hepatic collection of 64.8 × 53 mm, multi-walled to the left hepatic lobe and a residual collection in the right lobe of 43 mm. On re-examination of the scan images, a foreign body was identified between the antrum-pyloric wall and the segment I of the liver. In addition, a peri-hepatic effusion of the right iliac fossa and Douglas with infiltration of the peritoneal fat (with integrity of the other full viscera) was also observed. There was no apparent vascular lesion.

A median xypho-pelvic laparotomy was performed with evacuation of approximately 200 cm3 of cloudy peritoneal fluid. The preoperative exploration allowed the objective of a gastric perforation in the pre-pyloric area of approximately 0.5 cm in diameter with the presence of a foreign body, a "fish bone" type, nearly 5 cm long. This was followed by extraction of the fish bone, a gastric suture with epiplooplasty, a peritoneal wash and a drainage.

The evolution on the 7th day post-operatively was marked by a simple postoperative course and a clear clinical-biological improvement. The antibiotic therapy was continued for a total duration of 2 weeks after the surgery without recurrence of the abscesses. The patient was seen in outpatient consultation 15 days after returning home without any clinical-biological particularity. The control imaging at 3 months showed a complete resorption of the hepatic abscesses.
