A 51-year-old Chinese female presented with the incidental finding of a large heterogeneously enhancing mass in the frontal lobes after a computer tomography (CT) scan for minor head injury following a fall . Her past medical history included only adenomyosis and endometrial polyps. No neurological abnormalities were observed.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 76 × 70 × 54 mm mass in both frontal lobes with extension across the midline that was hypointense on T1-weighted, hyperintense on T2-weighted images, and demonstrated avid postgadolinium contrast enhancement . The lesion showed foci of calcification and peripheral cystic components, with mild perilesional edema and significant mass effect. The corpus callosum was displaced posteriorly. Inferiorly, the lesion extended up to the olfactory bulb.
The patient underwent gross total resection (GTR) of the tumor. Intraoperatively the tumor was not found to breach ventricles and the tumor was deemed to be entirely extraventricular. Intraoperative frozen section suggested the diagnosis of a high grade glioma. Histology showed a well demarcated cellulartumor with prominent perivascular pseudo-rosettes and very occasional true (ependymal) rosettes. The tumor cells showed enlarged, hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei, a granular ‘salt and pepper’ chromatin pattern, and fibrillary cytoplasm. Mitotic figures, including atypical forms were readily identified. There were areas of palisading necrosis and microvascular proliferation. The Ki-67 proliferative index was about 20%. These features were diagnostic of an anaplastic ependymoma (WHO grade III).
MRI taken on postoperative day 1 showed no evidence of residual tumor. The patient's postoperative recovery was uneventful. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies were negative for malignant cells and no drop metastases were detected on neuroaxis MRI. The patient underwent adjuvant intensity- modulated radiation therapy of 60 Grays in 30 fractions to a region encompassing the tumor bed and a 2 cm margin around it over a period of 2 months. At follow up, the patient developed local recurrence in the frontal lobes within 2 months of completing radiotherapy. At 8 months postsurgery, progression of disease locally had caused her to become increasingly drowsy and by then she was wheelchair bound.