A 46-year-old unmarried man was referred to the Department of Psychiatry, at Chosun University hospital by a local psychiatric clinic. Acute euphoric mood, labile affect, increased talkativeness, decreased need for sleep, and unrestrained buying sprees had developed about 3 weeks prior. Concurrently, he was convinced that he had sufficient money to start a global business, and was scheduled to meet the President of his country in secret. In addition, he experienced vivid visual hallucinations: he reported having recently seen hundreds of North Korean soldiers in the battlefield at dawn. He had already been prescribed psychotropic medications, including aripiprazole (5 mg/day) and alprazolam (0.5 mg/day), at a local psychiatric clinic 2 days prior. He was admitted to a psychiatric inpatient unit for further evaluation and treatment. Upon admission, the patient was found to have no personal or family history of psychiatric illnesses. He reported no sexual intercourse over the last 3 years. On mental status examination, he showed the characteristic psychopathology of psychotic mania, such as euphoric mood, grandiose delusions, flight of ideas, pressure of speech, and increased psychomotor activity. However, he did not show any impairment in concentration and immediate memory. His Mini-Mental State examination (MMSE) score was 29; he only failed to recall one item at delayed recall, reflecting unimpaired cognition. Further, no abnormalities were found upon physical and neurological examination. He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder with psychotic features. On the 1st day after admission, blonanserin, an atypical antipsychotic drug, was administered at a dose of 8 mg/day for alleviation of manic and psychotic symptoms.
On the 2nd day, routine blood test, including complete blood count, serum electrolyte, and biochemical tests, and chest X-ray, electrocardiography, electroencephalography, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no aberrant findings. However, the patient showed a positive result for the serum venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) test, at a titer of 1:32. Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test showed reactivity, whereas results of the HIV test were negative. On the 3rd day, analysis of cerebrospinal fluid through a lumbar puncture showed a positive VDRL result, at a titer of 1:8, and increased white blood cell count (22/mm3) and total protein (78.7 mg/dL). Since a positive VDRL result for the cerebrospinal fluid confirmed the diagnosis of neurosyphilis , the patient was administered intravenous penicillin G, 20 million units daily, for 2 weeks. Along with intravenous penicillin G, an oral antipsychotic regimen (blonanserin, 8 mg/day) was maintained throughout the treatment period. From the 7th day onward, the manic and psychotic symptoms improved dramatically, which was supported by his report of gaining insight into illness and significant reduction of the scores of psychiatric symptom rating scales . By the time of discharge, on the 17th day, most psychiatric symptoms had disappeared. After 5 days of discharge, the patient visited our hospital, and neither mood symptoms nor psychotic symptoms were observed. He was administered a reduced dose of antipsychotic medication (blonanserin, 4 mg/day) for 2 weeks, which he later discontinued.