A 20-year-old Japanese man presented with his father to our periodontic clinic at Osaka University Dental Hospital, Japan, because of his poor oral condition. His chief complaint was severely painful gums, which led to crying. He was unable to provide detailed information about when and how this problem had started. His father told us that our patient had thought there was a gingival problem since childhood, had complained of gingival pain for the previous six months, and had been unable to brush his teeth for the last two weeks. Our patient's height was 153 cm and his weight was 62 kg. His medical history included a three-month hospital stay caused by low birth weight and cyanosis just after birth. A clinical diagnosis of PWS had been made on the basis of symptoms such as hypotonia, genital hypoplasia, acromicria (short hands and feet) and genetic testing.
An intra-oral examination revealed poor oral hygiene with heavy generalized plaque throughout the permanent dentition. His gingival tissues showed marginal redness, swelling, and food impaction . An apparent anterior open bite, increasing overjet, an anterior crowded arch and malpositioning of the teeth were noted. In addition, circular caries and attrition of the mandibular first molars were present. Pocket depths ranged from 4 mm to 8 mm. Mobility grade 2 was present in the mandibular left second premolar. We tried to measure the pocket depth and clinical attachment level at his first visit. Unfortunately, however, our patient did not allow the pocket measurement because of pain. Thus, we could not perform the conventional pocket measurement and examined only the mesial and buccal/labial pockets. Periapical radiographs disclosed localized vertical bone resorption (mesiolateral of maxillary right first molar and mesiolateral of mandibular left first molar) . Of particular note, the mesiopalatal pocket depth of the maxillary right first molar was 8 mm.
Based on pocket measurements and an X-ray examination, our patient was diagnosed with localized periodontitis. In addition, our patient exhibited several caries lesions from the mandibular right anterior teeth to the left molars. An orthopantomogram showed full permanent teeth with unerupted lower third molars. There was no family history of periodontitis.
Advice on periodontal treatment was provided in the presence of one of our patient's parents. This included oral hygiene instructions on how to control plaque using a manual toothbrush (Sam Friend Supersoft #300; Sun Dental, Osaka, Japan), 0.2% w/w chlorhexidine mouth rinse (ConCool F; Weltech, Osaka, Japan) and 1% v/w chlorhexidine gel (ConCool Gelcoat F; Weltech). Professional scaling was also performed to remove supragingival plaque. Our patient kept his treatment appointments with his father every three weeks, but his plaque control was poor. His father told us that our patient was motivated to brush his teeth and did so happily, but sometimes he fell asleep without brushing because of daytime somnolence; a common occurrence in PWS . He refused to allow his parents to help him brush his teeth. Furthermore, malpositioning of the teeth and difficulties with hand and wrist movements inhibited adequate plaque control. After three visits to the clinic our patient had become accustomed to the dental treatment, and subgingival scaling was performed using an ultrasonic scaler. However, active treatments such as root planing and periodontal surgery were not employed because of poor plaque control. Both tooth-brushing instruction (TBI) and subgingival scaling were performed every three weeks. Although some gingival inflammation remained, his gingival swelling and redness were reduced by six months after his first visit .