Ms. B is an 86-year-old woman who presented with a four-day history of obstipation, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting associated with worsening colicky abdominal pain and postprandial reflux. Her past medical history included Kaposi sarcoma, hypertension, osteoarthritis, and vitamin D deficiency. Although she had acute cholecystitis in the past, cholecystectomy had not been performed. Her surgical history included caesarean section through a lower abdominal midline incision and tonsillectomy. She lived alone and was independent with her daily activities of living.
On examination, all the vital signs were within the normal range. Her abdomen was distended and tender on palpation as well as percussion, particularly in the lower abdomen. There was also guarding in the same region. Bowel sounds were present. On initial laboratory evaluation, she had mildly elevated inflammatory markers with white cell count of 15.6 [4.0–11.0 × 109/L], C-reactive protein (CRP) of 67 [<6.0 mg/L]. Her liver function tests showed bilirubin of 25 [2-20 μmol], alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 18 [<33 U/L], alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 135 [30-110 U/L], and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) of 56 [<56 U/L], indicating an obstructive pattern of the liver enzyme derangements. Other laboratory abnormalities were creatinine of 99 [45-90 μmol/L] and urea of 8.6 [2.5-7.5 mmol/L], indicating mild acute kidney injury in the context of her reduced food intake and dehydration. Her other serum electrolytes were normal. The urinalysis was unremarkable.
On her computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and pelvis, there were two gall stones of 3 cm and 3.3 cm lodged in the proximal duodenum and distal colon, respectively . It also showed a contracted and inflamed gallbladder with gas in the biliary tree. Along with the gallstones, the presence of pneumobilia was consistent with the presence of fistula originating from the gallbladder. The common bile duct (CBD) was dilated, measuring 17 mm. The diagnosis of Bouveret syndrome with gallstone coleus was made.
While resuscitating with intravenous fluids, a nasogastric tube was inserted. Intravenous antibiotics (Ampicillin, Gentamicin, and Metronidazole) were commenced. The patient was consented for a laparotomy for removal of the gall stones and a potential bowel resection with stoma formation. Laparoscopic approach was not considered due to its technical difficulty with manoeuvring the gallstones and the likely presence of intra-abdominal adhesions.
The laparotomy revealed two points of obstruction at the first part of the duodenum and at the distal sigmoid colon . An attempt was made to manually move the stone in the duodenum into the distended stomach but was unsuccessful. Following a duodenotomy, the duodenal stone was extracted. The sigmoid colon was distended proximal to the second stone. An indurated segment of the sigmoid colon was found distal to the stone. The cholecystocolonic fistula was not found. Similarly, a colotomy was made to remove the stone. There were no intraluminal pathology including strictures and masses identified. Both of the gallstones were removed via longitudinal incisions. The duodenotomy and colotomy were primarily closed transversely using PDS in a single layer. Duodenal repair was reinforced with an omental patch. There were severe inflammatory changes in the right upper quadrant involving the gall bladder and the second part of the duodenum, which were more in favour of a cholecystoduodenal fistula over a choledocoduodenal fistula.
On examination of the rest of the bowel, it was grossly normal except for multiple diverticulae in the left-sided large bowel. They were relatively small and uncomplicated diverticulae. The cause of the dilated CBD was not found. The cholecystectomy, resection of the fistula, and CBD exploration were not performed due to the unclear anatomy intraoperatively as well as patient comorbidities, making the risk of complications high.
Her immediate postoperative recovery was uncomplicated. She did not require inotropic or ventilator support. Her diet was slowly progressed. The patient was subsequently discharged to the care of her family and followed up in the general surgery clinic.