A female infant was born at 27 weeks of gestation to a 33-year-old, Gravida 8, Para 5 mother. The pregnancy was complicated by subchorionic hemorrhage at 11 weeks, rupture of amniotic membranes at 24 weeks gestation, and intrauterine growth restriction with absent end-diastolic flow of the umbilical artery. Doppler scans and a poor biophysical profile (2/8) at 27 weeks highlighted the need for an urgent cesarean section.
The patient received a complete two-dose course of betamethasone at 24 weeks and a single rescue dose before the C-section at 27 weeks. The birth weight was 680 g (13th percentile), and the head circumference was 22 cm (6th percentile). The infant received delayed cord clamping for 1 min, and her 5-min Apgar score was 8. Noninvasive intermittent positive pressure (NIPPV) was initiated in the delivery room, which was continued on admission to the NICU.
A chest X-ray showed radiographic features of RDS . There was an increase in the oxygen and ventilatory requirements. The infant met the institutional criteria for surfactant delivery via LISA. In our institute, the surfactant is administered via the “Hobart method”, which utilizes a semirigid 16-G catheter that is placed into the trachea without the use of Magill forceps. Bovine lipid extract surfactant (BLES®, 5 ml/kg) was successfully instilled.
The catheter was prepared by removing the introducer needle and marking the desired estimated depth. The catheter tip was slightly curved to mimic the natural airway anatomy to facilitate the insertion past the vocal cords. The infant was premedicated with atropine and fentanyl.
The procedure was performed by a neonatal physician trainee who was certified to perform LISA. The vocal cords could easily be visualized using a laryngoscope. Despite easy visualization, an attempt to insert the catheter between the vocal cords to the desired depth failed due to unexpected resistance. Given that the angiocath tip was passed beyond the vocal cords, a decision was made to start the instillation of surfactant. However, resistance was encountered during instillation, which prevented the administration of surfactant. At this point, a second visualization with the laryngoscope was conducted that confirmed that the catheter was through the vocal cords. The angiocath was then withdrawn by 0.5 cm.
A second attempt to deliver surfactant was performed, and this time, it was successfully instilled without any resistance. Subtle subcutaneous neck swelling was noted after the procedure, vital signs were normal, and no bleeding or clinical deterioration was observed. The orogastric tube was aspirated, and no surfactant was retrieved, thereby confirming that there was no inadvertent intragastric delivery of surfactant. The oxygen could be weaned down from 30 to 21% by 45 min after the procedure, and the ventilatory parameters were weaned.
Three hours after the procedure, the infant became hypotensive. A pneumothorax was suspected, so chest X-ray was ordered and revealed a pneumomediastinum . The air leak was localized to the anterior mediastinum, with a linear radiolucency showing a tract to the anterior aspect of the trachea close to the level of the vocal cords, suggesting a high tracheal perforation. Air tracking up to the soft tissue in the neck region was noted, suggesting subcutaneous emphysema.
The infant required prompt management of hypotension, which was addressed with a fluid bolus of normal saline, and needed initiation of dopamine that was ultimately weaned off 8 h later. The pneumomediastinum was conservatively managed with close monitoring of the clinical condition and switching from NIPPV to nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) and decreasing positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP).
The infant remained stable from a respiratory perspective on a low level of noninvasive support. Follow-up chest X-ray revealed a gradual resolution of the pneumomediastinum, and a complete resolution of the radiographic findings was noted by day 10 of life. There was no need for a further dose of surfactant or intubation for mechanical ventilation.
The newborn was transitioned from nCPAP to a high-flow nasal cannula at 32 weeks. Cranial ultrasound performed on day 3 showed a grade 2 germinal matrix hemorrhage on the right side and a periventricular hemorrhage on the left side.
Subsequent cranial ultrasound examinations demonstrated the evolution of periventricular hemorrhage into cystic lesions. The infant had a brain MRI at 32 weeks that showed similar findings. The newborn also had an episode of late-onset sepsis at 20 days of life that was successfully treated with antibiotics. Enteral nutrition was gradually established. The infant was completely off respiratory support by day 50 of life at the corrected gestational age of 34 plus 1 day and therefore did not develop bronchopulmonary dysplasia. The infant was discharged home at 40 weeks’ gestation.