A 50-year-old male patient with mitral regurgitation (MR) and MAD previously diagnosed with CMR was referred to our clinic due to a recent syncopial episode. TTE revealed severely dilated left heart chambers (4D left ventricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) = 218 ml, left atrial volume index (LAVI) >48 ml/m2) with an LVEF of 57%, bileaflet prolapse of the mitral valve, severe MR [effective regurgitant orifice area (EROA) 60 mm2, regurgitant volume (RV) 117 ml], and a 12 mm displacement of the hinge point of the mitral annulus from the posterior ventricular wall . Further complete 3D-TTE analysis of the patient was performed to demonstrate the imaging findings of MAD syndrome . A previous CMR examination of the patient had reported LV dilatation with almost identical volumes and EF to TTE (EDV = 217 ml, EF = 59%), the presence of MAD of 10 mm displacement, and the presence of myocardial fibrosis of the basal inferolateral wall . Due to our protocol for patients with syncope, we performed a 24 h ambulatory electrocardiogram (ECG) that revealed episodes of monomorphic and polymorphic non-sustained ventricular tachycardia . In accordance with the management algorithm of the recently published EHRA and EACVI consensus document for MAD syndrome , the patient was treated with surgical mitral valve repair and implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) implantation.
The 3D-TTE examination was performed with the GE Vivid E95 echo machine (GE Vingmed Ultrasound, Horten, Norway), using the 4Vc probe, and all data were stored in the EchoPAC v.203 workstation.
Advanced LV assessment and 4D strain analysis values were performed with the dedicated AutoLVQ application, using a full-volume apical four-chamber view, focused on the LV, with a frame rate of >25 vps. Global LV strain values were overall normal. The longitudinal strain was measured at −21%, circumferential strain at −20%, radial strain at 69%, and area strain at −40%. The strain values of the basal inferolateral segment were reduced, confirming the presence of the fibrosis detected in the MRI examination of the patient. The segmental radial strain was measured at 35% (normal values at 43.2 ± 4.5%), area strain at 24% (−36.5 ± 3.9%) (with adjacent segmental values of −47 and −56%), and circumferential strain at 18% (−30.3 ± 4.0%), while the longitudinal strain was preserved at −22% (−21 ± 0.6%) due to the hyperdynamic motion of the basal posterior wall .
Advanced mitral valve assessment was performed with the AutoMVQ method that provided the measurements of the leaflets and the annulus, using an apical four-chamber view, focused on the mitral valve with 4D zoom and a frame rate of >12 vps. By default, AutoMVQ creates the mitral valve model using a middle reference frame between end-diastole and end-systole. Since the requested information for MAD syndrome is the dimension changes between diastole and systole, we had to manually adjust the systolic and diastolic frames twice and provide two different mitral valve quantification (MVQ) models. A direct comparison of the systolic and diastolic models allows us to understand the dynamic annulus changes in MAD syndrome. In our patient, this method confirmed (1) the flattening of the saddle-shaped annulus during the systole and (2) the systolic expansion. In particular, the annulus area increased from 14.6 cm2 to 23.2 cm2, the perimeter from 13.7 cm to 17.2 cm, the anteroposterior diameter from 3.4 cm to 4.8 cm, and the commissural diameter from 4.2 cm to 5.5 cm. Meanwhile, the annulus height decreased from 11.4 cm to 7.0 cm . The disjunction arc of the valve was easily demonstrated by an “en face” 3D ventricular view of the mitral valve where the extent of the arc was assessed by measuring the circumference of the posterior annulus involved within the disjunction. Volume rendering views can reveal the actual part of the free posterior wall of the left ventricle that is separated from the annulus and the atrium .