An 80-year-old man presented with a progressive decrease in hearing on the right side accompanied by dizziness and disturbance of balance 10 months prior to admission. The neurological examination revealed right hypoglossal nerve palsy. Audiometry documented complete sensorineural hearing loss on the right side.
Skull x-ray and cranial computed tomography (CT) scans showed a large osteolytic lesion with bone destruction, including the temporal bone, occipital bone, clivus, jugular foramen, and hypoglossal canal . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an 8 × 7 cm homogeneous enhancing mass in the right posterior fossa related to the petrous part of the temporal bone, with extension to the cervical region . The cerebellum was displaced, and definite brain invasion was not seen. The preoperative diagnosis was a temporal bone origin malignancy such as squamous cell carcinoma or meningioma with invasion of the petrous bone.
The patient underwent surgery to obtain a pathological diagnosis and for complete removal of the mass. A C-shaped postauricular skin incision was made that extended to the neck. The scalp was reflected anteriorly, and the mass infiltrating the subcutaneous tissue was exposed. The lesion appeared as a firm gray mass that had destroyed the temporal and occipital bones. The dura was intact with no invasion, and the lesion was easily peeled off. For the cervical part of the tumor, the major vessels were secured inferiorly, and the mass was removed up to the skull base. The tumor was removed entirely, except for a small portion around the jugular foramen to avoid lower cranial nerve injury. Finally, the large empty space was filled with a sternocleidomastoid muscle flap . There were no neurological deficits after surgery.
Histopathological studies confirmed a WHO (World Health Organization) grade II atypical meningioma with up to 6 mitoses per 10 high-power fields . The Ki-67 proliferation index was 15%. The results of immunohistochemical staining are provided in Additional file : Figure S1.