A 39-year-old female presented painful ulceration on the oral mucosa for the past two months and visited the Hospital of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University in November 2021. She had received treatment for this condition with a systemic administration of corticosteroids for more than one month in other hospital without efficacy. She denied any history of other systemic medications, dental restorations, radiotherapy, smoking and tobacco use. She had no family history of relevant conditions and malignancies. Physical examination revealed extensive ulcerated lesions on the tongue dorsum, bilateral tongue and buccal mucosa as well as the lower lip, and Nikolsky’s sign was negative . A biopsy from the left tongue showed dyskeratosis of spinous cells, liquefaction and degeneration of basal cells, indistinct basement membrane, and a large number of lymphocytic infiltrates in all epidermal layers instead of band-like infiltrates, which are consistent with pathological changes of OLL . Oral thalidomide and topical tacrolimus mouthwashes were scheduled to control the OLL, while the oral lesions remained unhealed. We recommended the patient for further systemic examination.
In January 2022, the patient found a goiter in the right neck, accompanied with extensive unhealed ulcerated lesions on the oral mucosa. The patient visited Xiangya Hospital, Central South University for further examination. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) confirmed the thyroid mass and revealed a mediastinal mass unexpectedly . Laboratory examination showed procalcitonin (PCT), C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and cancer antigen 125 (CA125) were obviously elevated (PCT: 0.104 ng/mL, normal: < 0.06 ng/mL; CRP: 14.70 mg/L, normal: 0–8.00 mg/L; ESR: 46.00 mm/h, normal: 0–26.00 mm/h; IL-1β: 7.11 pg/mL, normal: < 5 pg/mL; CA125: 76.6 U/mL, normal: 0–35 U/mL). The neck and mediastinal masses were surgically removed and the histopathologic examination showed PTC in the right lobe of the thyroid and CD (unicentric, hyaline vascular type) in the anterior mediastinal mass . Further immunohistochemical staining confirmed the diagnosis of CD . After thyroid cancer surgery, oral levothyroxine was scheduled for the inhibition and replacement therapy, and topical tacrolimus mouthwashes were applied to subdue pain and inflammation for oral lesions.
In March 2022, two months after complete excision of the neoplasms, the patient revisited to the Hospital of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University. The mucosal involvement showed significant alleviation, but there remained unhealed ulceration on the bilateral tongue . Based on the manifestations and findings across the timeline, a definitive diagnosis of OLL associated with CD and PTC was made. We subsequently gave the patient intralesional injection of corticosteroids and systematic thalidomide, and applied triamcinolone acetonide ointment and tacrolimus mouthwashes topically. After one month, the tongue mucosal lesions gradually healed . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography confirmed that there was no recurrence/metastasis of CD and PTC. The management of the patient was summarized in Fig. .
We followed the guidelines of the Helsinki Declaration in this investigation. The procedure has been explained to the patient, who signed an informed consent allowing treatment procedures and publication of her data.