On January 31, 2021, a 75-year-old male presented at the Gastroenterology Department of our hospital complaining of intermittent melena with epigastric discomfort for 1 mo.
The patient reported that melena occurred several times a day and was accompanied by epigastric discomfort and fatigue, without dizziness or severe abdominal pain.
The patient detected a plantar nodule on the right side in November 2016. It gradually grew and developed an ulceration. Biopsy results showed melanoma. He underwent an extended resection of the melanoma on the right plantar. Postoperative pathological diagnosis was acral malignant melanoma. He received interferon α2b (1800 WU three times per week) and continued maintenance therapy of a decreased dose of interferon α2b. He had no history of other chronic diseases.
The patient had no history of smoking or drinking. He denied a history of allergies, and his family history was unremarkable.
At admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.5 °C, heart rate was 70 beats per min, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per min, and blood pressure was 140/70 mmHg. Abdominal examination found soft tenderness in the left quadrant, without rebound tenderness. Lung and heart examinations were normal.
Routine blood tests revealed a normal white blood cell count (7.5 × 109 cells/L), moderate anemia (hemoglobin of 75.0 g/L; normal range: 130.0-175.0 g/L), hypoproteinemia (31.0 g/L; normal range: 35.0-52.0 g/L), and elevated levels of creatinine (136 µmol/L; normal range: 59-104 µmol/L). Transaminase, amylopsin and lipase levels were normal, and coagulation function was normal.
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan (January 30, 2021) showed an irregular shape of the jejunum in the left upper quadrant and shadows of fat, which indicated intestinal intussusception . Multiple gallstones were also found. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (February 2, 2021) showed multiple linear ulcers in the antrum, superficial gastritis, and small polyps. Magnetic resonance enterography (February 3, 2021) showed partial thickening of the jejunal wall in the left upper quadrant and formation of a soft tissue mass (32 mm × 24 mm), indicating a neoplastic lesion . The mass showed increased signal intensity in diffusion weighted imaging with intussusception of the distal jejunum and mesentery (jejunojejunal intussusception), and intestinal lumen expansion with air and fluid accumulation . Chest CT (February 7, 2021) showed a nodule in the superior lobe of the left lung (7 mm) and tiny nodules in the right lung (2-4 mm).
The patient underwent partial small bowel resection. Pathological findings revealed a 4.0 cm × 3.0 cm × 2.5 cm protrusion tumor. Histopathology showed diffuse growth of tumor tissue, with the majority located in the submucosa and nearly invading the mucosa . Tumor cells presented with patchy distribution, large nuclei, prominent nucleoli , and red cytoplasm . Some tumor cells showed pigment granules in the cytoplasm . Epithelioid tumor cells contained mitotic figures . Immunohistochemical staining showed HMB45 (+), Melan-A (+), S-100 (+), SOX10 (+), Braf (-), PCK (-), LCA (-), Ki-67 (about 50%) . Lymph node metastasis was detected in one of the five lymph nodes biopsied. Combined with the patient’s history of past illness, the pathologic diagnosis was small intestine metastatic melanoma.