This is the case of a 13-year-old black African boy of the Bantu ethnic group, a student, who presented at the pediatric emergency room of Yaounde University Hospital Center with intense chest and vertebral pains, evolving for 48 hours before admission. A week before, in the course of a brawl his left forearm was twisted, resulting in a sharp and permanent pain in his left forearm associated with a functional impotence without any cutaneous lesions. At home, his tutor gave him paracetamol and diclofenac that were administered orally followed by a consultation the next day at a traditional healer. The traditional healer carried out scarifications on our patient’s forearm, consisting of multiple superficial incisions of the skin made by a blade, supplemented by the application on the cutaneous lesions of an ointment composed of herbs, leaves, and earth, which would be likely to contain Clostridium tetani spores. Less than 48 hours later, there was an onset of a generalized pain, predominant in our patient’s back and in his sternal region.
The adolescent lives with his aunt in town. There were no elements in favor of a non-accidental injury or child abuse. He had no history of chronic disease; he has never had an operation. The immunization status of the child was unknown to the next of kin.
On general examination on his presentation to our emergency department, he was conscious and ill-looking. His temperature ranged between 36.8 and 38.3 °C, his pulse was 88 beats per minute, his pupils were equal and reactive to light stimulus, and his blood pressure was 105/70 mmHg. He presented a trismus, spinal stiffness, a generalized contracture with abdominal rigidity, and opisthotonus. In addition, there were also spasms triggered by noise, light, and touch during care.
The loco-regional examination of his left upper limb revealed a balm based on herbs and black earth placed under a traditional splint. After removal of the latter, scarifications were visible with areas of cutaneous necrosis . The rest of the examination was otherwise normal.
An X-ray of his left forearm showed a slightly displaced shaft fracture of the two bones of his forearm classified Orthopaedic Trauma Association (OTA)/AO 22-A3 . His hematological and blood electrolytes profiles were within normal limits. No biologic test was performed for the detection of tetanus antitoxin antibodies in whole blood due to the non-availability of this test in our setting at the time.
The diagnosis of generalized tetanus complicating a closed fracture of the forearm with subsequent opening was made. Generalized tetanus was thus diagnosed a few hours after our patient’s admission on the basis of the clinical examination in particular, and an obvious point of entry in an individual with unknown vaccination status who clinically presented a trismus, a generalized contracture, as well as paroxysms.
He was subsequently admitted 6 hours later to our intensive care unit. He was placed in solitary confinement in a dimly lit room; a nasogastric tube was placed, and sedation and diazepam myorelaxation were performed. The etiological treatment consisted of an antibiotherapy based on metronidazole that was intravenously, directly, and slowly administered and an immunotherapy with equine anti-tetanus serum. Subsequent disinfection of the point of entry with resection of necrotic tissue was performed to reduce microbial growth and release of toxins.
The evolution was marked by a gradual deterioration in his state of consciousness, dysautonomic manifestations, particularly blood pressure surges, and tachycardia alternating with bradycardia. Moreover, the occurrence of several episodes of tonic–clonic paroxysms required additional doses of muscle relaxant and intubation. He died a few hours later in our intensive care unit, 12 hours after admission to our hospital.