A 29-year-old preeclamptic postpartum patient was referred to the ophthalmology outpatient clinic with the complaint of sudden vision loss in both eyes. She applied to the obstetrics and gynecology clinic with headache and cloudy vision the day before. In her first examination, systemic BP was 165/105 mmHg, and there was bilateral (++) pretibial edema. It was unclear when her BP began to rise, as the patient had no regular pregnancy follow-up. She was not at high-risk for either PE or SRD and did not have clinical high-risk predictors such as pre-existing chronic hypertension or chronic kidney disease. In her obstetric ultrasonography findings, there was anhydramnios, and the fetus was compatible with 39 weeks of gestation. While thrombocyte count was 232x103/mm3; hemoglobin was 10.2 g/dL, ALT was 142 IU/L, and AST was 142 IU/L. There was (+++) proteinuria with the dipstick. Renal function and coagulation tests were normal. She was diagnosed as PE, hospitalized and had a vaginal delivery. Antihypertensive (nifedipine) and anticonvulsant therapy for eclampsia prophylaxis (MgSO4) was started following hospitalization.

On the first postnatal day, the visual acuity of the patient was finger counting at one meter for the right eye, while it was two meters for the left eye. She did not have any abnormalities in her anterior segment examination for both eyes and had normal intraocular pressure. In the slit-lamp fundus examination, there was bullous SRD involving the retina’s superior aspect and extending to the optic disk in the right eye. In the examination of the left eye, there was a similar SRD including the temporal aspect of the retina and it was enlarging into the macula. Unfortunately, we did not have the opportunity to do a retinography or optical coherence tomography (OCT) screening in our department, thus we confirmed the SRD in both eyes via B-scan ophthalmic ultrasonography in accordance with fundus examination. Both before and after the resolution of the detachment, the patient was asked to undergo an OCT examination at another hospital. We informed the patient that this disorder had a self-resolving manner and had a good prognosis.

We were able to get the patients’s OCT imaging in the second week of follow-up, her visual acuity improved to 8/10 for the right eye, while it was 4/10 for the left eye. Except for a minimal subretinal fluid in both eyes and a localized retinal pigment epithelium disruption in the left eye, OCT was considered normal. While the patient’s right eye vision had fully recovered, her left eye vision improved to 8/10, after 1-month follow-up. She did not provide us with a second OCT imaging after her vision completely recovered.