A 57-year-old woman presented in 1995 with a six-week history of acute onset polyarthralgia. She also had Raynaud’s phenomenon, dry eyes, dyspepsia, intermittent night sweats, brittle nails, intermittent hair loss, mouth ulcers and fatigue. A provisional diagnosis of mild connective tissue disease (Sjögren’s or lupus) was made, based on her symptoms and a single positive doubled-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) result.
Her past medical history included Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and osteoarthritis. In 2007, she was infected with a sheep bot fly while in Morocco. She subsequently had larvae removed from her left maxillary sinus and her right eye by our ear, nose and throat team.
In 2010, she re-presented to our rheumatology department with intermittent left-sided facial pain and swelling, accompanied by hearing loss in her left ear. She also described gradually worsening epiphora, blepharospasm and left eye swelling.
An autoimmune screen was negative, including anti-Ro and anti-La, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, autoantibody and antinuclear antibodies. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 6mm/h (normal range: 1 to 20mm/h) and her levels of immunoglobulin G and A were mildly elevated. A Schirmer’s test was also normal. In view of these results, it was felt that her symptoms were unlikely to be due to connective tissue disease.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her sinuses, skull base and parotid glands showed only mild thickening of her sinuses. She was referred to our ear, nose and throat team for further investigation. A tympanogram demonstrated low tone loss and negative pressure. An ultrasound scan of the left side of her face found no cause for the swelling, and a flexible naso-endoscopy was normal.
In 2012, our patient was referred to our ophthalmology team because of the persisting symptoms. She had been started on carbamazepine and botulinum toxin injections to her facial muscles, with minimal symptomatic improvement. A second MRI scan was performed and reviewed by a neuroradiologist. This scan suggested vascular compression of her left facial nerve. A vascular loop protocol MRI showed a loop of her posterior inferior cerebellar artery taking a long course around the seventh and eighth cranial nerves into the meatus and back, resulting in compression of her seventh and eighth cranial nerves.
Our patient was referred to our neurosurgical team for microvascular decompression. Her symptoms of pain, epiphora, blepharospasm and swelling completely resolved following this procedure.