A 14-year-old Greek male, born to healthy non-consanguineous parents, at term and without perinatal complications, was evaluated for uncontrolled epilepsy. He displayed generalized motor seizures at 3.5 months of age, eventually controlled by anticonvulsants. He showed developmental delay with head control at 4.5 months and ambulation at 19 months with a broad-based unsteady gait. He was diagnosed with ataxic cerebral palsy. In addition, he displayed a delay in speech and generalized learning difficulties at school. Tubulopathy was identified at the age of 8 years. Bartter syndrome was erroneously diagnosed at first. The patient received treatment with potassium gluconate, magnesium, spironolactone and indomethacin. At the same age, sensorineural deafness was detected and a hearing aid was used. At the start of his teenage years, this young man had infrequent secondarily generalized focal motor seizures unresponsive to several medication changes. At 14 years of age, he was a pleasant, cooperative teenager with mild intellectual disability and normal cranial nerve examination (II–XII), normal muscle strength in the upper and lower extremities, mild spastic hypertonia in the lower limbs, increased deep tendon reflexes and bilateral Babinski signs. There was mildly decreased superficial sensation in the lower extremities and no disturbance of position sensation or vibration. Romberg sign was absent. His gait was broad based and slow and he was unable to walk in tandem. Examination for cerebellar signs revealed the absence of tremor and dysmetria, while rapid alternating movements were slow and uncoordinated, resulting in dysdiadochokinesis.
Wakefulness and sleep electroencephalogram (EEG) showed slow background rhythms and no epileptiform activity. Brain computed tomography (CT) and MRI were normal. Nerve conduction studies revealed mild abnormalities on two occasions without important differences between the two tests. The motor conduction velocities on the second measurement were 41.3 m/s for the right median nerve, 38.2 m/s for the right peroneal nerve and 40.8 m/s for the left peroneal nerve. The sensory conduction velocities were 38.6 m/s for the right median nerve, 42.9 m/s for the right ulnar nerve and 42.3 m/s for the right sural nerve. There were no other abnormalities in these electrophysiological studies. Laboratory tests showed normal serum vitamin E, B12, folic acid and plasma very-long-chain fatty acid (VLCFA).
The patient’s epilepsy was fully controlled with topiramate and carbamazepine. At F/U, the ataxia remained stable, as was the spasticity, with independent home ambulation and need for support in the community. Episodic weakness appeared on many occasions, without evidence of electrolyte disturbance or clinically overt seizures, and this responded to adjustment of the anticonvulsants. Overall status was consistent with a static disorder of movement, with activity limitations, also associated with intellectual disability and epilepsy. Nevertheless, the unremarkable neuroimaging, the renal tubulopathy and sensorineural deafness, led us to obtain consent from the family to search for a neurogenetic syndrome, specifically for KCNJ10 mutations associated with EAST syndrome. The patient was heterozygous for two KCNJ10 mutations: a missense mutation (p.R65C) that is already published and a not yet published duplication (p.F119GfsX25) that creates a premature truncation of the protein . Both mutations are likely damaging. The missense mutation p.R65C has been also listed as disease causing in various databases including OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man). In addition, prediction software agrees. As for the truncating frameshift mutation p.F119GfsX25, it is noted that truncating mutations in particular when occurring at the beginning of the protein are most likely damaging. Prediction software agrees here too.
Parental testing has not been performed, and therefore, we do not know for certain whether the mutations are in different alleles, but this also seems quite likely as the missense mutation has already been described in a patient not harboring the additional duplication (and that the same mutation occurred twice is not impossible but very unlikely). This patient’s static clinical course has been ascertained for the following 10 years.