A 39- years old multiparous woman has suffered from mild MS for 10 years, as a result of childhood bacterial tonsilopharyngitis (rheumatic MS). The first attacks of symptoms appeared in her last year of second decade, during her second pregnancy. Her chief complaint was exertional dyspnea. Two - dimensional echocardiography (2D-ECG) revealed a decreased mitral valve area (1.5 cm2). She had no other medical conditions and her past medical history included nothing else of note. Recently the symptoms worsened and she began to experience dyspnea in ordinary activities, AF and hemoptesia (hemoptysis). 2D-ECG positive findings were: critical diminished mitral valve area (0.8 cm2), left atrial enlargement without any organized clot attachment, thickened leaflets, commissural and subvalvular fussions and mean diastolic pressure gradient across valve =12 mmHg. She was scheduled for MVR with mechanical prosthesis. Open cardiac surgery with CPB using bicaval connulation was carried out. Early post-operative course was uneventful and she was discharged to home on POD = 7 with warfarin prescription without any prohibition about taking it, since she had completed her family members. She felt face tenderness and hearing problems besides stuffy and clogged nose on POD = 20. She underwent ENT consultation and based on the clinical and paraclinical finding, met ARS diagnosis . As soon as an antihistamine, anticongestion and macrolide antibiotic was initiated. She came back to ENT service with persistent ARS as well as relapsing preoperative couphs and dyspnea besides lower extremities edema and toenails discoloration . After some modulations of therapeutic drugs, she was referred to pulmonary clinic on POD = 30. CXR confirmed a significant left pleural effusion and she was readmitted in our service while taking lasix and SABAs (albuterol inhaler) in addition to aforementioned medicines on POD = 33. Immediately a pigtail catheter was secured with the purpose of both assessment and management. At first the fluid was bloody then became milky. Finally we attained 1850 cc frankly white fluid. Bedside ether test revealed the presence of fat which was confirmed by lab study (triglycerides = 1750 mg/dl chylomicron). We encountered with a patient who had different signs such as chylothorax, lymphedema and yellow discoloration of toenails. After dermatologist consultation we arrived at Yellow Nail Syndrome on POD = 35. Immediately conservative treatment was taken place such as bed rest, massage and compression therapy of legs using garments, restricted diet consist of high protein low fat with medium chain triglycerides and octreotide. Since the decline of chylous drainage was unsatisfied (330 cc/d), we exchanged the pigtail catheter with an appropriate size chest tube and TPN was initiated. Then talc and doxycycline pleurodesis was carried out besides Vitamine E supplement on POD = 41. Fortunately chest tube output substantially decreased, allowing transition to low fat oral intake diet on POD =45. Chest tube was removed and the patient was discharged on POD = 47. At 4 weeks follow ups, CXR was clear without effusion and nails discoloration and legs lymphedema resolved.