A previously healthy 34-year-old Korean female was admitted to a regional hospital for fever, myalgia and severe headache that had started 2 weeks ago. Brain MRI showed a high T2 signal intensity change and diffuse swelling of the right temporal lobe, insula and hippocampus . Lumbar puncture showed lympho-dominant pleocytosis. The patient was started on intravenous (iv) dexamethasone and acyclovir under a high suspicion of viral encephalitis.
She was transferred to our institution 4 days later due to persistent headache despite treatment. A noncontrast computed tomography (CT) brain scan taken at our institution showed a hemorrhagic transformation of the right temporal lobe, which was not observed on the initial MRI . Follow-up lumbar puncture showed 510 white cells per mm3 (82% lymphocytes), 144 mg/dL protein and 61 mg/dL glucose. CSF culture studies were negative for bacteria, fungi and tuberculosis. PCR of the CSF confirmed the presence of HSV1. The patient was free of neurological symptoms, with a Glasgow Coma Scale of E4M6V5, and was admitted for close observation and continuation of iv acyclovir. Corticosteroid treatment was discontinued upon her admission. On day 3 of hospitalization, the patient presented with a sudden onset of vomiting and severe headache. Brain CT showed an increased amount of temporal lobe hemorrhage and a leftward shift in the midline . Mannitol was administered but did not seem to have a significant effect. The patient became increasingly drowsy, and her right pupil became dilated. She underwent emergency right decompressive craniectomy, expansile duraplasty and ICP monitor insertion. Postoperative brain CT showed alleviation of midline shifting . The patient recovered fully 5 days after the surgery. Apart from mild intermittent headache and dizziness, she did not show any other significant clinical symptoms, including neuropsychological problems. There were no significant neurologic deficits upon neurological examinations performed by the attending neurosurgeon and neurologist. The patient was discharged after completion of 2 weeks of acyclovir and returned 2 months later for cranioplasty. She was followed up 3 more times after cranioplasty. She was stable, without any neuropsychological problems or neurologic deficits, and was able to successfully return to work as a public official.