A 57-year-old Caucasian woman was originally diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma in her right breast in February 2011 (ER-positive, PR-positive and HER2-negative). She was also diagnosed as carrying a mutation of BRCA 2. The patient underwent bilateral mastectomy and right-sided sentinel lymph node biopsy with 1 of 6 lymph nodes being found to be positive for metastasis. Unfortunately, she declined adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation recommended by her treating physicians, but only received adjuvant hormonal therapy with letrozole. In February 2012, she presented with renal failure and severe bony pain, and was found to have hypercalcemia with extensive osseous metastasis. CT-guided biopsy of one of the pelvic lesions revealed metastatic adenocarcinoma, consistent with her ER-positive primary breast cancer. The patient received aggressive hydration and denosumab for hypercalcemia. She also received radiation to her sacrum and bilateral sacroiliac joints to palliate her pain. The patient was enrolled in a clinical trial, receiving hormonal therapy with the combination of tamoxifen and metformin. Her monthly denosumab injection for bone metastasis was also continued. Unfortunately, her disease continued to progress, and she was found to have extensive lymphadenopathy involving the cervical, mediastinal and pelvic area. In January 2013, the patient was transferred to our center.
As breast cancer in BRCA mutation carriers has been previously shown to respond to platinum-based chemotherapy , treatment with single-agent carboplatin (AUC 5) was initiated. Three days after starting carboplatin, the patient developed a severe headache and projectile vomiting. An MRI of her brain revealed a large, dura-based, contrast-enhancing extra-axial mass, approximately 3.3 × 4.3 cm in size, causing severe vasogenic edema in the right frontotemporal region, resulting in a significant midline shift. She was seen by a neurosurgeon, and an emergent decompressive craniotomy was performed. The pathology of the resected mass was consistent with metastatic breast cancer. Postoperative brain MRI showed marked improvement, but unfortunately it also demonstrated some small dura-based masses over the left cerebral hemispheres. The patient recovered quickly and subsequently received whole-brain radiation therapy to treat dural metastases. Despite the delay of systemic therapy for almost 2 months due to craniotomy and radiation, her extra-cranial disease responded well radiographically to the first dose of carboplatin, and thus this agent was continued until June 2013.
At this time, PET-CT showed a progression of the disease in the cervical, mediastinal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Carboplatin was discontinued and PLD was initiated as a second-line chemotherapy. For the first cycle, a total of 85 mg (40 mg/m2) of liposomal doxorubicin in 250 ml of D5W (5% glucose solution) was prescribed with the same premedications used for the prior carboplatin. PLD was infused at a rate of 1 mg/min for the first 20 min. As no infusion-related adverse effects were observed, the rate was increased to 1.6 mg/min in order to complete the infusion over 1 hour according to our standard protocol. Twenty minutes later (approximately 50 mg PLD in total was given), the patient was noted to develop confusion. She had some tangential thoughts, started to make nonsensical comments to the people around her and began to tell stories from the past. The infusion was held and she was observed for 30 min, but her symptoms did not improve. An on-call physician was contacted to assess her. She was found to be alert and oriented and also able to answer questions appropriately. There were no neurological deficits. As the patient had an MRI earlier that day, no further imaging studies were performed. The infusion was discontinued due to the mental status change, and the patient was observed closely. Her symptoms persisted for 18 h and then resolved spontaneously. The patient's acute transient encephalopathy was deemed secondary to PLD. When she returned for the second cycle of chemotherapy, she was not rechallenged with PLD; instead, she was being administered conventional doxorubicin. This agent was tolerated well without any mental status change for another 5 months. Unfortunately, the patient developed a disease progression, requiring further palliative therapy with an eventual transfer to a hospice service, where she died 2 months later.