A 49-year-old man with schizophrenia was brought to our hospital as an emergency case of idiopathic esophageal rupture. The patient underwent an emergency laparoscopic surgery. No abnormal findings were found in the abdominal cavity. Dissection was proceeded from the left side of the esophagus and an abscess was observed. Perforation placement was searched, but the perforation site could not be found. Before the end of surgery, the mediastinum was irrigated with saline solution and the esophagus was covered with lesser omentum.
However, after the surgery, the patient developed a mediastinal abscess and pyothorax, and two blood cultures were positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Thoracic drainage and antibiotics improved the mediastinal abscess and pyothorax; however, the patient’s back pain and low-grade fever persisted. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine showed abnormal signal and extensive contrast in the vertebral bodies at T9 and T10, and high signal fluid retention on T2-weighteding imaging of the intervertebral disk at T9–T10 . However, there were no findings of compression of the spinal cord. Based on the MRI findings, the patient was diagnosed with PS, and computed tomography (CT)-guided drainage was performed for disk drainage and detection of pathogenic bacteria. MRSA was detected in the bacterial culture of the intervertebral disk.
The patient was treated with intravenous daptomycin (700 mg/day) for 10 days, intravenous teicoplanin (800 mg/day) for 5 weeks, oral sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim (4 g/day), and oral minocycline (200 mg/day).
The patient’s symptoms improved, and he was transferred to the hospital 3 weeks later. His oral antibiotic treatment was scheduled to continue; however, the patient stopped the medications at his own discretion.
After 6 weeks, the patient presented again with high fever and back pain. PS recurrence was suspected. MRI and CT showed an intradiscal abscess at the T9–T10 level, anterior paravertebral abscess, and extensive vertebral body destruction . We diagnosed septic shock due to PS at the T9–T10 level.
The patient underwent a two-stage operation: anterior vertebral debridement and fixation with iliac bone graft and10 days after first surgery, posterior fixation with instrumentation.
Seven days after second surgery, the patient complained of increased right chest pain and shortness of breath. Chest X-ray showed a moderate pleural effusion in the right lung; however, electrocardiogram showed no obvious abnormality. Two days later, in the middle of the night, the patient’s right chest pain increased, his blood pressure dropped, and he had shock. Chest X-ray showed massive hemothorax in the right lung . The patient’s hemoglobin had dropped sharply from 8.1 g/L to 6.4 g/L. Chest CT and subsequent intercostal arteriography showed a pseudoaneurysm in the right eighth intercostal artery, which was considered to be the source of the bleeding. This presentation appeared to be ruptured mycotic aneurysms involving intercostal vessels. Following local anesthesia with 1% Lidocaine, the right common femoral artery was punctured utilizing a single-wall technique. A 4-Fr sheath was introduced, and 4-French shepherd’s hook catheter (Terumo Clinical Supply, Tokyo, Japan) advanced selectively into the right 8th intercostal arteries. Angiography confirmed the target aneurysms of the 8th intercostal artery. A 1.7-French microcatheter (Prograde-α; Terumo Clinical Supply) was inserted and the aneurysms were then embolized with a N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA)/Lipiodol mixture (1:2) . There were no intraoperative complications.
The patient was treated with intravenous daptomycin (700 mg/day) for 6 weeks, oral sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim (4 g/day), and oral minocycline (200 mg/day). Then, the patient completed his course of antimicrobial therapy in the hospital without any complications .