A 24-year-old (gravida 0 para 0) female without experience of sexual intercourse was referred to our gynecology department with complaints of menorrhagia and vaginal discharge. Physical examination revealed multiple hyperpigmented macules on her lips, buccal mucosa, fingertips, and toes . She was diagnosed with mild anemia at 10 years of age; genetic screening for thalassemia reported no abnormalities. At 15, she underwent a laparotomy to treat an “intestinal obstruction.” Since the age of 21 years, she has experienced a prolonged menstrual period (50–60 days) and hypermenorrhea, accompanied by a clean and odorless vaginal discharge. The US examination showed an enlarged cervix with multicystic lesions, the largest of which measured 1.9 cm×3.4 cm×2.2 cm. The patient has since experienced occasional hematochezia and was referred to several medical institutions to treat abnormal uterine bleeding. At 23 years of age, she underwent gastrointestinal endoscopy, revealing chronic non-atrophic gastritis and multiple polyps in the stomach, duodenum, and rectum. The pathological diagnosis of the resected polyp specimen from the mid-ileum revealed chronic active inflammation involving the superficial mucosa . During this period, the medical imaging examination revealed a growing cervical mass. Serum gynecological tumor markers, including alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen (CA) 199 (CA199), CA153, and CA125, were within normal levels. The human papillomavirus screening test results for cervical secretions were negative. The patient’s father and younger brothers had similar black mucocutaneous macules, and her grandfather died of gastrointestinal bleeding. Except for her father, who was also diagnosed with leukoderma, the patient and her family denied the presence of other familial diseases.
After admission to the inpatient department, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and multimodal US . Transrectal US revealed an enlarged, barrel-shaped cervix (6.4 cm×5.7 cm×6.0 cm) containing multilocular lesions of various sizes comprising a few solid components. The cervical lesions occupied almost the entire cervix, with the upper rim reaching the internal cervical os and the lower rim 0.7 cm above the external cervical os. No cervical myometrial echo was found. Some solid components were found in the septae between neighboring cysts, which altogether measure 4.0 cm×3.0 cm×3.3 cm; the cystic-solid echoes were encompassed by relatively larger cystic echoes. The cystic echoes, with diameters of 0.1–1.0 cm, were honeycomb-shaped with a slightly higher solid echo. The solid echo and septae showed strip-like rich blood flow signals with an arterial spectrum resistive index of 0.57. The cervical canal had a 0.4 cm separation, making the line of the cervical mucosa invisible. No abnormal echoes were observed in the anterior or posterior vaginal fornix or in the endometrium and myometrium of the uterus. No space-occupying lesions were observed in the uterine parametrium. An anechoic cyst, measuring 3.4 cm×2.3 cm×2.8 cm, was found in the left ovary. The ovarian cyst had a thin wall and was surrounded by a few short, strip-like blood flow signals. No lesions were observed in the right adnexa. The three-dimensional reconstructed view using 3D realisticVue (W10 EV3-10B, Samsung Medical, Seoul, South Korea) displayed multilocular lesions resembling the “cosmos pattern” in MRI examination, nearly occupying the whole cervix . Three-dimensional power Doppler US revealed an increased blood supply with irregular ramifications, parts of which multiplied and formed clump-like patterns. Three-dimensional tomographic US imaging of the blood flow of the cervical lesion indicated that its blood supply was located in the intercyst septae and solid components. The blood flow histograms revealed the following results: vascularization index, 4.567; flow index, 35.374; vascularization-flow index (VFI), 1.615. Using the VOCAL software (Voluson TM E10 BT19, General Electric Company, Boston, Massachusetts, the United States), the volume of the mass measured was 80.65 cm.3 Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS) (PHILIPS EPIQ7, Philips Healthcare, Seattle, WA, the United States) using intravenous SonoVue (Bracco, Milan, Italia) revealed that solid components of the cervical mixed echo begun to develop at 7 s and peaked at 22.14 s, which gradually faded and presented a slightly increased signal in the final stage, exhibiting a “quick-up and slow-down” pattern of the time-intensity curve. CEUS also displayed a local density random walk wash-in/wash-out curve type with a wash-in slope of 1.62 dB/s, peak intensity of 19.03 dB, time from peak to 1/2 of 39.67 s, and mean transit time of 26.63 s. The cervical serous layer displayed continuous echoes of the signal, which did not increase simultaneously with the solid components of the cervical masses. The MRI revealed an enlarged cervix with multilocular space-occupying lesions of various sizes involving the entire muscular layer.
Subsequently, a hysteroscopic biopsy revealed multiple polyp-like neoplasms in the uterine cavity and multilocular lesions in the cervix . Pathological examination of the biopsy specimen revealed LEGH and aLEGH. Whole-exome and Sanger sequencing confirmed the STK11 gene mutation in the patient and her family .
Based on the evidence mentioned above, the patient was diagnosed with PJS and recommended undergoing laparoscopic exploration and cervicectomy according to clinical guidelines [, ]. The lesion-penetrated parts of the lower uterus, cervix, and ovarian cyst were resected and subjected to pathological examinations, revealing that the cervix and lower part of the uterus were both invaded by glandular lesions . Immunohistochemistry revealed Polyclonal Antibody to Mucin 6 (MUC6)-positivity. Simple gastric metaplasia (SGM) and LEGH in the cervix were also documented, suggesting the presence of gastric-type glandular epithelium. Alcian-blue/Periodic acid Schiff reagent (AB/PAS) staining revealed the presence of neutral mucus in the gastric-type cells.