An 18-year-old male presented to a local hospital with sudden chest pain accompanied by headache, palpitations, and shortness of breath for 18 h. He was in good health, had no previous underlying diseases, and no history of cardiopulmonary disease.
Initially, the patient presented with sudden chest pain, described as persistent, non-radiating, dull pain, followed by palpitations and headache, accompanied by shortness of breath and cough with a small amount of phlegm, which could not be relieved by rest. He consulted at the local hospital for treatment and was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). After admission, he developed anuria and mixed acidosis, which were difficult to correct. His vital signs were as follows: heart rate of 138 beats/min, respiratory rate of 32 breaths/min, blood pressure of 105/38 mmHg (after continuous infusion of high-dose norepinephrine and dobutamine), central venous pressure (CVP) of 9 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 100% (oxygen absorption flow rate at 4 L/min). Bedside color echocardiography showed an aneurysm of the right coronary sinus of the aorta, which ruptured into the right atrium. The width of the base was 24 mm, the height was 15 mm, and the rupture point was 7 mm. A continuous shunt was observed on color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) . Left ventricular ejection fraction was 63%. Spectral Doppler showed that the aortic valve jet velocity was normal. CDFI showed that there was no abnormal blood flow across the atrial septum. Minimal aortic valve regurgitation, mild tricuspid regurgitation with a regurgitant area of approximately 3.8 cm2 and a maximum velocity of 2.8 m/s, and a pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) of 35 mmHg were observed. The patient was diagnosed with a ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm into the right atrium.
The local hospital contacted our hospital for consultation. After discussion, the plan was to transfer the patient immediately to our hospital for emergency ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm repair. Considering that the patient's condition was critical and the hemodynamics were still unstable after administration of a large amount of vasoactive drugs, bedside VA-ECMO was performed immediately using 15-French arterial, 8-French arterial backflow, and 21-French venous cannulae via an open right femoral cutdown, achieving flows of 3 L/min. At this time, the patient's vital signs were as follows: heart rate of 130 beats/min, respiratory rate of 22 breaths/min, blood pressure of 109/47 mmHg, and CVP of 29 mmHg. The ECMO flow and dobutamine dose were adjusted to reduce shunting . After establishment of ECMO, the patient was transferred by ambulance to our hospital for emergency surgery. Transesophageal echocardiography demonstrated a right sinus of Valsalva aneurysm rupture into the right atrium (, ).
The patient underwent emergency surgical repair. A median sternotomy was performed, and after systemic heparinization, cardiopulmonary bypass was established with bicaval cannulation. A cardioplegia cannula was inserted into the aortic root, and a left ventricular vent was inserted into the right superior pulmonary vein. The patient was then placed under moderate hypothermia. After an aortic cross-clamping, antegrade and retrograde cross perfusion of histidine-tryptophan-ketoglutarate (HTK) cardioplegia solution were performed. The right atrium was incised, and the aortic valve was exposed through an oblique incision at the aortic root. Exploration showed that the aortic sinus was grossly dilated and penetrated into the right atrium, with a rupture size of approximately 1.2 × 1 cm . The rupture was repaired with a pericardial patch sutured intermittently using 4-0 polypropylene. No leak was detected after the repair. The aortic root and the right atrial incision were then closed using 5-0 polypropylene sutures. Cardiac circulation was then resumed, cardiopulmonary bypass was discontinued when the blood pressure stabilized. Ventilator parameters were as follows: tidal volume of 500 ml, respiratory rate of 14 breaths/min, positive end-expiratory pressure of 5 cm H2O, inspired oxygen concentration of 60%. The following vital signs were observed: blood pressure of 125/65 mmHg, heart rate of 80 beats/min, pulse oxygen saturation of 100%. Blood gas analysis showed the following results: pH of 7.45, PCO2 of 39 mmHg, PO2 of 270 mmHg, glucose of 8 mmol/L, lactic acid of 1.10 mmol/L, HCO3 of 27.1 mmol/L, and hemoglobin (Hgb) of 94 g/L. Urine output was 3 ml/kg body weight/h. The patient's hemodynamic status stabilized, ECMO was discontinued. Then protamine was administered. The patient was hooked to ECMO for 8 h. He returned to the surgical ICU after surgery and to the general ward after 7 days. He was successfully discharged after 40 days . After 2 years of follow-up, the patient's heart structure and function were normal. He had good exercise tolerance and no evidence of heart failure.