A 42-year-old woman with a stable partner who consulted for a painful swelling in the genital area. On medical examination, the presence of an abscess in the Bartholin gland was confirmed, which was drained; the purulent material from the puncture was sent for culture. The patient was treated empirically with azithromycin 1 g on the first day and then 500 mg/day for 5 days. The sample was seeded on blood agar, chocolate agar and thioglycolate broth. It was incubated for 24 h at 37 °C in an atmosphere with 5% CO2. Gram staining of the purulent material was performed. Identification was performed by VITEK®2 with VITEK®2 NH cards.
The sample from the abscess and the isolate were sent to the STD Service of the National Institute of Infectious Diseases (INEI)-ANLIS "Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán" for confirmation of genus and species. In addition, the presence of Chlamydia trachomatis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Mycoplasma hominis and Ureaplasma spp. was investigated in the sample from the abscess by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique. Confirmation of genus and species from the isolate and the determination of the capsular group were performed by PCR. For molecular characterisation and subtyping, the sequentiotype (ST) and the clonal complex (CC) were determined by the technique of multi-locus sequencing (MLST). The antigenic profile was studied by amplification and sequencing of the genes encoding PorA (porin A), fHbp (factor H binding protein), NHBA (heparin binding antigen) and NadA (Neisseria adhesion protein)9. The analysis of the sequences obtained for the assignment of peptide allelic variants was performed in the PubMLST database.
In addition, the antimicrobial service of INEI-ANLIS determined the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) by dilution in agar of the following antibiotics: penicillin, ampicillin, ceftriaxone, rifampicin, ciprofloxacin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline and azithromycin. The methodology established by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) was followed.
The patient was swabbed oropharyngeally, urethrally and endocervically for the search of colonisation by N. meningitidis by PCR and culture. It was not possible to obtain swabs from her sexual partner. All samples were sent to the ETS service of INEI-ANLIS.
Gram staining of the purulent material showed a large inflammatory reaction and Gram negative diplococci. After 24 hours, the colonies in the solid media were bright, greyish and larger than the N. gonorrhoeae colonies. The colonies were tested for superoxol and oxidase and were both positive. Identification with VITEK® 2 NH cards showed N. meningitidis (97%). The identification of the isolate was confirmed by the ETS service of INEI-ANLIS by testing the use of carbohydrates (glucose, maltose, lactose and sucrose) and mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS, Bruker, Daltonics). The PCR technique from the sample was positive for N. meningitidis and M. hominis and negative for C. trachomatis, M. genitalium and Ureaplasma spp.
The isolate was identified as belonging to capsular group B (NmB), ST-35 (CC-35), and its outer membrane protein profile consisted of PorA 22-1,14; NHBA 21 and fHbp 16 (Novartis family 2). The gene encoding the NadA protein was not detected.
The antibiotic susceptibility of the isolate was intermediate to penicillin (MIC: 0.12 μg/ml) and ampicillin (MIC: 0.25 μg/ml) and sensitive to ceftriaxone (MIC: 0.0005 μg/ml), rifampicin (MIC: ≤ 0.004 μg/ml), ciprofloxacin (MIC: 0.015 μg/ml), chloramphenicol (MIC: 1 μg/ml), tetracycline (MIC: 0.12 μg/ml) and azithromycin (MIC: 0.12 μg/ml).
With N. meningitidis confirmed as the infectious agent of bartholinitis, the antibiotic was changed to ceftriaxone. The PCR technique and cultures of the patient's oropharyngeal, urethral, and endocervical swabs were negative for N. meningitidis.
