An 18-year-old Saudi male was referred to our hospital with a 3-month history of upper abdominal pain and yellowish discoloration of the sclera. The pain was colicky and non-radiating, with a severity of 3/10, and was not related to food intake or position. Six months prior to the presentation, the patient was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type 1 and started on insulin aspart 14/16/8 units and glargine 38 units HS. There was no family history of hepatobiliary, hemoglobinopathy, or gastrointestinal malignancy. Two weeks prior to the presentation, the patient was admitted to another hospital during which magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was performed and showed a filling defect in the distal common bile duct (CBD). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) could not be done there due to unavailability.
His physical examination was unremarkable, apart from scleral jaundice. Liver function test revealed a total bilirubin of 6 mg/dL, alanine aminotransferase 70 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 258 U/L, and gamma-glutamyl transferase 474 U/L. Complete blood count, renal function test, calcium level, amylase, and lipase levels were normal. The parathyroid hormone was elevated (171 pg/mL); however, TSH, free T4, LH, FSH, prolactin, ACTH, cortisol, and testosterone levels were normal.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed a dilated CBD of 8 mm and a single gallbladder stone . During the ERCP, two duodenal polypoid lesions were noted, one of them overlying the ampulla of Vater, with erythematous and ulcerated surface . The common bile duct was cannulated, and the cholangiogram revealed dilated extra and intrahepatic bile ducts and a lower CBD filling defect . Multiple biopsies were obtained from both the duodenal lesions, and a plastic stent was inserted in the CBD. CT scan of the abdomen with IV contrast showed multiple enhanced well-defined lesions in the peri-ampullary area as well as the pancreaticoduodenal groove. No distant metastasis was detected .
The histopathological evaluation revealed infiltration of the intestinal mucosa by a few small solid nodules. These nodules were composed of cells with round uniform nuclei and stippled chromatin. Immunohistochemical studies of the nodules showed positive reactivity for CK7, CDX2, CD56, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin and stained negative for CD20 . Less than 2% of the cells were labeled with the proliferation marker Ki-67, and the mitotic rate was 1/2 mm2. Accordingly, a histopathological diagnosis of NET grade 1 was made.
Tc-Octreotide scan showed multiple large intraluminal and extraluminal duodenal masses with no radiotracer uptake due to necrotic component. Two left para-aortic lymph nodes, the larger one measuring 2.6 cm × 2.8 cm, showed intense radiotracer uptake . There was no abnormal focus of activity in the liver, bones, and rest of the body.
Further workup showed an elevated 24-h urinary normetanephrine of 4,394 μg/24 h; however, the 24-h urinary metanephrine was normal as was the chromogranin (52 ng/mL; reference value <93), urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, gastrin, somatomedin, and glucagon. Tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-feto protein, and CA19-9 were normal. Colonoscopy, MRI pituitary, and parathyroid ultrasound were unremarkable. Sequence analysis of MEN1 gene was negative for any pathogenic variants.
After a multidisciplinary team discussion, the patient underwent a conventional Whipple procedure followed by para-aortic lymph node dissection. Lymph nodes draining the head of the pancreas and duodenum were dissected, and the surgeon was keen on removing as many lymph nodes as possible. Gastrointestinal reconstruction was done as follows: pancreaticojejunostomy was performed as a two-layer end-to-side full-thickness pancreatic neck inside the jejunum; hepaticojejunostomy was done with end-to-side common hepatic duct to antimesenteric border of the jejunum 15 cm distal to pancreaticojejunostomy, and gastrojejunostomy was done using handsewn anastomosis. Jejunojejunostomy was created around 60 cm from the biliary-enteric anastomosis. All the surgical margins were negative for tumor, and among the 39 lymph nodes excised, 12 lymph nodes showed metastatic NET. The tumor was confirmed to be NET grade 2. Two presumed para-aortic lymph nodes turned out to be paragangliomas.
After the surgery, the patient had improved apart from diarrhea responding to pancreatic enzymes. The patient was started on intramuscular octreotide 30 mg monthly based on the oncology recommendation and considering the presence of lymph node metastasis. Gallium-68 DOTATATE showed no residual uptake in the postoperative bed, and apart from an avid left para-aortic lymph node, no other DOTATATE-avid lymph node was noted. Over the 18-month follow-up, gallium-68 DOTATAE and CT scan have been showing the stability of the avid left para-aortic lymph node with no local recurrence.