A 64-year-old man visited the local medical center on March 4th with a complaint of general weakness, myalgia, and abdominal pain, which had begun a week prior to the visit.
The patient underwent computed tomography (CT) at the local medical center where he was diagnosed with thrombosis of the SMV, and was subsequently transferred to our hospital. The abdominal CT scan revealed a large thrombus running straight from the SMV gastrocolic trunk to the distal site, totally obstructing a segmental portion of the SMV. Additionally, the surrounding fat stranding and bowel wall edema of the ascending colon were confirmed.
The patient had a fever of 37.9 °C at the time of the visit, and complained that he felt hot. He also complained of a headache, but there was no cough, sputum, diarrhea, or vomiting.
Over the previous 5-years, the patient had been prescribed 1000 mg metformin once daily (Q.D.), 1 mg glimepiride Q.D., 2.5 mg linagliptin Q.D., 50 mg losartan Q.D., and 10 mg rosuvastatin Q.D. for hypertension and diabetes.
The patient continued to complain of a dull pressing pain in the right upper quadrant, with mild tenderness in the area during the physical examination. The bowel sound was hypo-active, and there were no other specific findings in other physical examinations.
Blood tests revealed that the white blood cell count was 16160 /mL, the level of ESR was 86 mm/hr, and the level of HS-CRP was 16 mg/dL. Although SMV thrombosis was diagnosed, the patient only complained of mild tenderness, and no rebound tenderness. However, there were complaints of fever and muscle pain throughout the body. Since the patient’s symptoms were considered atypical for SMV thrombosis, a sample was collected through a nasopharyngeal swab and an Influenza A/B rapid antigen test was performed. The influenza test was performed using "The BD Veritor™ Plus System for Rapid Detection of Flu A+B" kit, sensitivity 81.3% (71.1%, 88.5%, 95% confidence interval), specificity 98.2% (95.7%, 99.3%, 95% confidence interval). In addition, after collecting samples through nasopharyngeal swab, coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) test by RT-PCR was performed by taking account of recent pandemic situation.
The abdominal CT scan revealed a large thrombus running straight from the SMV gastrocolic trunk to the distal site, totally obstructing a segmental portion of the SMV. Additionally, the surrounding fat stranding and bowel wall edema of the ascending colon were confirmed.