A 31-year-old woman, gravida-1 (23 weeks' gestation), para-0, presented with acute severe pain in her left buttock region radiating to the leg and increasing with ambulation. No underlying pathologies or drug abuse were present and no systemic symptoms were encountered. Backache was initially attributed to nerve compression. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and rest were prescribed.
After 4 days, the pain became worse. Physical examination revealed a temperature of 39.2 ºC, pulse rate of 111 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 43 breaths/minute and blood pressure of 100/50mmHg. The laboratory test results were significant for leukocytes of 5400/mm3 with left shift (92%), haematocrit of 24%, D-Dimer of 946.8μg/L and platelet count of 85,000/mm3. Chest X-ray showed images of bilateral pulmonary condensation.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with a diagnosis of septic shock and acute respiratory distress. Doppler ultrasound examination of both legs and pulmonary arteriography disproved the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism. An echocardiogram did not find any evidence of endocarditis.
Treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics (gentamicin and ceftriaxone), inotropic drugs and ventilatory support was prescribed. Her general status improved throughout the following days. Nevertheless, her back pain became worse. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed left-sided sacroiliitis with a small abscess at the lower joint margin extending into the iliac notch. A computed tomography-guided aspiration of the abscess was performed and the patient reported partial relief of her symptoms.
Sacroiliac aspiration yielded a small amount of fluid. Although blood cultures were positive for Staphylococcus aureus, culture of the material from the sacroiliac aspiration failed to yield positive results. Intravenous cloxacillin was added to the antibiotic therapy and a rehabilitation programme was initiated so that the patient might recover her strength and mobility.
A new MRI performed 6 weeks later showed progression of sacroiliac joint destruction and focal osteomyelitis . A cesarean section was performed under general anaesthesia at 34 weeks' gestation and a 2570g male neonate was delivered.
The total length of intravenous antibiotic treatment was 8 weeks. She continued with oral rifampicin and ofloxacin for 4 months. After cesarean section, the patient noticed progressive decreased pain and increased ambulatory ability. One year after the onset of symptoms, Technetium-99 conjugated with methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m MDP) bone scintigraphy still demonstrated increased uptake in the left sacroiliac region. Figure shows single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography (SPECT/CT) results. The patient is doing well with normal ambulation, although she continues to experience mild discomfort in her left buttock.