We report the case of a possible association between treatment with PCSK9i and the occurrence of adverse neurological outcomes in a subject with a previous diagnosis of myasthenia gravis.
The patient was an obese (BMI 30.8 kg/m2) man who was 72 years old and who underwent thymoma resection in 2005, urgent examination in 2007 (IKEM), which revealed weakness, fainting, and unremarkable internal and cardiac findings. He was diagnosed with myasthenia gravis (nonspecified immunosuppressive therapy was administered during long stay in Moscow) in 2010. He was diagnosed with ischaemic heart disease in 2015 and prescribed aspirin 100 mg; PCI (2× DES) was performed. The patient suffered from type 2 diabetes mellitus (treated with Glucophage 850 mg), arterial hypertension (Valsacor 80 mg, Orcal neo 5 mg) and lipid metabolism disorder. Total cholesterols ranged from 5.80 to 6.30 mmol/L. He stopped smoking 15 years prior, and reported having an allergy to penicillin.
In 2022, elevated lipid values was observed (TC—5.95 mmol/L, LDL-C—4.35 mmol/L, HDL-C—0.95 mmol/L and TG—2.90 mmol/L); postprandial glycaemia 9.7 mmol/L; additional biochemical parameters (Na+; K+; Cl−; bilirubin; AST; ALTl; urea; S-creatinine; hs-troponin Tb; blood counts and CRP) were in the normal range. ECG—sinus rhythm, rare ventricular extra systoles. Statin treatment was not implemented because of chronic myasthenia gravis (as a contraindication) and the patient's strict negative attitude towards statin treatment.
After considering the indication criteria, PCSK9i monotherapy was implemented to treat dyslipidaemia.
According to the patient′s family (the patient did not personally contact the doctor), within 24 h after the first dose of PCSK9i [Repatha (evolucamab), 140 mg], the patient developed severe muscle weakness, joint pain, fever, and general discomfort, lasting for several days. The PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 positivity was negative.
The physician strongly advised against the administration of the second dose of PCSK9i and to contact the treating physician immediately. Despite this fact, the second identical dose was self-administered approximately 2 weeks later, and the family called again to report significant worsening of the muscle problems within 24 h after PCSK9i administration, leading to the patient being admitted to the neurology department where he was being treated for myasthenia gravis. The patient was unable to squat, had impaired gait stability and speech impairments. Magnetic resonance of the nervous system reveal no abnormalities. Patient has been treated by corticosteroids (10 mg/day) but without any improvement. Finally, pregabalin has been administered and patient was subsequently treated with five plasmaphereses, leading to the slow improvements of muscle problems.
Electromyographic findings were as follows: n. medianus DML 120%, lowering of the amplitude of CMAP (muscle action potential), n. ulnaris DML 120%, n. perineus l.sin. DML, 120%, F waves increased by more than 130%.
The finding is indicative of subacute demyelinating axonal, sensorimotor polyneuropathy of the lower extremities. Changes in more than two nerves support dg. autoimmune polyradiculoneuropathy/suspicious acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. Based on the neurologist's conclusion, it can be assumed that in this case, treatment with PCSK9i resulted in significant worsening of the patient's chronic disease.