Our patient is a 39-year-old Caucasian woman, with family history of hypertension and with hypertension herself since her late 20s, well controlled on amlodipine 10 mg once daily. In addition, her non-cardiac history includes keratosis follicularis (Darier disease), with frequent skin infections, treated empirically with minocycline. She suffered an acute aortic dissection type A 3.5 years ago and underwent surgery for aorta repair with a 34 mm Dacron graft. Her immediate post-operative course was uncomplicated and she was discharged a week later.
Twenty-five days after surgery she presented to our institution with fever; clinical examination was remarkable for red keratotic papules of forehead, neck, and presternal area, in addition, fine left lower lobe crackles were present. Her fundi were normal. Leucocytosis with granulocytosis was observed; renal and liver functions tests were within normal limits. A chest X-ray revealed left lower lobe pneumonia with ipsilateral pleural effusion and an echocardiogram showed moderate pericardial effusion. Her blood cultures and Bronchoalveolar Lavage were positive for staph hominis and ciprofloxacin 500 mg BID was administered for 4 weeks. One week after completion of antibiotic therapy, she was re-admitted with fever and malaise and had negative blood cultures, but PCR was positive for Coagulase Negative Staphylococci and ciprofloxacin 500 mg BID and vancomycin 1 g IV BID were given for 4 weeks. With the suspicion of graft infection,—relapse of fever, despite previous appropriate antibiotic treatment, soon after urgent surgery, in a patient with skin disease—an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose Positron Emission Tomography Computerized Tomography (FDG PET-CT scan) was done and showed uptake in the aortic graft . Daptomycin 500 mg IV OD was initiated for another 6 weeks and fever and inflammatory markers subsided. During a 6-month period, however, multiple relapses occurred, each time following completion of antibiotics and a subsequent FDG PET-CT scan showed increased metabolic activity in the graft, pleura, pericardium, sternum and substernal fat, lymph nodes and spleen . The decision to re-operate was then made; the infected Dacron graft was removed and a bovine pericardium graft was inserted, 9 months after the first operation. Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE) was isolated in graft’s cultures and IV daptomycin was administered for 6 weeks post-operatively. Patient remained asymptomatic at 22 months follow-up after second surgery and 18F-FDG PET/CT scan showed significant reduction in FDG uptake.