A 40-year-old female patient visited the emergency department (ED) with a 3 d history of fever, minor headache, and abdominal pain.
The patient had been living in a postpartum care center after giving birth by cesarean section 3 wk prior to her ED visit. Eleven days prior, the front of her neck was swollen, and a needle aspiration was performed at a private surgical hospital; however, her thyroid gland showed no specific findings.
The patient had no relevant medical history, apart from a cesarean section performed 3 wk before presentation.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
During physical examination in the ED, the patient’s vital signs were measured: Body temperature (40.6 ℃), blood pressure (100/48 mmHg), heart rate (100 bpm), and respiratory rate (18 breaths/min). No specific findings were observed in the thyroid gland. Moreover, no notable clinical findings such as neck stiffness, tonsil hypertrophy, abdominal tenderness, abnormal breath sounds, or costal spine angle tenderness were observed. Additionally, the patient exhibited no signs of infection at the site of abdominal surgery (cesarean section) or thyroid fine-needle aspiration. Colposcopy was performed to preclude endometritis; however, no specific findings were observed.
The patient’s laboratory test results revealed bicytopenia (hemoglobin: 14.0 g/dL; platelets: 133000/μL; absolute neutrophil count: 2512/μL). However, other laboratory tests including total bilirubin level measurement (0.3 mg/dL), liver enzyme level measurement [aspartate transaminase (AST): 65 U/L; alanine transaminase (ALT): 35 U/L], thyroid function test (T3: 65.1 ng/dL; free T4: 0.88 ng/dL), and urinalysis (one white blood cell/high-powered field), showed no significant abnormalities. The C-reactive protein (CRP) level was elevated at 4.46 mg/dL.
The patient’s chest radiograph was normal. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed due to elevated CRP levels and intermittent post-delivery abdominal pain. However, a prominent infectious focus was not observed.
After administration of an antipyretic drug, the patient’s fever subsided, and vital signs remained stable during long-term follow-up in the ED. Four days later, the patient was discharged with a prescription for broad-spectrum antibiotics and a referral to the infectious disease outpatient department to evaluate her fever of unknown etiology. However, 4 d after discharge, the patient returned to the ED with a fever of 38 ℃ and decreased blood pressure of 60/30 mmHg. Laboratory test results revealed thrombocytopenia (platelets: 94000/μL), and other test results [total bilirubin level: 3.1 mg/dL; liver enzyme levels (AST: 202 U/L; ALT: 444 U/L)] and renal function indicators (blood urea nitrogen: 42.1 mg/dL; creatinine: 3.35 mg/dL) indicated multiorgan failure. The patient’s ferritin and triglyceride levels were 3429.0 μg/L (normal range: 13.0-150.0 μg/L) and 957 mg/dL (normal range: 10.0-150.0 mg/dL), respectively.