The subject of our study, a 56-year-old Caucasian Italian woman, presents with an occlusal open bite and a complete dental formula, with only the left superior second premolar missing, substituted by an implantoprosthetic rehabilitation . The patient, a medical doctor, has a normal blood pressure range, is not affected by any metabolic disease and is a non-cigarette smoker. For the evaluation of her occlusal muscle activity, a bilateral electromyography (EMG) of her masseter muscle was recorded using an evaluation system of mandibular movement (K6-I; Myotronics, Seattle, WA, USA) and Duo-trode surface Ag-AgCl electrodes (Duo-trode; interelectrode distance: 19.5mm, Myotronics). EMG data were recorded at a sampling rate of 240Hz and amplified at a time constant of 0.06 seconds. For the evaluation of her muscle activity, voluntary dental clenching was executed and recorded during swallowing. In accordance with the dental diagnostic protocol , a preliminary evaluation of the patient’s myoelectric activity in dental occlusion was performed through muscle EMG in order to assess their functional balance. Registered values showed a remarkable functional asymmetry of masseter muscles, 23mV for her left masseter and 103mV for her right masseter . According to the expressed electromyographic values, muscular activity was symmetrized by applying a 15 minutes transcutaneous stimulation of trigeminal motor branches at low frequency for elevator occlusal muscles and at medium frequency for submandibular antagonist muscles. This method allowed detection of the functional trajectory of occlusal elevator muscles and to record a symmetric craniomandibular relation, positioning a self-hardening material between the dental arches. The same material was used to make a cusp bite modeled on the inferior dental arch named orthotic-syntropic bite for its peculiar use of electrostimulation. When the orthotic was applied, electromyographic control was repeated to verify occlusal myoelectric balance. Registrations have documented substantially equal values: 57mV for left masseter muscle and 61mV for right masseter . Immediately after, the patient was submitted to pupillometric and hemodynamic examinations in habitual occlusion first and with the orthotic soon after.
For pupillary diameter measurement, we used a computerized corneal topographer MODI02 software 2005 LITE (CSO, Florence, Italy), made of a survey section by Placido disk 24 loops, camera sensor charge-coupled device (CCD) 1/3 inch and a claim support. The instrument presents, during the pupillar acquisition phases, a constant lighting of the disk and a 56mm distance of work. The points measured during data acquisition are 6.144, with a model elaboration higher than 100.000 points. Registered pupillometric analysis showed a remarkable right and left baseline asymmetry, respectively 4.98mm and 4.40mm , whereas in the occlusal rebalance condition an equivalent pupil diameter was registered, 4.13mm right pupil and 4.10mm left pupil . Indeed, pupillometric data analysis registered in occlusal rebalance shows a more suitable reduction of the basal diameter, with clear right side decrease, relating to higher occlusal myoelectric values.
For blood flow computerized examination, a GE HealthCare echograph, Voluson E8 Expert model, was used, with a 3D-4D-color-power Doppler volumetric probe. The duplex color scanner investigations were executed with an interval of 60 minutes, in habitual occlusion first, and with the orthotic after . The following evaluations were performed (see Table ).
systolic pulsatility and average flow velocity: (P.I. Index);
systolic and diastolic relationship-flow: (R.I. Index);
systolic peak in cm/second: (P.S. Index);
diastasis cordis in cm/second: (E.D. Index);
systole-diastole relationship: (S-D Index);
Carotid artery: C.a.;
Vertebral artery: V.a.
The registrations reveal that the patient’s left V.a. hemodynamic is more influenced by trigeminal proprioception. In fact, the orthotic application reduces on the left the S-D index of 70.94 and equilibrates the values of both vertebral arteries, 3.40 (left) and 3.21 (right), respectively. Whereas, in the ED index, diastolic flow increase of 12.06 cm/second of the left V.a. makes the values of both arteries equal, 12.70 (left) and 12.16 (right) respectively. Moreover, in the PI index it is possible to observe that the different average flow between the right (1.0) and left (2.88) vertebral arteries is totally cancelled in occlusal rebalance, with perfectly equal values (1.23). Also the PS Index confirms the previous results because a general reduction of hemodynamic values is registered both in carotid and vertebral arteries after orthotic application. In fact, the systolic hematic peak, expressed in cm/second, shows decreases of 2.05 on the right and of 7.69 on the left in the carotid arteries, while in vertebral arteries the decreases are of 7.42 on the right and of 4.37 on the left. The RI index does not seem to be influenced by occlusal proprioception.