A 53-year-old Nigerian male with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection treated with peginterferon alfa-2a and ribavirin, to which he showed a null response, presented to our hospital. Three months after the initial visit, multiple hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) were detected in segments 7 and 8 of the liver according to the Brisbane 2000 Nomenclature of Liver Anatomy and Resections , and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) was performed for each HCC. Seventeen months after RFA, a recurrence of HCC was detected in segment 4 (the medial section) by follow-up computed tomography (CT), and the patient was referred to our department.
Physical examination showed that the patient was an 87.9 kg, 168.5 cm male in good condition. The patient received medical treatment for diabetes mellitus and hypertension. He had neither a history of transfusion nor a history of SCT. The laboratory test results showed moderate liver damage, as shown in Table . Microscopic examination of peripheral blood erythrocytes did not show any morphological abnormalities.
Contrast-enhanced CT showed a 4.0 × 3.4 × 3.2 cm tumor in segment 4 adjacent to the left branch of the portal vein and the middle hepatic vein . An irregular liver surface; the hypertrophy of segments 1, 2 and 3; and splenomegaly all suggested the presence of cirrhosis. The normal liver parenchyma of the medial section accounted for 10% of the total liver volume according to CT volumetry.
With the diagnosis of solitary HCC in segment 4, left medial sectionectomy was conducted. Hepatic resection was performed with intraoperative ultrasonography (IOUS) guidance with Pringle’s maneuver (hepatic inflow occlusion time 15–30 min and reperfusion time 5 min; the total blood flow occlusion time was 165 min). Multiple IOUS examinations and inspections of the liver surface revealed no hepatic blood flow impairment during surgery . At the end of the operation, laboratory data showed no conspicuous abnormalities, with total bilirubin (T-Bil) 1.6 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 316 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 323 IU/L, hemoglobin (Hb) 11.6 g/dL, and prothrombin time (PT)% 52.5%. A drain was inserted along the resected plane of the liver. The operation time was 305 min, and the estimated blood loss was 714 mL. No blood transfusion was performed.
However, the laboratory tests on postoperative day (POD) 1 revealed severe liver damage and acidosis: T-Bil 2.8 mg/dL, AST 9250 IU/L, ALT 6120 IU/L, PT% 20.9%, blood pH 7.29, lactate 6.6 mmol/L, and base excess − 5.4 mmol/L. Figure shows the trends of postoperative laboratory data. The bedside US did not indicate an impairment of hepatic blood perfusion. The drain output was 460 mL/15 h, with serosanguineous appearance. Because his vital signs were stable and it was difficult to identify a cause of the acute severe liver damage, we selected conservative management while performing fresh frozen plasma transfusion. The values of AST and ALT declined gradually, but the level of T-Bil continued to increase, and renal and respiratory dysfunction emerged and subsequently deteriorated; therefore, we initiated continuous hemodiafiltration and plasma exchange under mechanical ventilation. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a slightly heterogeneous enhancement of the liver parenchyma without apparent major vessel occlusion on POD 13 , and diffuse cerebral infarction on POD 16 .
Although clinico-radiological examinations could not identify the cause of acute liver damage, the pathological examination of the resected specimen revealed that the intrahepatic peripheral blood vessels were occluded by sickled erythrocytes . Morphological abnormalities were not found by microscopic examination of the peripheral blood erythrocytes after surgery, but we requested an analysis of the patient’s hemoglobin by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with a suspicion of hemoglobinopathy. HPLC demonstrated an abnormal sharp peak indicating the presence of abnormal hemoglobin, which accounted for 34.4% of total hemoglobin . These findings strongly suggested the presence of HbS. Despite intensive treatments, he died of multiple organ failure on POD 20. Autopsy was rejected by his bereaved family for religious reasons.