A 67-year-old woman was referred to the hospital by the infectious disease specialist after failure of outpatient treatment of an infection of the surgical wound after an orthopedic surgery of the left shoulder performed 20 days earlier. She had a long-standing depressive disorder, which was controlled with escitalopram. The relevant previous surgery was a right nephrectomy performed 20 years ago for a calculous cholelithiasis. At admission, the serum creatinine level was 0.6 mg/dL.

As there was no improvement after initial treatment with teicoplanin for 5 days, or even after the addition of piperacillin with tazobactan, the surgical site was cleaned and material was sent for culture, with growth of Acinetobacter baumannii and multi-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Treatment with polymyxin B was initiated at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg/day. After 4 days of treatment, the patient began to report worsening anxiety, paresthesia of the upper limbs and insomnia. In the two days that followed, the case was joined by tremors of the extremities and dyspnoea. The psychiatric evaluation concluded that there was a possible worsening of the depressive disorder due to the length of the hospital stay. During the period of treatment with polymyxin, the patient's creatinine was measured a few times, increasing from 0.6 mg/dL to 1 mg/dL, and stabilising at this value during the treatment. After 15 days of use of polymyxin, the patient presented dyspnoea, difficulty in swallowing and muscular rigidity, associated with the change in renal function already described, and an evaluation by the nephrology team was requested. Polymyxin B was suspended at that time.

In the nephrology evaluation, in addition to the tests already available, calcium, albumin, magnesium, venous blood gases and urine I were requested. The total serum calcium level was 3.8 mg/dL (VR 8.8 to 10.3 mg/dL) and the albumin, 2.6 mg/dL (VR 3.5 to 5 mg/dL). The serum phosphorus concentration was normal (2.7 mg/dL; VR 2.5 to 4.8 mg/dL). The potassium level was 2.5 mEq/L (VR 3.5 to 5 mEq/L) and the magnesium 0.52 mg/dL (VR 1.7 to 2.5 mg/dL), characterizing severe hypocalcemia, hypokalaemia and hypomagnesemia. The venous blood gases presented the following values: pH: 7.44, pCO2: 40.1 mmHg, HCO3-: 26.6 mEq/L and H+: 36.3 nmol/L, pointing to the presence of mild metabolic alkalosis. The urine I did not evidence glycosuria or proteinuria and presented a urine density of 1015, pH 6.5, leukocytes 29,000, epithelial cells 23,000 and erythrocytes 7,000/mL.

Intravenous replacement of electrolytes was initiated, with significant improvement in the patient's symptomatology after 24 hours of therapy. During the nephrology follow-up, creatinine returned to the baseline value and the patient received daily replacements with 50% magnesium sulphate (5 grams a day); 10% calcium gluconate (1 gram, three times a day) and 19.1% potassium chloride (50 mEq a day).

On the 3rd day of electrolyte replacement, because there was no significant increase in serum concentrations, urine calcium, magnesium and potassium determinations were requested to calculate the excretion fractions (EF) of these elements.

In the case of magnesium, the serum level was multiplied by 0.7, as recommended. The calcium FE was presented only for the observation of its reduction with the time of treatment, since ionic calcium values (which is the fraction effectively filtered) should have been used, but, in the absence of these, total calcium values were used.

The patient was discharged two weeks after the end of the use of polymyxin B, cured of the surgical infection, with the renal function recovered to its baseline levels and with normalization of the serum levels of calcium, magnesium and potassium.
