A 36-year-old woman with no medical history was admitted to An-Najah National University Hospital in the West Bank, Palestine for fever and pancytopenia without a known source of infection. The lab findings indicated a neutrophil count of 300 cells per microliter and she received a diagnosis of non-M3 AML. On the eighth day of chemotherapy, she experienced neutropenic fever and received IV antibiotics following culture collection. One week later, her fever persisted and the antibiotics were switched to meropenem and vancomycin.

On the eighth day of neutropenic fever, a pan-computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bibasal pulmonary glass opacity, an enlarged spleen measuring 15 cm with several hypodense lesions. Because of inadequate vascular access, a catheter was placed in the right internal jugular vein. It was believed that this overall picture, combined with the positive galactomann test, indicated a widespread fungal infection, leading to the initiation of oral voriconazole. Severe thrombocytopenia prevented a biopsy from being performed, leading to an unclear diagnosis. Furthermore, there were no abnormalities detected during the ophthalmological examination and transthoracic echocardiogram.

On the ninth day of treatment, primary fungal growth was observed in the peripheral blood culture, leading to the initiation of a broader antifungal agent (IV caspofungin). Nonetheless, the final growth revealed growth of Saprochaete capitata; a fungi that exhibited varying appearances when grown on blood and chocolate agar, with dry white colonies on blood agar and cotton colonies with a frosted glass appearance on chocolate agar. Based on the susceptibility report, treatment started with amphotericin B (minimum inhibitory concentrations were: voriconazole < 2 mg/l, amphotericin B < 0.25 mg/l and caspofungin > 32 mg/l), leading to a decrease in inflammatory markers, fever frequency, and cell recovery count. Subsequent blood cultures revealed no signs of bacterial growth. A second bone marrow biopsy revealed no malignant cells, and she was prescribed voriconazole tablets for a six-week course upon leaving the hospital. She was admitted again for consolidation chemotherapy but experienced neutropenic fever. Even with antibiotics and voriconazole, her fever persisted, and the CT scan indicated the disappearance of the lung opacity, but revealed that the splenic hypodense lesions had grown in both size and number (4.5 × 5 cm, previously only subcentimeters). Furthermore, there were newly emerged small hypodense lesions in both kidneys, as well as numerous hypodense lesions in the liver. Amphotericin B IV was administered in combination with oral voriconazole, and a spleen biopsy guided by CT was conducted, however, the culture revealed no organism growth. Following a two-week course of dual antifungal treatment, her condition improved; however, she had to be readmitted due to the recurrence of fever. Despite receiving antifungals and steroids, no improvement was seen in her condition, with the spleen having the largest lesions. She had surgery involving resection of spleen removal, part of the stomach, and part of the pancreas due to extensive adhesions and to control source of infection. The histopathological analysis revealed fungal spores and septate hyphae branching at sharp angles, while the tissue culture did not indicate any growth. Voriconazole and amphotericin B were prescribed for another three weeks, and a CT scan showed marked improvement in the hypodense liver and kidney lesions.

