A 16-year-old male of East Asian descent arrived at night via air ambulance intubated and ventilated to our Heart Attack Centre with a history that during high-intensity interval training at the gym he suffered a cardiac arrest. On site, he received three shocks for ventricular fibrillation with a return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) after 17 min. An electrocardiogram (ECG) recorded 11 min after ROSC demonstrated marked anterolateral ST-segment elevation. An ECG recorded 116 min post-ROSC on arrival to our centre showed normalization of the ST segments . On examination, he was intubated and ventilated, invasive blood pressure was 105/75 mmHg, and his heart rate was 86 b.p.m. in sinus rhythm. His heart sounds were normal, and there were no murmurs. His chest was clear to auscultation. Bedside echocardiography demonstrated a structurally normal heart with preserved left ventricular (LV) systolic function and no regional wall motion abnormalities. Initial troponin T was 798 ng/L (0–14 ng/L) and peaked at 3073 ng/L 2 h later. His parents gave a past medical history of Kawasaki disease, but that he was not taking any medications.
In view of the patient's stable clinical status, the lack of persistent ST-segment elevation on the ECG, and normal echocardiogram, we did not perform emergent coronary angiography as we did not suspect an acute coronary artery occlusion. He received a 300 mg loading dose of aspirin, a 180 mg loading dose of ticagrelor and continued on 75 mg aspirin once daily, and ticagrelor 90 mg twice daily with lansoprazole 30 mg once daily. In addition to antiplatelet therapy, he received a single 2.5 mg dose of fondaparinux, bisoprolol 2.5 mg once daily, and atorvastatin 80 mg once daily. He was admitted to the adult cardiac intensive care unit where he remained stable. Coronary angiography was performed the following morning.
Kawasaki disease was diagnosed at the age of 3 months in his country of origin for which he received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy on day 21 of his illness. He was not treated with acetylsalicylic acid nor was he anticoagulated. Echocardiography 6 days after IVIG treatment showed an aneurysm in the left main coronary artery measuring 5.5 mm. He responded well to treatment and remained under follow-up for mild left main coronary artery dilatation.
Aged 7 years following routine surveillance echocardiography suggestive of left anterior descending artery (LAD) stenosis, he underwent invasive coronary angiography. This demonstrated a small aneurysm followed by an 80% calcific stenosis of the proximal LAD, and a chronic total occlusion (CTO) of the dominant right coronary artery (RCA). Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging showed reversible ischaemia in the inferior, inferolateral, and anterolateral walls.
In 2012 aged 8 years, he underwent elective intravascular ultrasound-guided rotablation-assisted percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) to the proximal LAD with a 3.0 mm × 18 mm Multi-Link Vision bare-metal stent (Abbott Vascular, Chicago, USA; ). This corrected the CMR perfusion abnormalities initially, but from 2015 he was lost to follow-up and was not taking any medications.
Coronary angiography during the current admission demonstrated an unobstructed left main stem; however, the previous LAD stent was occluded with the distal vessel filling retrogradely via septal and well-developed epicardial collaterals from the RCA. The left circumflex artery (LCx) was unobstructed . There was a CTO in the RCA, as before, in the mid vessel . The likeliest explanation for his presentation was the insufficient ability of the collateral circulation to meet the metabolic demand of the heart during exercise, resulting in ischaemia and ventricular fibrillation.
Computed tomography of the brain demonstrated no acute intracranial abnormality, and his neurological course was unremarkable.
Following a local Heart Team discussion, he was transferred to a different centre with expertise in both adult and paediatric cardiology and cardiac surgery. He underwent further imaging. Computed tomography established that the internal mammary arteries (IMAs) were free of disease. CMR demonstrated increased indexed LV end-diastolic volume (118 mL/m2) and normal LV wall thickness and normal indexed LV mass with preserved global LV systolic function and no regional wall motion abnormalities at rest. There was a limited infarct in the apical anterior wall and part of the apical septum . There was inducible ischaemia in 5/7 segments of the LAD territory and 4/5 segments of the RCA territory. All segments were viable.
At the Heart Team meeting, it was felt that either percutaneous or surgical revascularization were suitable strategies. Two days later, the case was discussed with international colleagues and a consensus reached to revascularize him surgically with the opinion being that this would provide him with a more durable result. This was particularly pertinent in his case given the RCA CTO and previously occluded stent. Following detailed discussion with the patient and his parents, he received a left IMA to the LAD and free right IMA to the posterior descending artery. His immediate post-operative course was uncomplicated. He was discharged home 7 days after surgery on aspirin 75 mg once daily, clopidogrel 75 mg once daily, ranitidine 300 mg once daily, bisoprolol 1.25 mg once daily, atorvastatin 80 mg once daily, and paracetamol as required.
He was last seen in clinic in December 2019. Symptomatically, he was well and had returned to the gym but was refraining from heavy weights given his sternotomy scar. Clinical examination revealed a well-healed wound, no murmurs and a clear chest. All medications were stopped except aspirin and atorvastatin. He underwent repeat CMR in January 2020, which showed no inducible myocardial ischaemia.