A 76-year-old male patient came to our hospital with complaints of pain, swelling, and difficulty in flexing and weight-bearing in the left knee. The patient had a history of fall from bike 15 days back and took treatment at the local hospital for the same in the form of above knee slab and was referred to our hospital. There was no history of any head, chest, and abdominal injury and the patient was not a known case of hypertension and diabetes. The patient had a history of coronary artery bypass graft surgery 6 years back and is on tablet Ecosprin since then. On local examination, tenderness was present over the lateral tibial condyle, skin condition was good, and range of motion was restricted. X-ray of the left knee was taken, which was suggestive of the left tibia lateral condyle split fracture (Schatzker type 1) with severe osteoarthritis of the left knee ( and ). The patient was managed initially with above knee slab and limb elevation. As the patient was having osteoarthritis with fracture, we planned for primary TKR with stemmed tibial component. Surgery was postponed for 15 days because of patient medical fitness issues.
After getting the fitness for surgery (40 days after the trauma), the patient was operated in supine position through medial parapatellar approach using tourniquet. After the femur preparation, tibial preparation was started with removal of fibrous tissue at the fracture site, anatomical reduction of fracture, and maintaining the reduction with reduction forceps till the completion of the tibial preparation to prevent the displacement of fracture fragment. Cemented TKR was done using Zimmer implant of femoral component size E, tibial component of size 4 with stem extension of 12 mm diameter × 155 mm length and articular surface height of 10 mm ( and ). As the fracture was properly reduced to anatomical position and there was only fracture split, no depression, the augmentation was not required. Wound was closed in layers and the patient was given long knee brace postoperatively. Partial weight-bearing and knee range of motion were started after 3 days and full weight-bearing was started after 3 weeks. Eight months post-operative X-rays ( and ) showed healing of lateral condyle fracture and without any loosening of implants. The patient is having good knee range of movements and no pain on weight-bearing at present ( and ).
At present 1.2 years follow-up, the patient is comfortable with no pain and difficulty in walking. Functional outcome is good as per Oxford knee score. Shorter follow-up period is the limitation of this case report.