34-year-old black woman, from Equatorial Guinea, with a history of antiphospholipid syndrome and 6 pregnancies (1 miscarriage treated with curettage; 4 ectopic pregnancies, 2 of which were treated with methotrexate and 2 with salpingectomy). In the last pregnancy, an emergency cesarean section was performed due to vaginal bleeding in a full-term twin pregnancy with total occlusive placenta in a third-level public hospital. During the cesarean section, the patient presented postpartum hemorrhage secondary to uterine atony that did not respond to the administration of uterotonics, so the B-Lynch technique was performed, which is the most common uterine compression technique in the center where she was treated. The patient required admission to the intensive care unit, transfusion of two concentrates of red blood cells and was discharged, along with the neonates, on the fifth day after the cesarean section.

On the eighth day of puerperium, the patient went to the emergency room of the University Hospital of Getafe in Madrid, Spain, a public hospital of second level, different from the center where she was treated for the cesarean section. She reported continuous abdominal pain, predominantly in the hypogastrium, and micturition clinical (dysuria, pollakiuria and urinary urgency), without dysthermic sensation or gastrointestinal clinical.

On examination, the patient had a temperature of 36.7°C, blood pressure of 127/71 mm/Hg, heart rate of 89 bpm and oxygen saturation of 99%; on abdominal palpation, she reported pain in the hypogastrium with no signs of peritoneal irritation and a well contracted uterus. The surgical wound looked good, the lochia was normal, the cervix was permeable and she had no pain on cervical mobilization or clinical signs of post-cesarean endometritis. No adnexal masses were palpated.

Urinalysis showed a white blood cell count of 500/uL, protein 100 mg/dL and 1774 white blood cells/field; in the blood count the white blood cells were 8960/uL, neutrophils 6320/uL, hemoglobin 9.4 g/dL, hematocrit 28.6%, platelets 390100/uL; in the biochemistry there was a C reactive protein of 40.3 mg/L. With these findings, the most probable diagnosis was a lower urinary tract infection, without ruling out other causes of abdominal pain, given the history of recent surgery. A transvaginal ultrasound showed an anteverted uterus with irregular endometrium of 2 mm with possible haematotic remains inside and with a heterogeneous formation at the level of the caesarean scar compatible with a haematoma of 66 x 18 x 81 mm. The ovaries were normal and there was no free abdominal-pelvic fluid.

With a diagnosis of lower urinary tract infection and a hematoma in the cesarean scar, admission of the patient for observation and treatment of the pain was decided. At 5 o'clock the analyses were repeated, which showed anaemia (haemoglobin 8.0 g/dL, haematocrit 24.1%). An abdominal ultrasound was performed, which showed a subjective increase in the size of the hematoma with respect to the previous ultrasound, so a revision in the operating theatre was decided.

An exploratory laparotomy (Pfannenstiel) was performed through the same incision of the cesarean scar. Necrosis of the hysterorrhaphy scar was observed, almost in its entirety, with dehiscence of the scar, mild lacerations in the serosa of the uterine body that coincided with the areas of compression of the suture and haematoma that extended to the vesical dome, so it was decided to perform a total hysterectomy. The ovaries were normal so they were preserved. Urology checked the integrity of the bladder by instilling methylene blue through the bladder catheter, although it was decided to keep the bladder catheter for a week with antibiotic prophylaxis.

Postoperative evolution was favorable and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day. She went to the gynecological emergency room for evaluation and removal of the bladder catheter on the seventh postoperative day. On the last follow-up visit, three months after surgery, the patient was well and was discharged.

The pathological anatomy report described extensive tissue necrosis at the level of the suture zone in the isthmus, with involvement of all uterine layers in a transmural manner, with multiple phenomena of thrombosis and vasculitis with fibrinoid necrosis.
