The patient was a 60-year-old male who regularly visited a general practitioner for type 2 diabetes, who performed routine examination to rule out malignant disease. As his serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) level was slightly elevated, abdominal CT was performed, which revealed a unilocular cystic mass of 8.0 cm in diameter, located in the lower right retroperitoneum. He was, therefore, referred to our hospital for surgical treatment.
The patient had no relevant family history or past history of malignant disease in the abdomen or retroperitoneum. He was asymptomatic and in good health, with the exception of severe obesity with a body mass index of 40. An abdominal examination revealed no tenderness or palpable mass. Laboratory findings showed a high hemoglobin A1c level (7%; normal range 0–6%). The increased serum CA 19-9 levels, which was 43.3 U/mL in the previous hospital, had normalized to 16.9 U/mL at the time of the examination at our hospital. Ultrasonography identified a uniform hypoechoic cystic mass without septum and calcification in the retroperitoneum adjacent to the end of the ileum and appendix, which indicated a hyperechoic region with a debris-like appearance and no obvious nodular lesions or blood flow in the cyst. On enhanced CT, the retroperitoneal cystic mass appeared to be close to the appendix on the ventral side and to the right gonadal vessel on the medial side . Non-enhanced CT was regularly performed by his general practitioner who was managing him or diabetes to rule out a pancreatic lesion, and we also observed the changes of this cystic lesion over the course of three and a half years . The first image showed that the lesion was a 5 cm cystic mass with a uniform high density, with a CT value of 101 Hounsfield Units (HU). The second image, obtained 3 years later, showed that the cystic lesion had grown to 8 cm and that the internal density had decreased, as CT value of 28 HU. Eventually, the cyst diameter increased further to reach 10 cm and the CT value decreased slightly to 20 HU. Based on these clinical findings and the location, retroperitoneal lymphangioma, dermoid cyst and mucinous cystadenoma of appendix were listed as differential diagnoses. After we informed the patient that it would be difficult to make an accurate diagnosis of the retroperitoneal lesion and that malignant transformation could not be denied as a reason for the enlargement, we planned surgical resection rather than careful follow-up.
Laparoscopic surgery was performed under general anesthesia. The operative procedure began with the insertion of a 1.2 cm umbilical port using Hasson’s technique. Four additional ports were then inserted under direct visualization . The large cystic mass was identified in the retroperitoneal space below the right kidney and firmly adhered to the appendix and mesentery via the retroperitoneum . Due to strong adhesion, the appendix was dissected with a linear stapler and resected en bloc with the cystic lesion . After the lesion was mobilized from the retroperitoneal connective tissue, some feeding vessels from the right gonadal vessel were clipped and cut . The lesion was not associated with the colonic wall or ureter and could be completely dissected without injury to the surrounding organs. The lesion was placed in an entrapment endobag and removed from the abdomen via the umbilical port site. The total operative time was 157 min, and the estimated blood loss was small. Postoperatively, the patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on postoperative day 4.
The resected specimens consisted of a unilocular cystic tumor of 10 cm in maximum diameter with a smooth inner surface and the appendix . The cystic lesion included a large amount of yellow, turbid serous fluid . Microscopically, hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated the smooth muscular layers in the cystic wall, which was consistent with the muscularis mucosae, submucosa and muscularis propria of the gastrointestinal tract without communication with the appendix . Desmin staining confirmed the intestinal wall structure of the muscularis mucosae and the muscularis propria, which are needed to make histological diagnosis of EDC . The lining epithelial cells were positive for Mucin 2, indicating an intestinal-type glandular mucosa . The final pathological diagnosis was IEDC in the retroperitoneal space. There was no histological evidence of malignancy.