A 48-year-old male reported pain in the lateral part of his left lower leg and ankle during a badminton play. He was injured when he attempted to receive a high serve. The shuttlecock came to his left, so he stepped his right foot to the left first and jump to hit it. However, he felt pain at the left lower extremity when his left foot landed on the ground and immediately lost the ability to continue the play. He denied a direct impact injury to the proximal end of the left leg and confirmed no history of trauma or surgical treatment on the lower extremity.
Physical examination revealed no obvious deformity and intact skin of the left leg with mild tenderness upon palpation of the lateral malleolus, as well as the proximal aspect of the fibula. Medial or posterior tenderness was not presented. The initial motions of the ankle joint were limited and there was no distal neurovascular deficit. There were no other skeletal injuries and the systemic examination was unremarkable.
Plain radiographs demonstrated a spinal fracture at the proximal fibula with no displacement of fragments. Evidence of a medial, lateral, or posterior malleolar fracture or other defects was not clear . Talar shift or widening of the ankle mortise was not noted.
Computed tomography (CT) images of the ankle showed an avulsion fracture of the anterior tibia by the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL) with a nondisplaced bony fragment . However, magnetic resonance images suggested no injury of the posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament, interosseous tibiofibular ligament, deltoid ligament, and both the medial and lateral malleoli .
Considering the ankle was stable, we decided to perform nonoperative management. The injury was treated with rest, ice, and elevation. Immobilization of the left lower leg was done with a short leg cast for 6 weeks. Six weeks later, the cast was removed. After that, gradual resumption of ankle range of motion, leg strengthening exercises, and regular activities began. The patient initially walked with hand support. Three months after the injury, the patient started to walk with full body weight. The patient presented free of pain, good ankle motion, and functional recovery during follow-ups at 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months after the injury. Plain radiographs showed successful recovery of the fracture at the proximal fibula . At the final follow-up, his American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society ankle-hindfoot (AOFAS) score was 100 out of 100 total points, and he returned to his regular sport, badminton.