A 25-year-old Caucasian female with a history of type 1 neurofibromatosis was brought to our hospital with diffuse abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and fever following cesarean section for fetal distress. She was transferred to our institution within 18 hours of the onset of symptoms for surgical intervention in view of the ominous findings on computed tomography (CT) scan and endoscopy done at the peripheral hospital. She had not passed flatus or stool since surgery and denied hemetemesis, melena, shortness of breath, or chest pain. There was no history of tobacco or alcohol abuse, ingestion of corrosive substances or non-steroidal anti inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Our patient appeared acutely ill and toxic. She had a temperature of 38.8°C, pulse of 120/min, blood pressure of 154/90 mmHg, respiratory rate of 24/min, and oxygen saturation of 97% on 2 L of oxygen. The cardiac and respiratory exams were otherwise unremarkable. Her abdomen was markedly distended. There was diffuse tenderness on palpation of the abdomen with no peritoneal signs. The cesarean section incision appeared clean with no tenderness or discharge. Bowel sounds were absent on auscultation. There were multiple neurofibromas on our patient's neck and anterior chest consistent with her diagnosis of neurofibromatosis. Her white blood cell count was 25,000/mm3, with 91% neutrophils. The initial electrolytes, amylase, lipase and liver function tests were within normal limits.
CT scan of our patient's abdomen showed marked gastric dilation and air in the wall of the stomach along the entire greater curvature and portal venous system . There was marked dilatation of the small and large bowel. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) of our patient showed areas of diffuse mucosal congestion and extreme pallor as well as ulceration on the posterior wall and greater curvature of the stomach. Gastric biopsy revealed transmural necrosis. Streptococcus viridans was isolated from gastric biopsy. Blood cultures did not grow any pathogenic bacteria and nasogastric cultures were not obtained.
Our patient was diagnosed with emphysematous gastritis and promptly started on intravenous clindamycin and piperacillin/tazobactam, nasogastric decompression and intravenous hydration. Total parenteral nutrition was initiated from day two and our patient was closely monitored in the intensive care unit for three days. She improved with the above measures and tube feedings were initiated from day seven. Follow-up CT scan on day eight showed resolution of the gastric and portal venous air . Our patient was finally discharged home on oral proton pump inhibitors on day 10. A follow-up EGD two months later showed no sequelae and our patient remained asymptomatic.