A 42-year-old woman with history of SLE on hydroxychloroquine, mycophenolate and prednisone, complicated by pancytopenia, presented with severe back pain 30 min after taking oral TMP-SMX 800-160 mg for paronychia. She was found to be febrile to 39.1 °C, hypotensive at 88/63 mmHg, and tachycardic at 107 BPM. Laboratory testing revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 8.63 × 103/uL (97.3% neutrophils, 0.1% eosinophils, 0.2% lymphocytes, with a baseline WBC of 2 × 103/uL), lactate 2.3 mmol/L and creatinine of 1.3 mg/dL (baseline 0.7 mg/dL) . HIV ELISA was negative but the CD4+ count was low at 64 cells/uL. Computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest showed no evidence of pulmonary embolus or infection and urinalysis was not suggestive of infection. Physical exam was significant for diffusely erythematous and warm skin without macules, papules, or urticaria. There were no other focal findings on physical exam. The patient was initially managed with aggressive 80 mL/kg intravenous (IV) fluid resuscitation, norepinephrine, broad-spectrum antibiotics (IV vancomycin and IV piperacillin-tazobactam), and stress dose steroids (hydrocortisone 50 mg IV every 6 h). Her hypotension resolved quickly over the first 36 h of admission. Over the following 3 days blood and urine cultures remained negative and steroids, vasopressors and antibiotics were discontinued without recurrence of hypotension. Additional infectious work up, including hepatitis B, hepatitis C and toxoplasma, were negative. The patient was discharged home on hospital day four with pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP) prophylaxis with atovaquone.
Ten months prior, the patient had a similar presentation several hours after taking her second dose of oral TMP-SMX 800-160 mg, which was prescribed for an abscess of the mons pubis. On presentation, she was hypotensive, tachycardic and febrile. Laboratory testing revealed a WBC of 10.9 × 103/uL (95.5% neutrophils, 0.6% lymphocytes and 0.5% eosinophils), acute kidney injury (creatinine 1.1 mg/dL) and lactate of 1.2 mmol/L. She was treated similarly for presumed septic shock. Work-up for infectious etiologies including blood and urine cultures, CT imaging of head, spine and abdomen as well as an echocardiogram was unrevealing. She was weaned off vasopressor support within 24 h. Her steroids and antibiotics were discontinued within 72 h with clinical improvement and she was discharged home with the diagnosis of septic shock with unknown etiology.