A 56-year-old Caucasian woman was referred for treatment of a local recurrence of endometrial cancer with infiltration of her sacral bone and nerve plexus. After initial diagnosis of endometrial cancer in 2005 (pT1B N0 MX G1 L0 V0), a Wertheim-Meigs operation was performed with subsequent radiotherapy with the initial result of complete tumor remission. In 2009 the patient presented with histologically confirmed pulmonary metastases. Under anti-hormonal therapy (medroxyprogesterone acetate), again complete remission was achieved. At the start of 2012, 7 years after the initial diagnosis, the patient was admitted to our hospital due to a presacral recurrence of the endometrial cancer with infiltration and widespread destruction of the os sacrum.
The patient complained of severe back pain and a marked pain spreading out to her right leg, suggestive of nerve infiltration. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed infiltration of the os sacrum and the sacral plexus. The tumor size was 11.9 × 11.6cm in axial section and 14.9cm in craniocaudal direction .
The patient’s case was discussed at the multidisciplinary tumor board for therapy options: due to the immediate proximity to the sacral plexus the patient could neither undergo surgical therapy nor a second radiation therapy because of the high risk of neural destruction potentially resulting in paralysis. Due to its ablation mechanism IRE was deemed to be the best therapy option for the patient as palliative disease control.
IRE uses a series of electrical pulses of microseconds to generate irreversible permeabilization of cell membranes and thereby induces cell death in the treated region. IRE seems to be highly effective in tissues with a high density of cell wall structures and less effective in tissues with a high concentration of collagenous and elastic fibers [,]. This – in contrast to thermal ablation techniques like radiofrequency ablation (RFA) or microwave ablation – potentially allows tumor cell ablation without concomitant destruction of connective tissue, blood vessels and nerves . Due to this potentially selective cell ablation technique, IRE was offered as a palliative therapy option because it provided the opportunity of tumor mass reduction and decrease of tumor burden with reduced risk of impairment of the sacral plexus and surrounding blood vessels. The procedure with risks and benefits was discussed with the patient and informed consent was obtained.
The patient was put under general anesthesia and neuromuscular blocking to prevent arrhythmia . The procedure was performed using a commercially available IRE system. Due to the large tumor volume (941cm3) a total of six needles were placed into the target area . The percutaneous placement of the electrodes was guided by computed tomography (CT) fluoroscopy as well as ultrasound using a multifrequency probe (1 to 5MHz). As recommended by the manufacturer and recorded by the IRE generator the following parameters were used: number of electrodes: six; type of electrodes: monopolar; distance of electrodes: 0.7cm (minimum), 1.2cm (maximum); impulses per electrode: 70; voltage: 1100V (minimum), 3000V (maximum). A stepwise ablation procedure with multiple replacements of the electrodes was performed, starting from a caudal position and moving to cranial. The first ablation procedure covered about 40% of the tumor mass and was stopped after 8 hours. Follow-up imaging showed good response to treatment in the caudal parts of the tumor with remaining viable tumor tissue in the cranial parts . The patient was scheduled for a second ablation procedure after 14 weeks to cover the formally not treated areas.
During the two IRE procedures the patient did not have any cardiovascular events, in particular no supraventricular tachycardia and no atrial fibrillation. Complications, especially postinterventional paralysis or bleeding, were not observed. After the first ablation procedure the patient did not complain about aggravated back pain; neither sensory deficit, nor loss of strength in her legs, nor paresthesia were observed. A neurological examination after the second ablation session revealed a mild 4+ paresis of the right extensor hallucis longus (L4 to S1) with complete resolution after 4 weeks. No sensory loss or impairment of bladder function occurred. After the second intervention opiate medication could be withdrawn. Using carbamazepine (200mg twice a day) and Polamidone (levomethadone) (5mg three times a day) pain control was achieved. The patient’s 24 hour follow-up imaging after the second ablation as well as follow-up imaging after 8 weeks (consisting of contrast-enhanced ultrasound, MRI and a CT scan) showed wide ablation of the tumor with necrosis of most portions of the tumor and reduction of tumor volume to 791cm3.