A 74-year-old indigenous Malaysian man, an ex-smoker of tobacco, with underlying severe aortic stenosis, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease presented to us with a 6-month history of lethargy, subjective loss of weight, loss of appetite, and night sweats associated with a sharp, persistent right-sided headache and left hip pain. He denied any pruritus. He denied chronic cough, and had no significant travel history or high risk behavior. He had no family history of malignancy. He had no baseline ultrasound of the genitourinary tract, having refused investigation of his chronic kidney disease previously.
Prior to this current admission, he had been admitted two times over the past 4 months for hyponatremia and normochromic normocytic anemia, with initial serum sodium measuring 120 mmol/L and 124 mmol/L, respectively. Peripheral blood film showed features suggestive of iron deficiency anemia; concurrent with a serum iron level of 9.7 umol/L with calculated transferrin saturation of 21.2%. Ferritin and B12 levels were normal while a fecal occult blood test was negative. On both occasions, he received intravenously administered saline and subsequently was discharged with orally administered sodium supplements. Tests for thyroid function and cortisol levels from a previous admission were normal.
On admission, he was afebrile with a blood pressure of 130/70 and pulse rate of 70. An examination revealed a mildly cachexic man with generalized disuse atrophy of all limbs. Functionally, he was unable to ambulate due to left hip pain. There was tenderness at his left hip with reduced passive and active movement due to pain, and a bony protuberance at the posterolateral aspect of the right side of his scalp. There were no neurological deficits, and respiratory and abdominal examinations were unremarkable.
On examination of the skin, there were diffuse brown well-circumscribed pigmented lesions of undetermined onset over his face and trunk suggestive of multiple seborrheic keratoses. The lesions over his posterior trunk were distributed in a symmetrical “Christmas-tree” pattern .
An electrolyte investigation showed low serum sodium of 119 mmol/L. All other electrolytes were within normal range, and there was no derangement of liver enzymes. A chest X-ray on admission showed bilateral multiple irregular nodules and prominent hilar opacities . In view of long-standing headache, we proceeded with non-contrasted computed tomography of his brain, which revealed a well-defined round hyperdense lesion at the right high frontal cortex measuring 0.7 × 0.7 cm, associated with perilesional edema . There was a lytic lesion at the right parietal bone with expansile soft tissue component . Resource limitations precluded a follow-on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Computed tomography of his thorax, abdomen, and pelvis revealed a heterogeneously enhancing soft tissue mass at the right kidney measuring 3.8 × 4.4 × 3.7 cm, with no evidence of obstruction or hydronephrosis . There was evidence of bilateral metastatic lung nodules, and multiple hilar and paratracheal nodes . There was no evidence of aortic aneurysm. There was also a 5 × 5cm lytic lesion at the left ilium, consistent with his left hip pain .
Further biochemical investigation showed increased urine osmolarity of 303 mOsmol/kg and urine sodium of 48 mmol/L; in view of prior normal thyroid function, cortisol level, and clinical euvolemia, we diagnosed him as having syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH). Fluid restriction was commenced and his sodium levels recovered to 131 mmol/L over 5 days. He was referred to the Dermatology team; in view of the findings of metastatic renal carcinoma, the skin lesions were attributed to Leser–Trélat syndrome.
Having been thoroughly counselled on his condition, he refused renal and skin biopsy and was not keen for further intervention. Despite the absence of a histopathological diagnosis, the constellation of clinical and radiological features was suggestive of a renal malignancy with metastasis, and he was referred to the Palliative Care team for further management.