Description and clinical diagnosis
A 78-year-old female with a history of a previous TKA presented to the emergency department following a motor vehicle accident. She complained of severe pain, swelling, and bruising in her lower leg. Physical examination revealed false motion of the affected lower leg and swollen soft tissue with multiple fracture blisters. The neurovascular examination was normal, and there was no evidence of impending compartment syndrome. Radiographs revealed a tibial shaft fracture with no evidence of loosening around the tibial prosthesis, consistent with AO/OTA classification 42B2 and Felix classification type IIIA. Three years ago, she underwent open reduction and internal fixation with dual plates to address an ipsilateral periprosthetic supracondylar femur fracture. Radiographs showed that fracture has completely healed. Furthermore, the patient was diagnosed with non-small cell lung cancer, specifically adenocarcinoma. There is no evidence of recurrence after surgical excision three years ago.

Decision making
Due to the patient's age and medical comorbidities, as well as the compromised soft tissue condition and poor bone quality, open reduction and internal fixation was considered high-risk due to potential secondary complications associated with prolonged bed rest and immobilization, as well as wound complications. Therefore, the surgical team chose to use an IMN without reaming to minimize soft tissue injury and promote fracture stability, as it is a load-sharing device.

Surgical technique
Under spinal anesthesia, the patient is positioned on a radiolucent standard table, and a small bump is placed under the ipsilateral hip. The fluoroscopy unit is placed on the contralateral side. The injured lower extremity is then draped in a sterile manner. A sterile radiolucent triangle is placed under the knee to assist maintain flexion of the knee joint. The tibial baseplate and the tibial tubercle are palpated and verified using fluoroscopy. A direct midline incision is made, extending from the inferior pole of the patella to the tibial tubercle. Careful dissection is performed to preserve the compromised soft tissues. The patellar tendon is sharply divided in line with the orientation of its fibers. A threaded guide wire is inserted at a point between the anterior edge of the tibial baseplate and the tibial tubercle to avoid the tibial baseplate and cement mantle. It advanced in line with the axis of the tibia as much as possible. A cannulated awl is gently used to open the canal following the guide wire. Then, a ball-tip guide is inserted and passed across the fracture site while maintaining adequate fracture reduction manually. A nail with a smaller diameter (12 mm in this case) than the preoperatively measured canal diameter is inserted manually with great care to avoid violation of the posterior cortex. Despite making every effort to perform the procedure delicately, an iatrogenic crack occurred in the proximal metaphysis of the tibia while manually oscillating the nail during its advancement. The nail was advanced into the distal segment of the fracture. Proximal and distal holes are secured with angular stable interlocking screws to reduce the risk of screw cutout, while ensuring proper reduction and implant positioning under fluoroscopy.

Postoperative course and follow-up
The patient was mobilized immediately and allowed to bear weight with walker support as tolerated for two weeks after the surgery until the soft tissue had completely healed. She subsequently gradually returned to her pre-injury ambulation status. Despite the initial challenge of poor soft tissue condition, the patient recovered without any soft tissue or wound complications. The postoperative hospital course was uneventful, with no medical complications. At the six-month follow-up, plain radiographs showed healing in three out of four cortices at the fracture site of the tibia and an iatrogenic crack in the proximal tibia. The patient had returned to her pre-injury ambulation status.