A 39-year-old female came to our clinic complaining of gradual loss of visual in the left eye for 5 months. She had been diagnosed with acute retinal necrosis in the right eye, and wide-field photograph of the right eye showed patchy and diffusive retinal necrotic lesions . Pars plana vitrectomy was performed due to retinal detachment of the right eye 5 months earlier. The visual acuity in the left eye at the time of initial presentation was 20/20. In the meantime, she noticed floaters in her left eye. Superior retinal necrosis had been detected and it was recorded in her previous medical chart. The aqueous fluid from the left eye was positive for herpes zoster virus (VZV). She received repeated (nine rounds) intravitreal ganciclovir injection (3 mg/0.1 ml) into her left eye, one injection every 2 weeks, and systemic antiviral therapy for 5 months. The patient noticed a decrease in the visual acuity of the left eye and was referred to our clinic.
When the patient came to our clinic, her best corrected visual acuity was 20/400 OS, 20/33 OS. The intraocular pressure was within the normal range in both eyes. There was no inflammation in the anterior chamber, and the lens was normal in the left eye. There was no posterior necrotizing involvement and no macular edema or exudation in the left eye. Indirect ophthalmoscope examination revealed pigmentary change in the superior peripheral retina of the left eye. Slight abnormality of the interdigitation zone in the fovea area of the left eye was detected on OCT. Angio-OCT revealed normal capillary density of superficial retinal capillary, deep retinal capillary, outer retina, and choriocapillaris layers in the left eye . The Humphrey visual field (central 24–2 threshold test) showed massive visual field damage in the left eye. The amplitude and implicit times of pattern visually evoked potential (VEP) and flash VEP were within the normal range in the left eye. The amplitudes of dark-adapted flash electroretinography (ERG) were slightly low in the left eye. Photopic single-flash response showed decreased amplitude of a-wave and b-wave in the left eye. The amplitudes of photopic 30-Hz flicker were decreased in the left eye. Trace arrays showed subnormal multifocal electroretinography (mERG) with decreased amplitudes for the left eye. The three-dimensional topography map showed a blunted foveal peak .