A 44-year-old male presented with chronic osteomyelitis of the right tibia. The patient presented to the orthopaedic clinic due to right leg pain and swelling, the inability to bear weight, and multiple attacks of subjective fever. The right leg pain suddenly progressed over the prior 3 mo, without a history of recent trauma. The pain increased at night and later became constant even during rest. The pain was located mainly on the proximal right tibia with radiation to the right knee and middle third of the right leg. The patient also experienced multiple attacks of fever and night sweats.
The patient had an open fracture 22 years ago with an infection and was diagnosed with chronic osteomyelitis with a discharging sinus. The sinus had closed, but the pain continued. He was treated with evacuation of the abscess and courses of antibiotics.
The patient had a history of hypertension.
No personal or family history relevant to the presentation. No history of allergy to medications was reported.
On inspection, there was swelling of the right leg and skin redness on the anterior aspect of the proximal third of the right leg. We observed a skin scar with thin scar tissue over the tibia directly. There was no underlying soft tissue on the anterior aspect of the proximal right tibia with massive swelling and tenderness around this area. The patient had an intact neurovascular examination.
Laboratory findings included slightly increased leukocytes (12.3 × 109/L; normal range: 4.5-11.0 × 109/L), haematocrit (40.2%; normal range: 41%-50%), platelets (522,000 mcL; normal range: 150,000 to 450,000 mcL), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (95 mm/h, normal range: < 20 mm/h), and high C-reactive protein (133 mg/L; normal range: 0-10 mg/L). The patient had a discharging sinus on the anterior proximal third of the right leg in the centre of the previous scar. Culture from the sinus grew Staphylococcus aureus.
Anteroposterior and lateral X-ray views showed multiple opacities, and magnetic resonance imaging showed a collection with high signal intensity in the proximal right tibia. The radiological studies revealed an intramedullary collection of the proximal right tibia with the impression of subacute osteomyelitis with multiple Brodie’s abscesses of the proximal right tibia .