An 18-year-old man was referred for painful bilateral testicular tumors confirmed with scrotal ultrasonography. MRI revealed a 2.5 cm tumor and a 3.0 cm tumor in the rete testis regions of the right and left testicles, respectively . CBC, LH (4.9 mIU/mL, normal 1.5–9.3 mIU/mL), FSH (5.1 mIU/mL, normal 1.6–8.0 mIU/mL), and total testosterone (398 ng/dL, normal 249–836 ng/dL) were normal. Tumor marker beta-HCG, AFP, and LDH were also normal. Both tumors subjectively progressed in size during the time between initial evaluation and surgery. Bilateral partial orchiectomies were attempted . The right was converted to a radical orchiectomy with prosthesis due to intraoperative concerns regarding testis viability. A partial orchiectomy was successfully completed on the left. Intraoperative frozen sections were not conclusive for germ cell, Leydig cell, or another histology. Pathologic evaluation of both tumors revealed the proliferation of tumor cells throughout the testicular parenchyma and rete testis, with nodules ranging from <1 to 10 mm, a low proliferation index (Ki67 positive in 1% of cells) and negative p53. No features of malignancy such as necrosis, mitotic figures, or pleomorphism were present . A presumptive diagnosis of Leydig cell tumors vs TARTs was suggested.
CT scans of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a soft tissue density measuring 2.1 × 1.7 cm in the left para-aortic region . Also noted were slightly enlarged inter-aortocaval nodes and a small left adrenal nodule. An image-guided biopsy of the para-aortic mass was nondiagnostic.
A postoperative endocrine evaluation revealed markedly elevated ACTH levels (4322 pg/mL) yet normal cortisol levels. The patient’s clinical and radiographic findings, testis pathology, and elevated ACTH level, all supported a diagnosis of NCAH and the presence of TARTs. The postoperative endocrine evaluation also revealed an LH level of 21.5 mIU/mL, FSH of 22.9 mIU/mL, and a low testosterone level (81 ng/dL). Borderline adrenal insufficiency and moderate hypogonadism were effectively managed with hydrocortisone and testosterone supplementation. Larger than average doses of hydrocortisone were necessary to maintain the ACTH at a desired level (under 100 pg/mL).
Follow-up scrotal U/S and CT scans 2 years post-surgery revealed a right testicular prosthesis, a partial left testicle containing no new masses, and a stable para-aortic soft tissue mass .