A 37-year-old male patient was admitted to a local general hospital in October 2019 due to persistent fatigue for 1 year and repeated syncope for 1 month. Physical examination showed marked atrophy of the muscles of the extremities. The electrocardiogram (ECG) captured ventricular tachycardia (VT) with heart rate (HR) of 145 bpm . The blood tests revealed creatine kinase (CK) 1067 U/L (reference range: 20–174 U/L) and creatine kinase isoenzyme (CK-MB) 112 U/L (reference range: 0–18 U/L) respectively. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging revealed that a possibility of atypical myocarditis. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed that the coronary and intracranial arteries were normal. Echocardiography demonstrated enlargement of left and right chambers (LVDD 57 mm) with a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF 42%). The above tests implied that the pathological VT was probably associated with neuromuscular or immune disease. Nonetheless, the patient rejected the further tests, and received implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) therapy. 5 mg of bisoprolol once daily was given for long-term use. The patient had a history of chronic hepatitis B and no other disease.
In November 2019, the patient was hospitalized in the department of neurology of our hospital for aggravating muscle atrophy. Electromyogram (EMG) showed active myogenic damage. Muscle biopsy of the right biceps brachii demonstrated sporadic necrotic fibers with regeneration, but without obvious inflammatory cell infiltration. Autoimmune antibodies were measured and positive for anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and AMA. The muscular dystrophy was considered and coenzyme Q10 was prescribed in addition to the previous medications.
In April 2020, the VT recurred and could terminate spontaneously . The patient was hospitalized again. He was administrated amiodarone (200 mg/day) and methylprednisolone (24 mg/day). The VT did not come out thereafter.
Unfortunately, the patient suffered from repeated sustained VT in May 2020 . According to ICD programming, since the day before admission, the patient had 43 VT, with a HR of 180 ± 5 bpm, and received 37 ATP treatments and 1 discharge treatment . Meanwhile, he had new onset of blurred vision and diplopia.
The vital signs: T: 36.2 °C , P: 70 beats/min, R: 18/min, BP: 97/60mmHg. The strength of proximal limb muscle was grade 3 out of 5, the distal limb muscle was grade 4 and the bilateral tendon reflex was active.
Laboratory tests showed Troponin T 0.098 ug/L (reference range: 0.020–0.130 ug/L), CK 163 U/L, CK-MB 17 U/L, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 178 pg/mL (reference range: <100 pg/mL), glutamic-pyruvic transaminase 51.2 U/L (reference range: 0–40 U/L). The renal function and coagulation function were nearly normal. ECG showed VT with HR of 166 bpm . Echocardiography revealed that LVEF decreased to 28% and LVDD increased to 64 mm, Regional wall motion abnormality (RWMA) was not detected .
Upon admission, esmolol, dexmedetomidine and amiodarone were administered to control the VT storm and under sedation. Besides, sacubitril/valsartan (50 mg/day), bisoprolol (7.5 mg/day), spironolactone (20 mg/day), and entecavir (0.5 mg/day) were also administered. However, these measurements did not work.
In order to identify the aetiology, the previous histologic slice was overdyed. The results showed some muscle fibers atrophy and a few denatured and necrotic muscle fibers . Combined with negative genetic testing results and immunohistochemical stain, muscular dystrophy and mitochondrial encephalomyopathy can be ruled out . According to the advice of the rheumatologist, the patient was diagnosed as AMA-positive idiopathic inflammatory myopathy (IIM). Furthermore, Immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy (IMNM) could be confirmed according to 2017 EULAR-ACR classification criteria . Therefore, all the aforementioned symptoms and clinical signs were associated with the myositis.
Thereafter, he received intravenous methylprednisolone 40–80 mg/day for 5 days, intravenous immunoglobulin 20 g/day for 5 days and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 0.75 g/day. Oral methylprednisolone was then started at a dose of 24 mg/day and the dose was subsequently reduced by 4 mg each week to 2 mg/day. The VT storm was controlled completely, and the echocardiography showed LVEF increased to 33% and LVDd decreased to 60 mm . After discharge, amiodarone was gradually discontinued, methylprednisolone was reduced to 2 mg/day, sacubitril/valsartan was increased to 75 mg/day, and the other drugs continued to use. During follow-up, the patient had no symptoms of heart failure, arrythmia, and diplopia. ICD programming showed the VT no longer recurred . Nine months after discharge, his last follow-up data showed remarkable recovery in LV systolic function (LVEF 52%) and normal CK level (38 U/L) .