A 75-year-old man presented with fever and right chest pain. The blood biochemical tests showed the following: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 251 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 469 IU/L; gamma-glutamyl transferase (γ-GTP), 125 IU/L; creatinine (Cre) 1.43 mg/dL; C-reactive protein (CRP) 3.04 mg/dL; squamous cell carcinoma-related antigen (SCC), 1.8 ng/mL; nerve specific enolase (NSE), 21.6 ng/mL; soluble interleukin-2 receptor (SIL-2R), 614 U/mL. Computed tomography (CT) showed a huge 10-cm mass under the right diaphragm . This well-circumscribed and smooth-marginated tumor showed minor enhancement in the lower density areas close to the fat and showed a gradual, heterogeneous mild enhancement of tumor and liver margins. The main feeder for the tumor is the right inferior phrenic artery, and this tumor was supposed to be a sarcomatoid malignancy originating from the diaphragm rather than a benign disease such as schwannoma on CT. No findings were suggesting obvious pulmonary invasion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated heterogeneous high signal intensity on T2-weighted images (T2WI) and diffusion-weighted images (DWI) . Contrast-enhanced MRI showed gradual heterogeneous enhancement similar to CT findings. Findings of extrahepatic development were also obtained, but the possibility of adhesion to the liver was suspected. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed abnormal uptake in the tumor with a maximal standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 4.6 . The uptake was not so high, and a myxoid type sarcoma, such as myxoid liposarcoma, or benign tumor was considered. Although a definitive diagnosis could not be achieved, we scheduled a diaphragmatic resection for suspicion of benign tumors of the diaphragm, such as mucous-type sarcoma or schwannoma. However, we performed extended right posterior segmentectomy with combined resection of the diaphragm, because separation of the tumor from the liver was not possible and the tumor was close to the posterior Glisson’s pedicles and segment 8 dorsal Glisson’s pedicles . The total operation time was 8 h 10 m, and the total blood loss was 1459 mL. Although the major diameter of the diaphragmatic defect was 12 cm, simple closure was possible . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 14 days after surgery. Pathological findings showed that the mass was located just below the hepatic capsule/intraparenchymal space and was adherent to the diaphragm, but there was no continuity with the diaphragm . Mitosis was unremarkable, about 0–1 cells/10 HPF. The morphology suggested low-grade mesenchymal tumors such as solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) and perivascular epithelioid cell tumor (PEComa) , but immunostaining was negative for these tumors, making the diagnosis difficult . We diagnosed the tumor as a spindle cell tumor with smooth muscle differentiation because of the positive results of myosin markers such as αSMA, desmin, and h-caldesmon, although some areas with high proliferative activity were observed. 1 year has passed since the surgery with no recurrence.