A 22-year-old Somali woman patient who had previously been in good condition came to the emergency department with a complaint of an acute visual loss for 1 week. The visual loss was more severe in the right eye, and there was a complete no light perception, while the left eye had a 70% light perception. There was also right eye relative afferent pupillary defect. Intraocular pressure measured on left was 11 mmHg and right was 14 mmHg. Anterior segment examination was normal and both optic discs were seen to be normal in the fundus examination. Extraocular muscles were also examined as normal.

Moreover, the patient reported joint discomfort, muscle weakness, and headaches along with weariness. She appeared sick upon examination, but her consciousness level was intact, she was cooperative. No other relevant positive findings were detected in her examination.

The patient's past medical history was uneventful, and she had no family history of autoimmune diseases. Her vital signs indicate a temperature level of 35°C, her blood pressure was 115/80, her pulse was 70 pbm, and her respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute. Brain MRI with contrast reported no brain parenchymal disease. Routine blood was normal except thyroid profile TSH was 115.6 mIU/L (range 0.35–5.1), T3 was 0.01 nmol/L (range 1.8–3.9), and T4 was 0.01 ng/dL (range 0.5–1.8). Further laboratory tests revealed a positive anti-tpo and anti- thyroglobulin tests, 74000 IU/mL (range 0–9) and 635.18 IU/mL (range 0–4), respectively. Thyroid ultrasound was reported enlarged thyroid gland with a hypoechoic, diffusely heterogeneous echotexture with no solid nodules or cystic features.

The patient was admitted to the neurology department under the diagnosis of retrobulbar neuritis optic neuritis possibly due to Hashimoto thyroiditis (Thyroid-associated optic neuropathy). A high-dose of corticosteroids (1 gram of methylprednisolone/day) was immediately started and with 100 mcg of levothyroxine treatment. The corticosteroid therapy was decreased after 3 days, and a 1mg/kg of daily dose of prednisolone was commenced. Subsequent to the corticosteroid treatment and thyroid replacement therapy, the visual field markedly recovered and the best corrected visual acuity were both measured at 0.5 (50%) in the right eye and 1 (100%) in the left eye.

These treatment regimens also diminished the general symptoms related to hypothyroidism and normalized TSH and free T4 levels after 2 months. No recurrence of optic neuritis occurred for follow-up after 3 months of treatment.