A 19-year-old girl was seen in the outpatient department with a diffuse, dull aching right heel pain that was the insidious onset and gradually progressive in nature. There was no history of any injury or surgery. The right heel pain was associated with a limp and did not respond to analgesics. There was no diurnal variation of pain. She had been experiencing difficulty in walking and carrying out daily activities for the past 6 months due to this heel pain. A local examination revealed mild swelling but no overt inflammatory signs, such as erythema or the local rise of temperature, and there was no tenderness. Considering her age of presentation, the character of pain, and no signs of inflammation or infections, further investigations were undertaken.
A plain X-ray of the foot showed an ill-defined sclerotic area in the calcaneum with radiating spicules, thinned overlying cortex, and soft-tissue edema over the heel . Contrastenhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left ankle confirmed the sclerotic lesion in the calcaneum with extraosseous component and enhancement with contrast. Alkaline phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase were within the normal range and renal functions were also normal. An ultrasound-guided tru-cut biopsy was undertaken from the lesion, which on microscopy showed abundant osteoid matrix interspersed by pleomorphic cells with elongated oval to spindle hyperchromatic nuclei with increased areas of fibrous tissue, which was the hallmark of osteogenic sarcoma . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography scans (FDG PET-CT) showed no distant metastasis.
Treatment: The patient was given 3 cycles of chemotherapy (cisplatin+adriamycin) at 3-week intervals. After the chemotherapy, a repeat contrast MRI and FDG-PET-CT were undertaken to determine the size and extent of the disease and micrometastasis, which revealed a decrease in the standardized uptake values in the primary lesion and also the extent of the disease.
A limb salvage surgery was undertaken, which involved a posteromedial incision extending 5 cm from above the ankle to the base of first metatarsal along the watershed line . The biopsy scar was excised, and the neurovascular bundle was isolated and separated. The flexor retinaculum was released, and the lateral plantar vessels had to be sacrificed because of their adherence to the tumor. The medial plantar vessels and nerves were isolated and separated . The capsule was incised all around the subtalar joint and removed from the navicular and cuneiform bone. The tendon Achilles was resected 1 169 cm from its insertion, and the plantar fascia was resected 1 cm from its margins. After thorough dissection, a wide en bloc resection of the calcaneum was taken . The procedure was uneventful. The sample was sent for histopathology, which confirmed osteosarcoma.
After the surgery, a below-knee splint was applied for 3 months,and the patient was advised non-weight-bearing ambulation. Sutures were removed at 2 weeks, and then three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy were given. At 3 months of follow-up, partial weight bearing was allowed with elbow crutches and an ankle-foot orthosis. The patient was followed up every 6 weeks. At a 1-year follow-up, a customized silicon heel cup and shoes were given for full weight-bearing ambulation. At the end of 1 year, a PET-CT revealed no evidence of metabolically active disease.