We present the case of a 10-year-old girl whose left arm was injured by a fall from a height of approximately 1.5 m. The patient was transported to a nearby hospital on the same day and referred for treatment on the second day after the injury. X-rays revealed a modified Gartland type 2B supracondylar humerus fracture, a Bado type I Monteggia fracture–dislocation, and a Salter–Harris type II distal radius physeal fracture with volar displacement in the ipsilateral upper extremity. No neurovascular symptoms or open wounds were noted. Surgical treatment was performed on the third day after the injury. Surgery was performed with the patient in the supine position. Reduction and fixation of the distal radius physeal fracture were performed to restore radial length prior to reduction of the humeroradial joint. The distal radius physeal fracture was reduced and fixed using steel wire-connected pins (JuNction, Arata, Japan) through closed reduction and percutaneous pinning. Next, manual reduction of the humeroradial joint was performed; however, it was difficult to achieve the reduction position. It was considered that the inability to achieve reduction was the interposition of soft tissue within the humeroradial joint. The supracondylar humerus fracture showed no progression of dislocation during the reduction maneuver; therefore, open reduction of the humeroradial joint was performed. The tourniquet was inflated to 200 mmHg and used for 60 min. An open reduction of the radial head was performed through a posterior approach. With the posterior approach, triceps splitting is performed proximal to the olecranon, and as per the Boyd approach, the humeroradial joint was exposed by detaching the anconeus muscle from the radial side of the ulna distal to the olecranon. The annular ligament was incarcerated within the humeroradial joint, preventing reduction. A partial longitudinal incision was made through the annular ligament, allowing for easy reduction of the radial head. The absence of instability in the forearm during pronation and supination was confirmed following the reduction of the humeroradial joint. Reduction of the humeroradial joint resulted in an appropriate reduction position for the ulnar diaphyseal fracture. The ulnar diaphysis fracture was fixed with a titanium elastic nail (TEN) to prevent displacement. Steel wire-connected pins were used to fix a supracondylar humerus fracture. The postoperative X-rays showed a good reduction position. Postoperatively, a long arm splint was applied to the forearm in a supinated position, and no postoperative drainage was performed. At 5 weeks postoperatively, as callus formation was favorable, the steel wire-connected pins for the supracondylar humerus and distal radius physeal fractures, along with the splint fixation, was removed, and range of motion training for the elbow and wrist joints was initiated. At approximately 3 months postoperatively, bone union was confirmed on X-rays. Approximately 6 months postoperatively, the ulnar TEN was removed. Intraoperatively, Fluoroscopic imaging under general anesthesia was used to evaluate the instability of the humeroradial joint. No instability was noted in the humeroradial joint during forearm pronation.

Approximately 1 year after surgery, the elbow joint range of motion was 10° extension, 150° flexion, 90° pronation, and 90° supination, with no range of motion limitation. X-rays showed that bone union had been achieved at each fracture site with good alignment. The patient was unaware of any symptoms in her daily life, and her Mayo Elbow Performance score was 100.

