9-year-old female patient was admitted to the emergency department (ED) with respiratory distress. She had a history of six months of less severe dyspnea and symmetrical polyarthritis of large and small joints (proximal interphalangeal, 2nd and 3rd metatarsophalangeal joints, wrists, elbows, ankles, and knees), with functional limitations and intermittent fever (38-39°C), associated with malar rash aggravated by sun exposure, alopecia, petechiae on trunk and neck, generalized lymphadenopathy, and unmeasured weight loss. Therefore, she was started on 6.5 mg/kg/day hydroxychloroquine and 100 mg/kg/day cefepime (maintained for 10 days). Pulse therapy with methylprednisolone was not initiated at this time due to the possibility of infection.

Laboratory tests, imaging studies, and a myelogram were then performed. A chest ultrasound was performed in the emergency room, revealing a left pleural effusion of 0.7 cm. This was complemented by a chest radiograph that showed a lingual atelectasis. The myelogram results revealed a hypocellular marrow with <1% blasts, mild granulocytopenia, and erythropoenia. The patient met the 2012 Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC) criteria for SLE (presence of acute cutaneous lupus, alopecia, arthritis, serositis, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-DNA, and antiphospholipid antibodies). Thus, prednisone 1 mg/kg and azathioprine 2 mg/kg were added to the prescription after these results.

Three days after admission, the patient developed a significant worsening of the general condition, worsening of dyspnoea, muffled heart sounds, jugular vein distension, haemodynamic instability and intense pallor. An echocardiogram was performed, which showed a large pericardial effusion with diastolic collapse of the right atrium. The patient received a transfusion and underwent a pericardiocentesis followed by pleuropericardial seal drainage. Due to the obstruction of the drain, a new approach was adopted the next day, without major complications. A new echocardiogram was performed two days later, showing moderate left ventricular systolic dysfunction, an ejection fraction of 60% and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The therapies with furosemide 2 mg/day and spironolactone 2 mg/day were then initiated. Intravenous immunoglobulin (1 g/kg/day) was administered in two subsequent days due to persistent autoimmune bicytopenia. The echocardiogram two weeks later showed no pathological signs.

Antigenemia for CMV was requested after a positive serological result with titers of 15/200,000 cells. Therapy with ganciclovir 5 mg/kg/day was initiated. After ten days of treatment, the antigenemia persisted (28/200,000 cells), and the dose of ganciclovir was, therefore, doubled. After eight days, another antigenemia presented titers of 1/200,000 cells. The patient maintained treatment with ganciclovir 10 mg/kg/day for two more weeks, with good clinical and laboratory improvement and was discharged with oral valganciclovir 20 mg/kg/day.
