We present a case of a 13-year-old boy, admitted to hospital for planned neurosurgical procedure of clipping aneurysm of left middle cerebral artery (arteria cerebri media [ACM]). He was previously hospitalized for urgent embolization and reembolization of ruptured right ACM (5/2017 and 6/2017). During reembolization, he developed allergic reaction with severe rash after induction of anesthesia. For that reason, clinical allergological testing on different anesthetic drugs was done. After clinical testing, the patient was proved allergic to midazolam, propofol, fentanyl, sufentanil, sevofluran, thiopental, rocuronium, and vecuronium.
Before new planned aneurysmal clipping, he was prepared with metilprednisolon, antihistaminic, and ranitidine. Preoperative morning cortisol levels were slight higher (742 nmol/L) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was lower than range (<0.2 pmol/L).
Because of patient's allergy to different drugs used for induction and maintenance of general anesthesia, and due to high demands for hemodynamic stability for aneurysmal clipping, anesthesia was performed with continuous infusion of etomidate and remifentanil, with scalp block and without use of neuromuscular blocking agents. We had previous good experience with continuous etomidate infusion for total intravenous infusion (total intravenous anesthesia [TIVA]) in neurosurgical patients; so, we decided to use etomidate in this case also.
Our protocol for anesthesia maintenance with etomidate infusion is dose of 100 mcg/kg/min for the first 5 min after anesthesia induction, followed by 60 mcg/kg/min for the next 25 min and then 10 mcg/kg/min until the end of the surgery. The protocol is based on recommendations from other research, and our clinical experience.
Enhanced anesthetic monitoring was used, with invasive blood pressure and entropy of encephalogram (Datex-Ohmeda S/5 Entropy Module), and the doses of etomidate used in this case enable isoelectric EEG for the time of clipping the aneurysm or burst suppression ratio greater than 70%. The surgery lasted for 4 h. There were no complications, hemodynamic, or any other sequellae during surgical procedure, and afterward, he was placed in neurosurgical intensive care unit (ICU) analgosedated and mechanically ventilated. The patient was awake and extubated 1 h after admittance to ICU and Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) was 15.
Levels of cortisol and ACTH were measured during next three consecutive days. Only one measured cortisol value, in the morning the day after the surgery, was below reference range, and the values were back to normal until that evening .
The explanation is more difficult due to the fact that the patient was prepared for the surgery with metilprednisolon because of his allergies which may diminish influence of perioperative stress on cortisol synthesis. ACTH returned to normal after the second day. He was dismissed from ICU on the second day with GCS 15.