A 75-year-old man with acute cholecystitis was scheduled to undergo a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. He had a history of emphysema and spontaneous pneumothorax with no limitations in his daily activities. Preoperative respiratory function tests indicated mild obstructive disorder. Preoperative chest radiography indicated a giant bulla occupying the lower half of the right hemithorax . Computed tomography (CT) of the chest indicated that the giant bulla compressed the middle and lower lobes of the right lung, leading to atelectasis. Conversely, the upper lobe had good air content . To prevent rupture of the giant bulla and tension pneumothorax during laparoscopic cholecystectomy, we planned to manage the patient under general anesthesia with OLV. Anesthesia was induced with propofol 80 mg, fentanyl 100 mcg, rocuronium 60mg, and maintained with 4–5% desflurane and remifentanil 0.13–0.18 mcg/kg/min. After two to three times of manual ventilation via a facemask, the patient’s trachea was intubated with a 37-Fr left DLT. OLV was started immediately after intubation and continued throughout the surgery, with the right-sided lumen open to ambient air. The surgery was completed uneventfully in 125 min; peripheral oxygen saturation was 98–99% throughout the surgery. Chest radiography before extubation indicated a large lucency occupying the entire right hemithorax . Initially, we suspected a pneumothorax due to rupture of the giant bulla; however, chest tube insertion was withheld because his hemodynamics and respiratory status were stable. Instead, we continued the OLV and obtained a chest CT scan to determine whether any conditions other than pneumothorax were present. Chest CT indicated compression atelectasis of the entire right lung, including the upper lobe wrapped around the giant bulla. A small amount of pleural fluid did not form a liquid surface. Instead, it was compressed by a giant bulla to form a concave surface. These findings led us to diagnose hyperinflation of the giant bulla rather than a pneumothorax. Returning to the operating room, an attempt was made to relieve atelectasis using a recruitment maneuver with moderate pressure. However, follow-up radiography indicated that the right lung had not expanded. We decided to observe the hyperinflated giant bulla conservatively under spontaneous breathing and extubated the patient after emergence from general anesthesia. After extubation, the patient’s respiratory status was normal with no evident abnormalities. The hyperinflated giant bulla deflated and the right upper lobe gradually expanded under spontaneous breathing. The chest radiograph on postoperative day three was similar to the preoperative radiograph. The patient was discharged on postoperative day seven.