A 12-year-old female patient presented to us with the complaint of pain, swelling and purulent discharge from her left heel. She had a history of similar episodes in the near past, for which she underwent incision and drainage elsewhere. She had a swollen red heel with a linear scar on its lateral aspect with pus discharge from the site on examination. Her blood parameters like WBC, ESR and CRP were elevated. A radiograph of the region revealed calcaneal bone destruction and surrounding osteopenia . Sinogram tracks the sinus, which was arising from the body of the calcaneum. Magnetic resonance imaging was suggestive of osteomyelitis of the body of calcaneum . A culture study of the swab, taken from a deeper aspect of the wound, showed the growth of methicillin-resistant S. aureus bacteria. After diagnosing chronic osteomyelitis of calcaneum was confirmed, the patient was planned for a single-stage operative procedure under systemic antibiotic coverage.
The calcaneum was approached laterally with an L shaped incision. Thorough debridement was done; the infected bone was curetted out and sent for culture examination . We use 10cc of calcium sulphate (STIMULAN®, Biocomposites) as bone defect filler, and for local antibiotic delivery, stimulan® paste was mixed with 1g of vancomycin moulded into multiple pellets through a sterile cast. The bone defect was filled with these pellets , and the wound was primarily closed, and the limb was supported by below-knee posterior POP (Plaster of Paris) slab. Postoperatively, on day 2, the wound was okay, and there was no discharge, and the radiograph showed the excellent placement of stimulan® . Intravenous antibiotics were continued for 1 week postoperatively. The patient was discharged with slab support and on oral antibiotics and calcium supplements. Post-operatively, after 2 weeks, the wound was healthy, and all sutures were removed.
The patient was followed up after 1 month, 3 months and 6 months. After 1-month oral antibiotics were discontinued, and she was allowed to do walker assisted partial weight-bearing. Clinically and through radiographs , she showed no signs of recurrence of infection and was utterly allowed to weight bear after 3rd month follow-up. Further, follow-up visits were uneventful.