A 37-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital in 2010 with complaints of headache, amenorrhea and acromegalic features. Her headache and amenorrhea had begun about one year ago. Past medical history was not significant and she had no prior history of diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, cardiac or pulmonary problems.
Physical examination has revealed typical acromegalic features in her face and extremities. Her vital signs were in normal ranges and neurologic examination showed intact function of cranial nerves.
Laboratory studies showed normal white blood cells, serum blood glucose and renal and liver function tests. Serum endocrinological testing revealed markedly elevated levels of IGF-1 and low levels of Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) and Luteinizing Hormone (LH). Other endocrinological tests were within normal limits. On Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT), the serum Growth Hormone (GH) level has not suppressed in response to induced hyperglycemia.
Skull X-ray examination demonstrated a slightly enlarged sella turcica. Computerized tomography revealed a pituitary mass without extra-sellar extension. Following clinical diagnosis, the tumor was completely excised via trans-nasal endoscopic approach. No residual tumor was found on post-operative MRI images. Histologically, the tumor was diagnosed as a pituitary adenoma with GH positive cells. The serum IGF1 levels gradually decreased to the normal range during the first year after surgery. The patient was symptom free for three and a half years when she returned with complaint of visual impairment. Perimetry test revealed visual field defect of bitemporal hemianopia.
On her brain MRI, there was a mass in the sellar and supra-sellar region. In the sellar part, tumor extended to the right cavernous sinus (Knosp grade III) and also a supra-sellar extention to third ventricle floor and anteriorly to sub-frontal area was obvious. On coronal images with contrast injection, there was a slight peri-tumoral edema and the border of tumor adjunctive to brain paranchyma showed fair enhancement . On coronal view, there was very interesting radiologic appearance. Supra-sellar mass had grown independently into the remaining sellar part .
Endocrinological studies revealed markedly elevated basal level of serum growth hormone. No autoimmune disease was found clinically or by serologic studies.
Following local recurrence had been evident, surgical operation was performed via trans-nasal endoscopic approach. Dural adhesions from previous surgery were exposed. The tumor was removed by suction and curettage. After complete removal, operation cavity was checked by angled lenses. Vascular and neural structures were completely preserved.
Surgical specimen fixation was done with 10% formalin and paraffin embedding and H&E staining was performed for histological examination. Immunohistochemistry with peroxidase method using antibodies against Prolactin, GH, LH, FSH, Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH), Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH), P53, Ki67, Cluster of Differentiation 3 (CD3) and Cluster of Differentiation 20 (CD20) antigens was also performed. Histopathological examination of the surgical specimens revealed sheets and clusters of monomorphic cells with round to oval nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasms invading brain tissue in irregular fashion. There was scattered dense intra-tumoral lymphoid follicle formation more prominent upon invasive parts. Some lymphoid follicles had germinal centers, too . An immunoperoxidase panel for anterior pituitary hormones showed sparsely granular immunoreactivity for GH and negative results for other pituitary hormones. CD3 and CD20 immunostaining was positive in 40% and 60% of infiltrating lymphoid cells, respectively. Additional staining for P53 was negative and Ki67 index was negligible (positive in < 0.8% of tumor cells).