This study involved a 62-year-old male who had undergone scleral buckling surgery 40 or more years ago for rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, as well as trabeculectomy 20 years ago for primary open-angle glaucoma in his left eye at another hospital. He presented to our hospital complaining of blurred vision in that eye. The patient reported that although the previous retinal reattachment surgery had resulted in a favorable outcome, he had experienced persistent conjunctival hyperemia, conjunctival edema, and low levels of ptosis during the subsequent recovery period. He reported that he had recently become aware of blurred vision in his left eye and subsequently consulted a local doctor. Upon examination at that facility, iritis and proliferating changes in the fundus had been identified in that eye, and he had been referred to our hospital.
Upon examination, his visual acuity was 1.0 × S-3.5D C-1.5D A × 30° OD and 0.5p × S + 2.0D C-2.25D A × 160° OS, and his intraocular pressure was 20 mm Hg OD and 11 mm Hg OS. Iritis was observed in the anterior chamber of the left eye, as well as a great number of pigment cell keratoprecipitates on the posterior surface of the cornea . Minor cataracts were observed beneath the posterior capsule, and mydriasis was somewhat poor. In the ocular fundus of the left eye, extensive atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium and partial hyperpigmentation were observed, accompanied by subretinal strands, yet the retina remained reattached. Around the entire peripheral area of the retina we observed a high, ring-shaped protrusion, but we also saw a shiny, filamentous material in the vitreous cavity that penetrated the sclera and choroid, completely extending from the 4- to 8-o'clock position of the protrusion . During a B-mode ultrasound scan, we observed a high-luminance image on the edge of the buckle protrusion with an acoustic shadow . We also observed slight opacity and inflammatory cells in the vitreous cavity. Thus, we diagnosed this patient as a case of intraocular erosion and intrusion by an Arruga suture, and for the iritis in the left eye we began to administrate low-concentration steroid eye drops, after which the inflammation disappeared. A previous doctor had performed a trabeculectomy on the left eye 20 years previously to treat primary open-angle glaucoma, and we recognized a filtration bleb in the upper part of the corneal limbus, but we saw no particular abnormalities in the middle optic media or fundus in the right eye.