A 49-year-old woman who had developed end-stage renal disease as a result of diabetes and had been on maintenance CAPD (continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis) for 22 months underwent live-unrelated kidney transplantation in April 2006. Her clinical course was uneventful for the first six months after transplantation and she did not have any rejection episodes. She was maintained on cyclosporine (4 mg/kg/day), mycophenolate mofetil (2 g/day) and prednisolone (5 mg/day). Five months after transplantation, she presented with cellulitis of the right leg following minor trauma and was treated with intravenous cefazolin (4 g/day) and ceftriaxone (2 g/day). The signs and symptoms of cellulitis improved but 3 weeks later, multiple painful erythematous firm nodules of diameter 2 to 7 cm appeared on the anterior and posterior aspects of her right leg and the lower part of her right thigh, and some of the nodules became ulcerated [Additional file ]. The patient was febrile (39°C), her blood pressure was 130/90 mmHg, and her pulse rate was regular at 80/min. There was no evidence of edema or lymphadenopathy, and her systemic examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory tests showed her hemoglobin was 8.6 g/dL, her total white cell count was 100,000/mm3, and her ESR was 125 mm for the first hour. Serum biochemistry showed her creatinine was 1.1 mg/dL, her fasting blood sugar was 191 mg/dL, her uric acid was 2.6 mg/dL and her lactate dehydrogenase was 625 IU/L. She was negative for cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgM, but positive for CMV IgG, which had also been positive prior to pretransplantation. Her chest X-ray was unremarkable. Right leg MRI showed severe thickening of the superficial soft tissue and skin, but no evidence of deep soft tissue or muscular structure involvement. Histological examination of deep incisional biopsies of some of the nodules revealed lobular panniculitis with infiltrating lymphocytes, neutrophils, multinucleated giant cells, foamy macrophages, fat necrosis and granulation tissue [Additional file ]. Hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) and periodic acid schiff (PAS) staining showed numerous broad, aseptate and irregularly branched fungal hyphae indicative of mucormycosis deposited within the hypoderm and vessel wall [Additional file ]. Specimen culture was negative for zygomycetes.
Since a fungal etiology of the skin lesion was established, the involved tissues were surgically resected, followed by intravenous treatment with amphotericin B (1 mg/kg/day). After 7 days of antifungal therapy, the patient's serum creatinine concentration had increased to 2.5 mg/dL; hence we had to decrease the dose of amphotericin B to 0.5 mg/kg/daily, and continue treatment until she had received a total cumulative dose of 1200 mg amphotericin B over 6 weeks. Mycophenolate mofetil was discontinued during anti-fungal therapy. The skin lesions showed a dramatic response to therapy, with only hyperpigmentation remaining in the involved areas of the skin. Following cessation of amphotericin B, her serum creatinine concentration decreased to 1.1 mg/dL and remained stable.