A 25-year-old African American female presented to the Emergency Department (ED) complaining of diffuse abdominal pain, non-bloody diarrhea, nausea, and non-bloody emesis.
The patient’s symptoms started the day prior to arrival to the ED. She described the abdominal pain as sudden onset, sharp and stabbing in quality, 10 out of 10 in intensity, and located in the suprapubic region with radiation to the right and left flanks. She denied any rash (including malar erythema), aphthous ulcers, hematuria, pleuritic chest pain, shortness of breath, or fever. Of note, several months prior, the patient had developed left eyelid swelling non-specific arthralgias (without swelling) of her wrists, fingers, and ankles. Her workup, including autoimmune laboratory tests, was inconclusive at the time. No diagnosis was made. Her arthralgias resolved spontaneously after a few days. She denied any arthralgias at the time of examination. The rest of her review of systems was non-contributory.
Her past medical history was significant for seasonal allergies. Her family history was significant for discoid lupus in her father, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in one of her paternal cousins, and SLE in another paternal cousin.
On presentation, the patient’s vital signs were normal: 36.7 °C, heart rate of 92 bpm, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. Her abdominal exam revealed normal bowel sounds, mild abdominal distention but no lesions, scars, or hernias. There was significant lower abdominal tenderness without guarding or rigidity.
Initial laboratory testing included a complete blood count (CBC) and comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) . The patient had leukopenia with a WBC count of 3.25 k/uL, lymphopenia with an absolute lymphocyte count of 740, and anemia with a hemoglobin level of 11.7 g/dL. The CMP revealed a low albumin of 3.1 but was otherwise normal.
A contrast computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis done in the emergency room revealed marked circumferential wall thickening and edema of the proximal and mid small bowel loops predominantly involving the submucosa .
At this point, the main differential diagnoses were intestinal angioedema and mesenteric vein thrombosis given the radiographic findings. However, the mesenteric vessels were patent, and there was no evidence of thrombosis. Laboratory testing for hereditary angioedema showed a normal C1 Esterase inhibitor level, low C3 (48 mg/dL), and low C4 (4 mg/dL) . Autoimmune work-up revealed elevated ANA of 13.6, normal double stranded DNA antibody of 25 IU/mL (anti-dsDNA ab), high anti-Smith antibody (>8 AI), and high anti-ribonucleic protein of 6.9 AI (anti-RNP) antibody . A urinalysis to screen for concomitant lupus nephritis did not show hematuria or red blood cell casts, and a urine protein to creatinine ratio was negative (0.1).