In July 2011 a 63 year old man with a total laryngectomy was admitted to the Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery at Vittorio Veneto Hospital for suspected aspiration of tracheoesophageal prosthesis.
The patient underwent total laryngectomy for advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx eighteen months before this admission.
He was an engineer, smoked 60 pack/years, and usually drank half litre of wine daily.
The disease had been diagnosed two years before and the patient had been treated in the first place with radiotherapy exclusively. Seven months after the end of the treatment, in January 2010, he underwent emergency tracheostomy for acute dyspnea due to recurrence of larynx carcinoma: then he underwent total laryngectomy with primary insertion of tracheoesophageal prosthesis.
During his hospital stay he started voice rehabilitation with speech therapist for about four days.
When the patient arrived at our department in July 2011 he referred that the TEP had torn away during daily cleaning procedure, so he tried to replace the device but the attempt was unsuccessful.
The lost TEP was a classic 10 mm Blom Singer Indwelling prosthesis, changed 2 months earlier (s ).
At the admission he was asymptomatic, in particular he had no dyspnea, stridor, fever or cough.
Anyway, at the examination the prosthesis was absent and he underwent immediately standard 2 view chest radiography, which demonstrated a ring-shaped opacity placed in the right lower lobe, suspicious for the aspirated TEP .
Thus it was planned to remove the foreign body with fiberoptic flexible bronchoscopy and to place another voice prosthesis, under general anesthesia, at the same time.
The flexible bronchoscope (Olympus BF 1 T 180) was inserted through the tracheal stoma. The TEP was present in the bronchus intermedius, just distal to its origin and it was retrieved without difficulty by grasping it with biopsy forceps , then withdrawing the whole bronchoscopy out of the tracheal stoma.
After removing the TEP copious issue secretions filling the bronchus intermedius were suctioned and sent for culture.
The patient was discharged the day after with prescription of antibiotic treatment.