The index case is that of an 18-year-old primigravida who was referred to the antenatal testing center for a growth scan at 35 weeks and 5 days gestation, due to lagging symphysio-fundal height measurement. She had no significant past medical history, and her antenatal course was uncomplicated. A detailed ultrasound scan was done and revealed a normal fetus with estimated fetal weight that was appropriate for gestational age, normal amniotic fluid index and a posterior placenta with a 3-vessel umbilical cord. There was a cystic structure with internal echoes, originating from the placenta at the point of the umbilical cord insertion, which was determined to be a 1.9 × 1.8 cm umbilical artery aneurysm on 3D and Doppler imaging. On subsequent imaging 3 days later at 36 weeks and 1 day, the aneurysm was noted to measure 3.06 × 1.79 cm, an increase in size from prior measurement. Umbilical artery Doppler studies were within normal limits. The middle cerebral artery peak systolic volume calculated was 1.04 MoM, which was at the higher end of the normal range. Fetal echocardiogram was done and revealed normal cardiac evaluation, with no abnormality detected in the ductus venosus velocimetry.

Due to the increase in size of the aneurysm over a short interval, the patient was counseled regarding the risks of intra-uterine fetal demise and was transferred to the labor and delivery unit. Fetal monitoring via non-stress test revealed fetal tachycardia, with a baseline heart rate above 165 bpm and regular uterine contractions. Her calculated Bishop score was 2, she was remote from delivery with a category 2 tracing, and a potentially compromised fetus. The decision was then made to proceed with cesarean section delivery. A live female infant was delivered weighing 2,850 g; Apgar scores were 7 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min. The baby was admitted to the special care nursery for observation due to transient tachypnea. The newborn hemoglobin was 15.8 g/dL. Karyotyping subsequently revealed 46 XX.

On pathological examination, the placenta was ovoid in shape with an eccentrically inserted 22 cm long 3-vessel edematous umbilical cord. There was a 2.5 × 2.4 × 1.2 cm dilated intact vessel containing a soft dark red blood clot, approximately 0.4 cm from the base of the umbilical cord. Surrounding the blood vessel was a 7.0 × 6.0 cm ovoid pale tan area. The umbilical artery aneurysm was confirmed at the point of insertion onto the placental disc. Microscopic and macroscopic chorionic pseudocysts were also noted.