A 68-year-old married male presented with multiple swelling on the trunk, back, upper and lower extremities since one year. Lesions started on the trunk and gradually spread to involve upper and lower limbs. Initially lesions were small, flat and then gradually increased in size to become nodular. He also had bilateral submandibular swelling and cervical lymphadenopathy. Patient was heterosexual and moderately built. No history of fever, cough, diarrhoea, weight loss or history suggestive of AIDS sequelae was noted.
On local examination, the swellings were multiple erythematous papules to nodular which were bluish in colour on the back, trunk and both extremities . The non-blanchable swellings were ranging from 0.5 cm to 7 cm in diameter and firm in consistency. Pallor was present with no hepato-splenomegaly seen and no other systemic findings. The two clinical differential diagnoses were of lipomatosis and neuromatosis, respectively.
Patient was advised HIV- enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and he was diagnosed for the first time as reactive to the HIV antibody ELISA test. All routine laboratory investigations were performed along with CD4 count of 239 cells/microlitre, which was low in this patient. The prothrombin time levels - 12 secs (control 35 secs), activated partial thromboplastin time kaolin levels more than two mins (control 35 secs), serum creatinine - 2.6 mg/dl (0.8 to 1.2 mg/dl), serum glutamic- oxaloacetic acid transaminase levels -130 iu/litre (8-33 iu/litre), serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase levels -134 IU/litre (4-36 IU/litre). The patient's ultrasonography (USG) abdomen showed features suggestive of fatty liver with multiple hyperechoic lesions in liver and spleen (suggestive of metastases). Many subcutaneous lymph nodes were also noted on anterior abdominal wall.
The patient was then referred to cytology OPD for FNAC. The FNAC was performed with 22-gauge needle from multiple sites of swellings over the trunk, back and submandibular lymph nodes. The aspirate obtained was hemorrhagic and the cytology smears were hypercellular which showed large cohesive clumps of oval to spindle cells . The cells had moderate amount of ill-defined, eosinophilic cytoplasm having oval to spindle nuclei with finely granular chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli and mild pleomorphism. Few mitotic figures were seen. The background showed hemorrhage and macrophages . Cytological features were suggestive of low-grade spindle cell neoplasm consistent with KS.
The biopsy from the subcutaneous nodule was performed with tumor mass comprised of proliferating blood vessels arranged in slit-like spaces and fascicles. These spaces were lined by endothelial lining separated by spindled cells having moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm and filled with red blood cells with extravasation in surrounding collagen bundles. Perivascular spaces show plenty of lymphocytes, hemosiderin-laden macrophages and neutrophils . Diagnosis was confirmed on biopsy as KS. Special stain and immunohistochemistry were not performed as patient had financial constraints.