A 26-year-old man complained of foamy urine for 3 years without hospital examination. Proteinuria was found in routine physical examinations 1 month prior, and he attended our clinic on the basis of these results. Laboratory data were as follows: urine analysis showed proteinuria (dipstick 2 +) and hematuria (3 +), 24-h uric protein quantification was 0.75 g/day (normal range, 0–0.15 g/day), and serum creatinine (Scr) was 151 μmol/L (normal range, 88–104 μmol/L). Based on abnormalities in the examination indicators, the patient was admitted to the nephrology department with an initial diagnosis of glomerulonephritis and renal insufficiency.
Further detailed consultations and examinations were carried out. The patient felt no other discomfort. His routine physical examinations showed no obvious abnormalities. He had no edema or hypertension, and his urine output was normal. During neurological examination, the patient was found to have an imperceptible tremor in his hands. A review of medical history revealed that the patient had allergic purpura 22 years prior and pneumothorax 7 years prior. The patient denied having consumed alcohol or abused drugs and denied having a history of hepatitis or family history of chronic or genetic diseases. His parents had a nonconsanguineous marriage. Laboratory examinations indicated normal white blood cell counts and hemoglobin levels. Urinalysis showed 2 + proteinuria with microhematuria (approximately 100 erythrocytes per high-power field), and his 24-h uric protein quantity fluctuated from 0.75 to 1.1 g/day. Abnormal renal function with an Scr of 150–170 μmol/L was detected. Liver function was normal, and other laboratory examinations, including serum electrolytes, thyroid function, C-reactive protein, and serum complement (C3 and C4), were also within the normal range. Additionally, immunoglobulin levels (IgG and IgM) were normal, except for mild elevation of IgA (3.73 g/L, normal range: 0.97–3.2 g/L). Serological tests were negative for anti-nuclear, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, anti-glomerular basement membrane, anti-hepatitis B virus, and anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies. Routine physical examination results indicated normal electrocardiogram and color Doppler ultrasound with normal kidney size and shape. Color ultrasound of the liver, gallbladder, spleen, and pancreas indicated rough echo in the liver.
Renal biopsy was performed to identify kidney disease. Analysis of renal biopsy specimens using light microscopy showed mesangial cells and matrix proliferation with glomeruli focal segmental hyperplasia and sclerosis (1/10 glomerulus; Fig. a). Epithelial cells were vacuolated and showed granular degeneration. Additionally, brush margins disappeared, the lumen dilated, and focal atrophy (atrophy area of approximately 15%) was observed in some renal tubules. Interstitial focal inflammatory cell infiltration was accompanied by fibrosis, and the walls of arterioles showed no obvious pathological changes . Immunofluorescence staining showed granular deposition of IgA+++ in the mesangium . No glomeruli were observed by electron microscopy. Silver staining showed shedding of tubule bristles and enhancement of interstitial edema . The pathologic diagnosis was focal hyperplastic IgA nephropathy accompanied by acute tubular interstitial injury (Lee grade III, Oxford grade M1E0S0T1).
Diagnosis of IgA nephropathy is relatively simple based on hematuria, proteinuria, and renal biopsy results; however, renal pathology may not yield a clear diagnosis. In our study, the observed pathological changes associated with IgA nephropathy did not explain the renal dysfunction in our patient. Additionally, the degree of tubular injury was not consistent with glomerular lesions. Thus, reasons other than IgA nephropathy may contribute to tubular injury. More importantly, the young patient in our study showed rough echo of the liver in our ultrasound findings. Although we repeatedly questioned the patient about his medical history, no common causes of liver damage, such as hepatitis or a history of drugs and alcohol, were reported by the patient. Furthermore, magnetic resonance imaging of the liver revealed liver atrophy and splenomegaly. The unexplained symptoms were confusing; however, the chief physician of our institution observed the mild involuntary fingertip tremors of the patient, and WD was then considered as a potential diagnosis based on this nonspecific neurological abnormality combined with the observed liver damage.
Renal biopsy was re-examined, and some subtle changes that had been overlooked on the first analysis were detected. For example, granular deposition in the cytoplasm of renal tubule epithelial cells was observed using light microscopy . Under electron microscopy, some renal tubular epithelial cells showed degeneration of mitochondria in the cytoplasm. The size of mitochondria varied, the inner and outer membranes were separated, and the cristae became shorter and disappeared . Moreover, lysosome size increased, and some round granules were deposited in the lysosome . Timm’s copper staining revealed some brown to black deposits in some renal tubular epithelial cells . Measurement of copper metabolism further confirmed the diagnosis of WD; lower levels of serum ceruloplasmin (0.02 g/L, normal range: 0.27–0.47 g/L) and increased urinary excretion of copper (260.4 μg/day, normal range: 10–60 g/day) were detected, although normal copper serum levels (12.52 μmol/L, normal range: 7.12–21.29 μmol/L) were also observed. The presence of K–F rings in the patient’s eyes, as observed by slit lamp examination, also supported the diagnosis of WD. To confirm this diagnosis, we also performed DNA sequence analysis and identified two mutations in the ATP7B gene; one was a known pathogenic mutation, whereas the other was a suspected pathogenic mutation .
Finally, the patient was diagnosed with WD. The observed kidney damage was identified as WD-associated renal injury, including renal tubulointerstitial injury and focal proliferative IgA nephropathy. The patient agreed to targeted treatment, including penicillamine 250 mg twice daily and oral zinc sulfate daily. Additionally, he was prescribed losartan to control proteinuria while monitoring renal function and blood pressure. During the 3-year follow-up, the tremor in his hands disappeared, and his 24-h uric protein level fluctuated from 0.3 to 0.5 g/day. Renal dysfunction was reversed, and Scr was maintained at approximately 110–130 μmol/L. Moreover, 24-h uric cooper dropped from 260.4 to 69 μg. The patient retained normal liver function and maintained a good quality of daily life.