The clinical case of a 14-year-old male adolescent with no significant antecedents for the current condition is described. He presents to the outpatient department with lower back pain for four years, of insidious onset, intermittent, progressive, which exacerbated six months ago, with irradiation to lower extremities, accompanied by progressive paresthesia and paresis predominantly in the right lower extremity, reporting limitations for personal activities. Physical examination: patient with plantígrado, bipodálica, assisted with cane in the left hand, with claudicatio at the expense of the right lower extremity, with impossibility for heel-toe gait, presenting paravertebral muscular contracture in the lower back region predominantly in the right, without external lesions, or changes in colouration. Lower extremities present muscular hypotrophy in quadriceps and tibial anterior bilateral, with muscular strength 3/5 in the Daniels scale in the right L4, L5 and S1 myotomes, rest of myotomes with normal muscular strength, presenting hypesthesia in the right L5 dermatome, bilateral normal osteotendinous reflexes, L4, S1, right Legg-Perthes, positive right Bragard, positive right clonus.

Laboratory studies with bone chemistry are performed with results within normal parameters according to the patient's age, which are presented in Table 1. A simple magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbosacral column is requested, where a heterogeneous, hyperintense mass is observed in the sagittal sections within the spinal canal, immediately posterior to the L5-S1 intervertebral disc with caudal extension to the underlying S1 vertebral body. An axial section in T1 and T2 shows a hyperintense mass in zone IV according to Weinstein, occupying approximately 30% of the spinal canal. Electromyography of the lower extremities with somatosensory evoked potentials and nerve conduction velocity is performed, which is reported as abnormal, with data of acute/active denervation in myotomes corresponding to the L5-S1 level on both sides and reduction of the bilateral voluntary contraction pattern in L5-S1 and S1 right.

The Oswestry disability scale is performed within the study protocol and found to have a disability limit of 71.1%, which is classified as a disabling disability.


Results

Due to the progressive symptoms and the patient's functional limitations, it was decided to operate, and a bilateral L4 and L5 laminotomy was performed, along with exploration and resection of the tumour and release of the nerve roots.

A tumor with characteristics similar to adipose tissue was obtained, where a wide vascular network was observed inside, with an approximate size of 14 × 10 × 4 mm of an ovoid shape, flattened with a smooth and shiny surface. The tumor was sent for anatomopathological analysis, which reported "adipose tissue with hypertrophic and enlarged blood vessels". After hospital discharge, the patient presented immediate symptomatic improvement, with independent walking, although with limitations for heel-toe walking, reporting improvement in lower back pain. Manoeuvres were performed to assess neurotension, which were negative.

One month after the surgical treatment, the patient reported clinical improvement in gait, muscle strength and sensitivity, with improvement in the Oswestry scale of functional disability, reporting a functional limitation of 26.6%, which is classified as moderate functional limitation, finding considerable functional improvement after one month of the surgical treatment
