Past Medical History
The patient had end-stage renal disease treated with hemodialysis, bilateral hip osteoarthritis with a previous right hip arthroplasty, hypertension, atrial fibrillation treated with warfarin (Coumadin), previous myocardial infarction requiring coronary artery bypass grafting, and monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) arrest requiring a dual-chamber, single-coil ICD 9 months earlier. Lead models included a Medtronic 5076 CapSureFix Novus magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) SureScan right atrial lead and a Medtronic 6935M Sprint Quattro Secure S MRI SureScan right ventricular lead. Two months earlier, he had experienced fevers during dialysis and recurrent S. maltophilia bacteremia, presumed to be from infected tunneled hemodialysis catheters. He had undergone 3 hemodialysis catheter replacements and had received intravenous (IV) antibiotics. However, before a planned left hip arthroplasty, preoperative blood cultures regrew S. maltophilia. He was admitted to an outside hospital and started on IV ceftazidime. Given his ongoing fevers, he left the outside hospital against medical advice for a second opinion at our hospital.

Differential Diagnosis
It was reasonable to suspect that hemodialysis catheters were the source of bacteremia because of frequent venous access and fevers during dialysis. According to Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA),2 and American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines, in cases of nonstaphylococcal bacteremia without evidence of cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED) infection, eliminating accessible non-CIED sources of infection comes first. Persistent bacteremia, despite appropriate IV antibiotic treatment and removal of alternative sources, should raise concern for ICD seeding.


Investigations

Hospitalization for second opinion and initial fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography screening

This strain of S. maltophilia was susceptible to ceftazidime, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), and levofloxacin. However, the patient was switched from IV ceftazidime to IV TMP-SMX upon arrival to our hospital because of his recent fevers and recommendations to avoid ceftazidime monotherapy for S. maltophilia, according to Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) guidelines. Infectious disease specialists recommended a fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography with computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) scan, which demonstrated increased activity around the left hip joint but no ICD involvement. Orthopedic surgery ruled out septic arthritis in view of the absence of clinical symptoms. Results of 2 blood cultures obtained during the current admission remained negative for 72 hours. Given the low association of gram-negative organisms with device seeding and clearance of blood cultures following a hemodialysis catheter removal (2 days earlier), the ICD was left in place. The patient was discharged with 6 weeks of IV TMP-SMX at 5 mg/kg every 24 hours.1 Oral levofloxacin was prescribed for synergistic effect, but the patient never filled the prescription.

Readmission and Repeat FDG PET/CT Screening
After the IV TMP-SMX course, the patient had clinical improvement and began using an arteriovenous fistula for dialysis. Two months later, he developed superficial pocket erythema and was started on oral cephalexin (Keflex). One month afterward, he had recurrent S. maltophilia bacteremia and was restarted on IV ceftazidime through dialysis. Because of his persistent bacteremia, he was readmitted for further diagnostic work-up.

There was again no evidence of pocket infection. Transesophageal echocardiography showed no lead or valvular vegetations (Figures 2A to 2E). Computed tomography of the chest was clear. Whole-body FDG PET/CT was repeated to screen for occult sources of infection before proceeding with device extraction. FDG PET/CT revealed uptake along device leads, a finding suggesting CIED infection.

Management
The patient’s antibiotics were again switched from ceftazidime to IV TMP-SMX, 5 mg/kg daily. Oral levofloxacin, 500 mg every 48 hours, was added for synergistic effects. Electrophysiology was consulted for ICD removal. ICD interrogation revealed sinus bradycardia at 57 beats/min, minimal pacing, and no recent arrhythmias or shocks. The ICD was successfully extracted percutaneously. Extraction proved moderately challenging because the device’s active fixation mechanism failed to retract. With careful traction and countertraction, the right atrial and right ventricular leads were removed intact without complications.
Device lead cultures grew S. maltophilia. Given his history of sudden cardiac death and the need for an ICD for secondary prevention, the patient was discharged with a wearable defibrillator. Despite blood culture clearance at 72 hours, device reimplantation was deferred pending 8 weeks of oral TMP-SMX double strength 3 tablets daily and oral levofloxacin, 500 mg every 48 hours, to ensure bacteremia resolution.