A 66-year-old asymptotic male with hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and a history of syncope was admitted to the hospital after ambulatory 24 h Holter electrocardiography monitoring, which revealed non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. His physical examination was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm without any ST-segment changes. 2D echocardiography showed preserved left ventricular ejection fraction of 65%. Non-invasive coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) showed 60% stenosis of the LMCA bifurcation with the minimal lumen area of 5 mm2, 40% stenosis in the proximal LAD, and 60% stenosis in the proximal LCx. Invasive coronary angiography confirmed stenosis of the LMCA bifurcation as well as revealed two obstructive stenoses of the second diagonal branch (DB) and the distal LCx. The SYNTAX score was 26, which indicates moderate complexity of coronary artery disease and require careful consideration between PCI and CABG. After the heart team’s (cardiologists, interventional cardiologists, cardiac surgeon) decision and patient’s consent, the complex PCI using DK crush bifurcation stenting technique was planned. Firstly, using the right radial approach, successful PCIs of the distal LCx and the second DB were performed. Secondly, LMCA LAD/LCx procedure was carried out. A 7F (French size) EBU (Extra Back Up, a guiding catheter used to provide maximal support and control during PCI) 3.75 mm guiding catheter was used and two Sion Blue ES (Sion Blue Extra Stiff, a guiding catheter used for high torque control and support) guidewires were placed in the distal segments of LCx and LAD. Then, an Ultimaster Nagomi 3.5/18 mm stent was implanted into the LMCA towards the LCx and partially crushed by a 3.0/15 mm semi-compliant balloon. Subsequently, after rewiring, balloon kissing was performed with a 3.0/15 mm semi-compliant balloon in LCx and a 3.5/15 mm semi-compliant balloon in LAD. Ultimaster Nagomi 4.0/15 mm stent was implanted into the LMCA towards the LAD. Proximal optimization technique (a technique involving inflating a balloon in the proximal part of the larger branch to optimize the opening and ensure better stent apposition and expansion before further stenting of the smaller branch) was performed with a 4.0/8 mm non-compliant balloon and, after rewiring the LCx, re-kissing was performed with a 3.0/15 mm balloon in LCx and a 3.5/15 mm balloon in LAD. Finally, an adequate apposition of LMCA/LCx and LAD stents was confirmed by the intravascular ultrasound monitoring. The final angiography revealed an excellent angiographic result, with optimal stent expansion, lesions covered, and TIMI 3 flow in all coronary arteries. The 1-month follow-up of the patient was uneventful.

