We evaluated a 28-year-old African-American woman with a history of myoclonus and epilepsy. She was born at term from an uncomplicated vaginal delivery, with initial normal development. A teacher noticed “hand tremors” at the age of 4 years. She had normal socialization and a mild learning disability but was able to finish high school and start college. At the age of 13, she developed her first generalized myoclonic seizure, followed by multiple episodes of early morning focal onset seizure with secondary generalization and additional episodes of generalized myoclonic seizures. She was treated with zonisamide and then topiramate with good control of the seizures. A previous EEG showed diffuse excessive fast activity. Brain MRI showed mild cerebellar atrophy .
The “hand tremor” was later identified as myoclonus and worsened during her high school years, with prominent involvement of her upper limbs. She was treated with clonazepam with moderate benefit. At her last evaluation, she displayed multifocal myoclonus at rest, mostly involving her face and distal upper limbs, mild action myoclonus at target, and no clear stimulus sensitivity. There were only very mild cerebellar signs (including mild saccadic pursuits, dysdiadochokinesia, and appendicular dysmetria) with no significant gait impairment . Patient’s cognitive profile was not formally assessed but she presented a decline over the years affecting her school career. Her parents were both from Antigua. There was no consanguinity in the family and no family history of seizures or other neurological conditions. Written authorization for the acquisition of the video for publication for scientific purposes was signed by the patient.
Previous genetic testing, including 21 genes of progressive myoclonic epilepsy and Dentatorubro-Pallidoluysian Atrophy (DRPLA) expansion, were negative. Targeted gene testing of NUS1 revealed a novel missense mutation of the NUS1 gene, c.868C>T (p.Arg290Cys), initially classified as a variant of unknown significance (VUS). The variant was not found in large population datasets and was absent in her parents (de novo). Therefore, the p.Arg290Cys was re-classified as likely pathogenic (ACMG criteria: PM1, PM2, PM5, PM6, PP3). This variant affects the same residues reported in previous cases of CDG with recessive mode of inheritance (p.R290H). We hypothesize that the different aminoacidic change in our case (p.R290C) may have a more profound impact on an important domain of the NUS1 protein due to the biochemical differences between Arginine and Cysteine, compared to Arginine and Histidine.
To the best of authors’ knowledge and as per Genetic Testing Registry (GTR, ) there are no gene panels for the myoclonic epilepsy in the US that include NUS1.