A 76-year-old male patient [body mass index (BMI), 21.5 kg/m2] was admitted to the General Surgery Department of our institution due to local abdominal distension in the left lower flank and intermittent abdominal pain for one year.
Before admission, the patient had undergone laparoscopic rectal resection one year ago in our institution. During the operation, five trocars were used in this patient, including a 10 mm trocar inserted at the umbilical site, two 5 mm trocars in the left flank, a 12 mm trocar and a 5 mm trocar in the right flank, respectively. Fascia layers were closed by an absorbable suture at the ≥ 10 mm trocar site. A 20 FR soft rubber tube was inserted in the left lower quadrant stoma port to drain excessive blood and exudates. The drainage tube was removed five days postoperatively following gastrointestinal function recovery, and the drainage liquid was ≤ 20 mL/d. The fascia layer at the drain site was not closed due to a tiny defect. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the ninth day after the operation. The patient reported no discomfort postoperatively. However, one month later, there was abdominal bulging in the left lower flank in the standing position, which disappeared in the supine position. Little attention was paid to this initially; however, the patient felt a gradual progression of the abdominal bulge, accompanied by occasional dull abdominal pain over time.
The patient had a history of chronic bronchitis combined with intermittent cough without regular medical treatment. He also has a history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, and a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The patient showed well controlled blood pressure without cardiovascular system symptoms. There were no restrictions on his daily activities.
The patient had no remarkable personal and family history.
According to the physical examination after admission, the patient was found to have a local palpable mass (3 cm in length) in the left lower flank above the former drain-site and an abdominal wall defect (2 cm in length). Tenderness and rebound tenderness were not observed in the abdomen.
Routine serological examinations were performed without obvious abnormalities.
A preoperative computed tomography scan confirmed the diagnosis and showed an abdominal wall hernia at the drainage site in the left lower quadrant, and the content consisted of the omentum majus . The detected abdominal wall fascial defect was 2 cm in diameter.