A 73-year-old man visited our emergency room (ER) in October 2004 with right upper abdominal pain and fever for the previous two days. Vital signs on arrival at the ER were blood pressure (BP): 161/107 mmHg, pulse rate (PR): 90/minute, respiratory rate (RR): 20/minute, and body temperature (BT): 38.9ºC. His consciousness was unaffected but he had an acutely ill appearance. Tracing back his medical history, he had hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh Classification Grade A), and in August 1999, a small HCC (Segment 5 of the liver, diameter less than 2 cm) was diagnosed. He received transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) at a medical center and a second TACE again in May 2001 for recurrent HCC. He declined further TACE for residual recurrent lesions. Therefore oral chemotherapy with the regimen tegafur/uracil (100 mg/224 mg) had been prescribed to him from December 2001 to November 2003, and was ceased due to loss at follow-up.
Physical examination in the ER found no yellowish skin, no icteric sclera but moderate right upper quadrant (RUQ) abdominal pain. Murphy's sign was positive. Bowel sounds were normal and his abdomen was soft, with no rebounding pain. There was no shifting dullness. Lab data included: white blood cell count (WBC): 14,520/mm3 (Neu/Lym: 83.5/6.4%), platelets: 169 k/mm3, total and direct (T/D) bilirubin: 1.4/0.6 mg/dL, serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase/serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (sGOT/sGPT): 38/32 U/L, albumin (Alb): 3.9 gm/dL, C-reactive protein: 11.9 mg/dL, NH3: 98 mcg/dL, and α-FP level: 231.1 ng/mL. Abdominal echogram revealed a thickened gall bladder wall, gall stones and a suspected tumor mass in the distended gall bladder. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed liver cirrhosis, gall stones, diffusely thickened gall bladder wall with increased contrast enhancement compatible with acute cholecystitis, and a hypodense mass lesion without contrast enhancement in the gall bladder . There was no roentgenographic evidence of a suspected recurrent lesion in the liver parenchyma at that time.
An open cholecystectomy via a right subcostal incision was performed on the next day. A distended gall bladder with multiple pigmented gall stones and a tumor mass, 6.0 × 4.0 × 2.0 cm in size, were found in the gall bladder lumen. When seen, the mass had already detached from the mucosa at the opening of the sac and no stalk could be identified . The mucosal surface of the gall bladder wall was smooth without evident tumorous or ulcerative lesions .
Microscopic pathologic examination of the gall bladder revealed heavy neutrophil and lymphocyte infiltration as in ordinary acute and chronic inflammation. The mucosa was congested and showed no evidence of tumor invasion. The vessels in the gall bladder wall were free from tumor emboli .
The sections of the tumor showed extensive infarction necrosis. The viable tumor cells were seen as uniform polygonal cells with eosinophilic granular cytoplasm arranged in tiled array or microtrabecular pattern mostly surrounding the blood vessels . Immunohistochemistry staining with α-FP antibody demonstrated varied positive staining intensity in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells . Other antibodies including CK7, chromogranin, and synaptophysin were all negative, excluding the possibility of carcinoid tumor or adenocarcinoma.
The patient recovered from the surgery well without major or minor complications and was discharged one week after the surgery. He received regular follow-up in our gastrointestinal (GI) outpatient department and his α-FP levels went down to 3.1 ng/mL in March 2005, and to 3.08 ng/mL in August 2005, five and 10 months after cholecystectomy, respectively. He died in July 2006 in another hospital due to upper gastrointestinal bleeding from a hemorrhagic duodenal ulcer complicated by hepatorenal syndrome.