A 34-year old African-American woman presented with a giant perineal tumor associated with a 29-year history of keloid formation without recalled dermal injury or abrasion. The patient's history revealed two family members (a mother and sister) with similar symptomology, resulting in a diagnosis of familial keloid syndrome. However, neither the mother nor sister was affected with perineal keloid development. Past medical history was also notable for arthritic symptoms and diabetes mellitus, which were present in both mother and sister. The index lesion was firm, pliable growth, 20 cm in its greatest diameter, adjacent to 10 cm and 6 cm perivulvar lesions, which caused the patient considerable discomfort and affected ambulation . Physical examination revealed multiple other hypertrophic nodular growths on the posterior neck, behind the right ear, bilateral scapular regions, right flank and breast, abdomen and extremities in addition to the primary lesion. Past medical history evinced numerous heterogeneous treatments for various keloids in multiple loci; she had previously received surgical extirpation, steroid injections, and two episodes of radiotherapy to the back. Despite these interventions, her keloids have either recurred or persisted. Surgical extirpation of the largest perineal lesion was undertaken, and histopathologic examination was performed, denoting the classic keloid-associated features of haphazard collagen deposition, with nodular formations thickened hyalinized bands .
On the day following surgical excision, the patient was treated with radiotherapy using photons at 6MV. The total dose delivered was 22 Gy in 11 days, with a daily fraction of 2 Gy. The dose fraction was split between two fields with an anterior-posterior/posterior-anterior (AP/PA) port arrangement. Maximum acute Radiation Therapy Oncology Group skin toxicity score was Grade 3 (moderate ulceration and skin breakdown), which resolved after a 3-day treatment break.
At 6 months post-therapy, the lesion in question had not recurred , and the patient reported no difficulty attributable to the lesion.
After 10 months after completion of radiation treatment for perineal keloids, the patient returned for additional treatment to her back and chest wall. Radiotherapy was delivered at 3 Gy/fraction with 9MeV electrons to her back, lateral back, and anteromedial back over 4 days. No complications have been noted, and the patient is currently being followed, with > 24 months since therapy..