A 78-year-old man was hospitalized to our hospital for a week owing to memory loss and poor responsiveness without obvious precipitating factors. Since the onset, he was in poor appetite and spirit, and occasionally unstable gait. The patient denied headache, dizziness, nausea, or vomiting, but he responded with intermittent headaches in the hospital. He had no ataxia, dystonia, speech disorder, and abnormal immunocompetence. There was also no history of cognitive decline, personality changes, seizures, radiation exposure, systemic infection, or other autoimmune diseases. His family history was unremarkable. Neurological examination did not show focal neurological signs. The patient was diagnosed with prostate cancer 3 years ago and got symptomatic treatment. On further evaluation, a routine blood investigation including HIV was done which was nonreactive.
The brain computed tomography (CT) disclosed three solid masses with slight hyper-attenuation, non-calcification, and non-cystic components. The biggest one was located in the third ventricle and the others were located in the body and posterior horn of the left lateral ventricle , MRI showed multifocal solid lesions in the same regions. They were slightly hypointense on T1WI and isointense to slightly hypointense on T2WI and T2WI dark-fluid images. While on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), the third ventricular lesion was hypointense, and the lateral ventricular lesion was slightly hyperintense, both of them with low apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values, all suggesting diffusion restricted. Post-enhanced, the ventricular lesions were significantly enhanced. Furthermore, parenchyma around the third ventricle displayed swelling and hyperintense on T2WI. It did not cause ventricular expansion and hydrocephalus above the lesions . He was diagnosed with intraventricular malignancy and based on his history of prostate cancer, the possibility of metastasis was considered clinically.
In order to determine the nature of the lesion and ensure smooth cerebrospinal fluid circulation in the third ventricle, the patient underwent a subtotal resection of the third ventricle tumor by transcallosal approach. Analysis of a frozen section was consistent with uncertain PCNSL. Immunohistochemistry revealed the tumor cells were positive for CD10, CD20, Bcl-6, MUM-1, C-MYC(10%), Bcl-2(90%), and Ki-67(80%), and negative for CD3, CD30, cyclin D1, ALK, and EBER in situ hybridization . The P53 was wild-type. Thus, the final diagnosis of the third ventricular tumor was DLBCL with a germinal center subtype. Postoperatively, the patient was in a shallow coma, and in poor overall condition. On day 17, he became critically unwell due to respiratory and circulatory failure and arrhythmia. But the families gave up continued resuscitation and requested to be discharged.