A 21-year-old man visited a hospital with scrotal swelling after a baseball struck his left testis. Plain computed tomography revealed no abnormalities. He was treated conservatively with analgesia until he visited the hospital again 5 days later, reporting no improvement. MRI indicated a tear of the left tunica albuginea, and he was referred to our hospital. His scrotum was swollen, and he was in pain at the time of admission. Ultrasonography showed echo-free space in the left scrotum, including a swollen testis with heterogeneous echogenicity. Doppler ultrasonography revealed no blood flow in the left testis. Blood flow was maintained in the right scrotum, and both epididymides were normal . MRI indicated swelling of the left testis with surrounding high-intensity areas and partial disruption of the tunica albuginea . The preoperative levels of LH, FSH, and testosterone were 6.7 mIU/mL, 13.8 mIU/mL, and 1065.9 ng/dL, respectively. Thus, we suspected testicular rupture with damage to the tunica albuginea. Emergency surgery was performed on the day of admission.
A dark-red serum drained after incising the tunica vaginalis. The tunica albuginea was extensively torn and the testicular contents were exposed . Primary closure of the tunica albuginea with absorbable sutures was initially attempted but not possible to complete since tight closure could cause secondary damage. A vascular pedicle flap was prepared by shaping the tunica vaginalis to replace the damaged tunica albuginea . The dartos fascia and scrotal skin were sutured with absorbable sutures.
The patient was discharged 2 days postoperatively. Ultrasonography identified no abnormalities in the size and blood flow of the ruptured testis at 2 weeks and again at 3 months’ follow-up . The LH, FSH, and testosterone levels were 6.7 mIU/mL, 13.8 mIU/mL, and 1065.9 ng/dL, respectively, at 3 months postoperatively. No abnormalities were observed either morphologically or functionally. Thus, the tunica vaginalis flap was considered to successfully preserve the injured testis.