A 53-year-old man with a history of multiple myocardial infarctions was admitted to our hospital because of ADHF accompanied by acute kidney injury (AKI) and hyperkalaemia. On admission, the patient was alert and oriented. Physical examination revealed blood pressure 130/70 mmHg, irregular tachycardia to 143 beats per minute with an oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. Respiratory rate was 26 breaths per minute, and physical examination revealed wheezing rales heard in both lungs and oedema in the lower extremities bilaterally. Due to significant wheezing and irregular tachycardia, abnormal heart sounds were difficult to distinguish on cardiac auscultation. The patient had type 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, paroxysmal AF, and high low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. He was markedly obese with a body weight (BW) of 131 kg [body mass index (BMI) = 45.9 kg/m2]. Laboratory tests showed an increase of brain natriuretic peptide (180.8 pg/mL, normal value: 18.4 < pg/mL), high serum potassium (9.4 mEq/l, normal value: 3.6–4.9 mEq/l). Serum urea nitrogen was 128.7 mg/dL (normal value: 8.0–22.0 mg/dL) and serum creatinine was 5.48 mg/dL (normal value: 0.60–1.10 mg/dL). An emergent continuous haemodialysis/filtration was conducted, and potassium value decreased. An electrocardiogram showed rapid AF rhythm plus ventricular premature beats around the rate of 160 beats per minute with left bundle branch block QRS morphology. The patient’s left ventricle showed marked dilatation and diffuse hypokinesis on echocardiography. The end-diastolic and end-systolic diameters of the left ventricle were 70 and 64 mm, respectively, and the ejection fraction (EF) was 18%. The left atrial diameter was 48 mm. Mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation were observed. The end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes were 403.9 and 364.2 mL, respectively, evaluated by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The EF on cardiac MRI was 9.8%. Coronary artery angiography was performed 1 month before admission and no significant stenotic lesion was found.
The medications were optimized as possible for chronic HF and other co-morbidities, including bisoprolol (2.5 mg), angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) (olmesartan 40 mg), vasopressin receptor antagonist (tolvaptan 15 mg), loop diuretics (furosemide 80 mg), mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (spironolactone 12.5 mg), and amiodarone 200 mg. The maximum dose of ARBs was prescribed whereas dose of beta-blocker and spironolactone were sub-maximum doses due to frequent histories of ADHF/low output state and hyperkalaemia, which required emergent haemodialysis.
Direct current electrical cardioversion (DC) was repeated under the support of intravenous anti-arrhythmics (amiodarone and nifekalant) to improve the haemodynamic status. However, sinus rhythm could not be maintained, and AF recurred many times. The patient developed a low cardiac output state and multiple organ failure with persisting AF. Intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) and mechanical ventilation with intubation were initiated. Right heart catheterization (RHC) on Day 20 showed a mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 57 mmHg and a cardiac index of 2.7 L/min/m2, under the support of IABP and catecholamine infusion (DOA = 4.7 µg/mL/min, DOB = 5 µg/mL/min). On the same day, continuous haemodialysis/filtration (CHDF) was started because of acute kidney injury (AKI) and anuria. One dose of Digoxin was administered intravenously, and intravenous infusion of an ultra-short-acting beta1-selective blocker (randiolol) was used as a rate control strategy. However, rate control of AF was challenging with the heart rate consistently greater than 120 b.p.m. despite sedation, with transient elevation up to 140 b.p.m. On Day 27, the haemodynamic status collapsed to a systolic blood pressure of 50 mmHg. Therefore, our Heart Team decided to perform an emergent catheter ablation of AF to overcome the vicious cycle of HF and AF. Bilateral pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) was performed using the Ensite system and an irrigated-tip ablation catheter (Tacticath, Abbott Laboratories, St Paul, MN, USA) , under deep sedation with dexmedetomidine and thiamylal. Sinus rhythm was restored by DC cardioversion following PVI. The procedure time was 2 h. These procedures were completed without using contrast agents, considering AKI.
After PVI, the sinus rhythm was restored. The patient’s haemodynamic condition improved dramatically, and catecholamine dosage was reduced. On the day after ablation, the IABP was removed. Renal function recovered and the patient began to produce urine. One week later, the patient was extubated, and mechanical ventilation was withdrawn. The patient’s clinical course is summarized in . There was an episode of AF recurrence after ablation, which was resolved by DC. After continuing cardiac rehabilitation program, the patient was discharged on foot, 1.5 months after the ablation.