A 57-year-old Asian man without relevant previous medical history was hospitalized following a fall from the 15th floor of a condominium. A witness said he had fallen from the condominium and had contacted electrical wires before hitting the ground. Prior to being transferred to the hospital, when the emergency medical service personnel arrived on scene, the patient had no pulse, but spontaneous circulation returned after 4 min of chest compression. On hospital arrival, the patient’s airway was maintained spontaneously, respiratory rate was 30 breaths/min, blood pressure was unmeasurable but the left femoral artery pulse was weakly palpable, heart rate was regular at 136 beats/min, body temperature was 36.1 °C, and Glasgow Coma Scale was E3V1M5. His right inner thigh was lacerated halfway around, and he was actively bleeding from this site. Blood analysis data on admission are shown in Table . We immediately initiated a massive transfusion protocol, secured the airway of the patient with endotracheal intubation and temporarily ligated the proximal exposed superficial femoral artery (SFA), deep femoral artery (DFA) just distal part after branching lateral femoral circumflex artery (LFCA), and superficial femoral vein separately. As we could not detect backflow from the distal artery, possibly because of intimal injury, spasm, or thrombus, and also as there was no time to expose this artery, we could not temporarily shunt it. As well, a tourniquet could not be applied because the injury site was too proximal to the torso. In parallel with preparations to initiate resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta via the left femoral artery, we packed the thigh and sequentially searched for other sites of bleeding because of the patient’s continued hemodynamic instability. Although we found no other sites of bleeding according to an extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma examination, subsequent plain pelvic radiography suggested the potential for retroperitoneal bleeding with iliac fracture. Considering the patient’s hemodynamics, we performed retroperitoneal packing by making suprapubic incision and entering preperitoneal space comprising the para-vesical and presacral space and then packing pads were placed.
After this was completed, the patient was stable enough to undergo contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT). CECT showed fractures of the 4th lumbar vertebra and right iliac body concomitant with arterial extravasation at this site , so we performed transcatheter arterial embolization . Although CECT showed that the right SFA and DFA just distal part after branching LFCA were interrupted , narrow blood flow in the distal popliteal artery seemed to be maintained by collateral perfusion from LFCA as pulse doppler detected a weak pulse in the dorsal pedis artery. The ankle brachial pressure index at this time was approximately 0.54. After confirming good consciousness of the patient and resolving resuscitation-related conditions such as hypothermia and acidosis, we decided to perform revascularization of the femoral artery and vein by bypassing them with great saphenous vein grafts at approximately 24 h after the initial injury. The operation was performed with the patient in the supine position. Minor fresh thrombus was obtained from distal side of SFA and SFV by Fogarty catheter insertion and we could obtain sufficient back flow from both vessels. We decided to sacrifice the DFA and vein and bypass the SFA. The great saphenous vein was harvested from the left limb, and a graft of about 7 cm in length was anastomosed to the intact intima of the SFA . As the superficial femoral vein also appeared to be bypassable, we bypassed it with a great saphenous vein . All anastomoses were performed by use of 6-0 monofilament suture with the parachute technique.
The soft tissue was also severely injured with some loss of tissue apparent. We initially considered covering the anastomosed vessels with viable muscle, but as the tissue deficit was not completely uncoverable, negative pressure wound therapy was applied over the muscle tissue.
The patient was extubated on the 4th hospital day, and musculocutaneous grafting was performed 22 days after the initial operation following completion of negative pressure wound therapy. Postoperative CECT showed the patency of flow through the femoral vessels and the score of ABI improved 1.15. As adjuvant therapy, although we could not administrate anticoagulant drugs prior to surgery on the basis of concomitant injury, systemic unfractionated heparin infusion was used during and post 10 days after bypass surgery. And then we converted to oral administration of warfarin and controlled the international normalized ratio of prothrombin time at the range of 2.0–2.5.
The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital 52 days after admission without any symptom such as swelling or intermittent claudication.