An 84-year-old woman was admitted to our institution because of rapidly progressive dyspnoea and orthopnoea over the past month despite aggressive dehydration during outpatient dialysis.
She had a history of ESRD due to diabetic nephropathy and had been on haemodialysis for two and a half years. Additionally, she had a history of dyslipidaemia and hypertension. One and a half years prior, she began experiencing chest discomfort and shortness of breath on exertion. A Levine three-sixths degree systolic ejection murmur and a coarse crackle were heard from her. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, high voltage, and strain T pattern in chest leads suggesting left ventricular hypertrophy. Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and pulmonary congestion, and serum brain natriuretic peptide level was 1290 pg/mL (normal range ≦ 18.4 pg/mL). Echocardiography revealed severe AS with a mean aortic valve pressure gradient (mAVPG) of 41 mmHg and an aortic valve area of 0.72 mm2. She underwent TAVI with a 23 mm SAPIEN3 (Edwards Lifesciences) a year and a half prior to this admission. Following the procedure, the patient’s recovery was uneventful, and echocardiography showed no paravalvular leak, a mAVPG of 17 mmHg, and an effective orifice area (EOA) of 1.92 cm2 at discharge (see ). She had been receiving antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel 75 mg after TAVI. Echocardiography at the one-year follow-up revealed no evidence of prosthetic valve dysfunction, with a mAVPG of 18 mmHg and an EOA of 1.82 cm2 (see ).
The patient underwent transthoracic echocardiography at admission, which revealed stiffening and complete loss of mobility of the aortic prosthetic valves (see ). This resulted in severe AS with a mAVPG of 68 mmHg and an EOA of 0.65 cm2. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed severe calcification and thickening of all three prosthetic valve leaflets .
The CT findings suggested a high risk of coronary artery occlusion if TAV in TAV was selected. Even in the case of a repeated SAVR with a bioprosthetic valve, there remained a concern about high surgical risk, with an STS score of 13.8% and a significant likelihood of early SVD. Following a rapid multidisciplinary team discussion, we performed an emergency SAVR with a 19 mm On-X valve (CryoLife). Pathological observation of the explanted SAPIEN 3 valves demonstrated severely degenerated bioprosthetic pericardial leaflets with severe intrinsic and extrinsic calcifications that could cause limitation of the leaflet motion . The patient did well post-operatively, and there were no other major complications. Post-operative echocardiography showed improvement in AV peak flow [2.6 m/s, mAVPG (14 mmHg], and EOA (1.84 cm2). No heart failure exacerbations, warfarin-induced bleeding events or prosthetic valve dysfunction were observed in the first year after SAVR.