A 45-year-old Caucasian man presented to our Urology department with a palpable left scrotal mass, known for two years, which had progressively enlarged during the last three months. He reported no history of epididymitis, torsion or trauma. On clinical examination the mass was painless, firm and mobile. His serum tumor markers, including alpha-fetoprotein, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin and lactate dehydrogenase, were normal.
Sonographic examination showed a sharply-demarcated hypoechoic, vascular left paratesticular mass, located close to the head of his epididymis. A large left hydrocele, with low level echoes was also found. MRI evaluation of the scrotum was done on a 1.5-T magnet unit, using a pelvic phased-array coil. The study included fast spin-echo axial, sagittal and coronal T2-weighted sequences and spin-echo axial T1-weighted sequences. Diffusion imaging was performed in the axial plane, using a single shot, multi-slice spin-echo planar diffusion pulse sequence. The maximum b-value was 900 s/mm2. A multilobular left paratesticular mass , in close proximity to the testicular tunicae of the superoanterior aspect of his left testis was detected. The dimensions of the tumor were 33 × 34 × 32 mm. T1-weighted images demonstrated a mass isointense to his testicular parenchyma . The mass was heterogeneous on T2-weighted and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps, with areas of high T2 signal and ADC value of 1.56 × 10-3mm2/s, and others of very low T2 signal and ADC value of 0.86 × 10-3 mm2/s . A large, left hydrocele, with a few septa and ADC value of 2.93 × 10-3mm2/s was also revealed. Both of his testicles, his epididymis and his spermatic cords were normal. The mean ADC value of his testicular parenchyma was 0.94 × 10-3 mm2/s and that of the epididymis 1.37 × 10-3mm2/s. His left testicular tunicae were intact. Based on MRI findings, the diagnosis of a benign fibromatous paratesticular tumor was suggested. Therefore, our patient underwent local excision of the mass. Histopathology reported an adenomatoid tumor of the tunica albuginea, with abundant fibrosis. Our patient is now well, without signs of disease on clinical and sonographic examination, one year after surgery.