A 6 years old boy with dyspnea, orthopnea, generalized pitting edema and fever, was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit, Shanghai Children’s Hospital. Three years before this episode, he presented to our hospital with acute onset of edema, hypoalbuminemia, heavy proteinuria and hyperlipidemia. The diagnosis of IgA nephropathy (Grade II) was made by percutaneous renal biopsy and in accordance with Lee’s classification . Initially he responded well to steroid therapy, but became steroid resistant after 2 years treatment. Immunosuppressive agents administered during this time period, included cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus. He had no history of trauma, tuberculosis or radiation therapy.
Physical examination revealed tachypnea, orthopnea, anasarca and ascites. The heart sounds were muffled and hepatomegaly was also noted. Blood pressure ranged from 90/60 mmHg (systolic/diastolic blood pressure) to 130/70 mmHg. Blood cell count showed that white blood cells (WBC) was 14.49 × 109/L, neutrophils 79%, hemoglobin 11.5 g/dl, C-reactive protein 130 mg/L. Biochemistry analysis revealed total protein of 36 g/L, albumin 10 g/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 10 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 29 U/L, triglycerides 2.05 mmol/L, cholesterol 10.13 mmol/L. Serum electrolytes (Na+, K+, Ca2+ and Cl−) were normal. Heavy proteinuria and hematuria were found on urinalysis (urinary protein: creatinine ratio 30.38). Serum creatinine was normal and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR, calculated with Schwartz formula) was 147 ml/min/1.73m2. Blood and urine cultures were sterile. T-spot for tuberculosis was negative. There was no ultrasound evidence of thrombosis in the superior vena cava or subclavian vein. Ultrasound also demonstrated that both kidneys were enlarged with a loss of cortico-medullary differentiation. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) found no evidence of congenital malformation or malignancies. Echocardiography revealed pericardial fluid of 4.6 cm at maximal thickness, suggesting a large volume hydropericardial effusion. The massive pericardial and pleural effusions were additionally confirmed by thoracic CT . Notably, milky fluid was obtained from the pericardial space by pericardiocentesis . Chyle test was positive. Cell counts and biochemistry in the pericardial effusion revealed WBC 405 × 106/L, lymphocytes count 92%, red blood cells 63 × 106/L, AST 8 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 58 U/L, Glucose 7.22 mmol/L, total protein 7 g/L, albumin 4 g/L, adenylate deaminase (ADH) 2.6 U/L, triglycerides 2.55 mmol/L, cholesterol 0.79 mmol/L. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of chylopericardial effusion.
Continuous renal replacement (CRRT) therapy was performed to alleviate the fluid overload. Meanwhile, pericardial drainage was performed and the diet was modified to low fat but rich in middle chain triglycerides and high protein. No side effects were encountered with this diet modification. The symptoms of cardiac tamponade subsided promptly, while the edema receded gradually over the subsequent 2 weeks. The indwelling pericardial catheter was removed when no fluid was drained after 3 weeks treatment and as shown in Fig. , the chylopericardial effusion was removed successfully. Pericardial effusion has not recurred at 1 year of follow up, on follow up echocardiography.