A 65-year old woman was hospitalized after reporting abdominal pain and faecal impaction. Blood samples were normal and a chest X-ray revealed hypoplasia of the right lung with severe thoracic scoliosis. A colonoscopy and gastrografin enema were performed with diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the rectosigmoid junction. Pre-operative staging was performed with a CT scan that highlighted a right diaphragmatic hernia with involvement of the right kidney and subsequent migration of the right liver into the thorax. This herniation led to torsion of the caval axis and occlusion of the right and middle hepatic veins with modification of liver outflow, thus creating a right to left hepatic vein shunt passing anteriorly to the umbilical recess . An alteration of the retrohepatic cava vein was also demonstrated with suspected double caval system. The right lung presented absence of the inferior segment with bronchial ending without atelectasis. The patient underwent combined hernia repair and rectosigmoid resection. Intraoperative findings revealed a large right posterior diaphragmatic hernia without a sac opened in the thorax. Exclusively the left lobe remained inside the abdominal cavity with traction of the hepatic hilum under the right diaphragm with the round and falciform ligament overlying the diaphragm sustaining the liver . The liver was rotated in the abdominal cavity intraoperatively: this retraction revealed a ligament between the diaphragm and the liver determining compression of the inferior vena cava . The ligament was therefore, dissected in order to restore the vena cava’s normal diameter. Also the right kidney was reduced in the abdominal cavity and hernia repair was performed with dual mash sutured with non-absorbable separated stitches to the diaphragm. A shift of the liver outflow was seen with a natural by-pass inverting flow from the right and middle hepatic veins to a large accessory hepatic vein in the parenchymal bridge in front of the umbilical recess and then to the left hepatic vein . Sigmoid resection with mechanical colorectal anastomosis was performed at the same time. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged eight days after surgery.