A 63-year-old woman with chronic hepatitis B virus infection was referred to our clinic due to incidental detection of a hepatic mass. Alpha-fetoprotein and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II (PIVKA II) levels were 25.24 ng/mL and 3021 mAU/mL, respectively. The patient was diagnosed with HCC in December 2014. Thereafter, she underwent hand-assisted laparoscopic partial hepatectomy for a solitary tumor with 5 cm in diameter in the right posterior sector. Pathological findings showed that the lesion was 40 mm in size, moderately differentiated, solitary HCC without any macroscopic vascular invasion (T1bN0M0 and stage IB, based on the 8th Union for International Cancer Control staging of HCC). Liver fibrosis was evident during initial surgery (METVIR F2-3).
Six months after initial surgery, multiple recurrent lesions in the liver were observed. Consequently, the patient was treated with lipiodol-transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE). After this successful TACE, sorafenib (400 mg per day) was administered. Six months later, she underwent laparoscopic left adrenalectomy for adrenal metastasis (pathology revealed metastatic, moderately differentiated HCC). Eight months after the adrenalectomy, the patient underwent laparoscopic partial hepatectomy for a solitary recurrence in the lateral sector (pathology revealed moderately differentiated HCC, background liver condition; METAVIR F3). Eight months after the second hepatectomy, the patient was treated with sorafenib (400 mg per day, followed by 600 mg per day) for increased PIVKA II levels. Despite 9-mo treatment with sorafenib, she was found to have a 43-mm mass in the spleen and portal vein tumor thrombosis (PVTT) that involved both the right and left portal branches down to the main trunk (Vp4) on computed tomography (CT) .
Hepatitis B infection.
Her personal and family history was unremarkable.
Her vital signs were normal. There were no remarkable findings other than abdominal distention.
PIVKA II levels increased tremendously up to 46.291 mAU/mL. The BCLC staging system classified the patient into stage C. Aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and platelet count were 49 IU/L, 40 IU/L, and 14.7 × 104/μL, respectively. The FIB-4 index was calculated as 3.71, suggesting that she was likely to be cirrhotic. Her cirrhosis was classified into Child-Pugh B (8) and modified albumin-bilirubin grade 1.
CT findings revealed moderate ascites, which indicated portal hypertension due to tumor thrombosis. This also demonstrated irregularity of the external contour of the left lobe of the liver, suggesting cirrhosis.