A 58-year-old diabetic female presented to our Outpatient department with a severe painful shoulder on the left side with the inability to lift her arm for 15 days. The pain was disturbing her sleep. There was a history of pre-existing shoulder pain on the same side due to adhesive capsulitis with a stiff shoulder for 6 months. For the same problem, her shoulder was manipulated overzealously by a local bonesetter to improve her shoulder movements following a possible steroid injection. Ever since the manipulation, the patient complained of severe pain in the shoulder, affecting all the movements at the shoulder, her daily activities and sleep. On examination, there were no active movements possible at the shoulder with active-assisted forward flexion of 80° and active-assisted abduction of 50° with pseudoparalysis of the shoulder . There was no obvious wasting of the deltoid, supraspinatus and infraspinatus. The lift-off test and Belly-press test for subscapularis integrity were positive. Constant shoulder score was 12. On radiography, there was inferior subluxation of the shoulder . On magnetic resonance imaging, there was increased capsular hyperintensity, suggesting joint effusion and capsulosynovitis, subscapularis muscle tear and medial biceps tendon subluxation with edema around the tendon . The diagnosis of acute traumatic capsulosynovitis of the shoulder with the upper subscapularis muscle tear with biceps tendon subluxation with shoulder subluxation was made. The patient was posted for shoulder arthroscopic surgery. Intra-operatively, we found a severe amount of capsulosynovitis all around the shoulder joint more at the rotator interval . A thorough capsular synovectomy was done. Biceps tendon subluxation was noted, and a tenotomy was done. The upper third subscapularis muscle tear was noted at the humeral insertion site. Repair of subscapularis muscle was done with two fiber wires and one knotless PEEK anchor arthroscopically . Postoperatively, the patient was immobilized with an arm pouch for 6 weeks. Rehabilitation was started on day 10 postoperatively. The post-operative radiograph showed a concentric reduction of the shoulder . The patient was followed up regularly at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, 12 weeks, 6 months and 1 year. At the 2-year follow-up patient had completely pain-free movements at the shoulder and was regularly involved in household activities. Constant shoulder score had improved significantly to 82.