A 65-year-old woman with a background of hypertension, stroke, and fibromyalgia was admitted to the cardiology department due to recurrent malignant syncope with no prodrome. Her resting electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm with complete right bundle branch block and left anterior hemiblock. The medical testing included 24 h-Holter ECG, stress-echocardiography, and nuclear test which were unremarkable.
Eventually, she underwent implantation of the new generation Biotronik ILR—BioMonitor 3—according to standard procedure protocol: the skin was pinched perpendicular to the intended tunnelling direction at the left fourth intercostal space between suprasternal notch and left nipple with a small angle. The tunnel was created in the subcutaneous fat-layer in parallel to the skin surface, and the tunnelling tool was advanced until it reached the blue stop. The knob was unlocked, the white handle was fixed and the blue part was pulled back for device release. A clean ECG signal was observed; the measured R wave was 1.98 mV . The wound was unremarkable. Just after the procedure, the patient complained of sharp local chest pain. Chest X-ray demonstrated ILR at the normal expected position, and no pneumothorax was seen. Later on, the pain was relieved and the patient was discharged home on the same day.
During the post-procedure period, the patient felt well with no chest pain but kept touching and moving the subcutaneous device until she had stopped feeling it about 1 week later. The remote communication with the device at the standard location was lost and the patient was invited for interrogation in the pacemaker clinic. During that visit, we were able to interrogate the device from the left lower chest area . A repeat chest X-ray and computer tomography located the device in the left postero-inferior part of the pleural cavity.
A video-assisted patient thoracoscopy was performed. A 5-mm port was placed in the left mid-axillary line in the fifth intercostal space. The ILR was found free in the pleural space . The device was retrieved with forceps and the patient had no further complications during a follow-up of 40 days.