We report a 79-year-old Caucasian man with a history of dementia, ischemic heart disease, diabetes mellitus, hypertension and cerebrovascular accident. He was admitted to our department with yellowish discoloration of urine, skin and eyes, which had developed over the past few days. On physical examination, the patient was jaundiced and afebrile, with normal vital signs. There were no abdominal findings on clinical examination, and there were no clinical features of sepsis upon presentation. His laboratory investigations revealed serum total bilirubin 10 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 7.4 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 405 u/L, gamma-glutamyltransferase 223 u/L, aspartate transaminase 75 u/L and alanine transaminase 95 u/L. His inflammatory markers were within normal limits.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed a slightly thickened gallbladder, multiple gallbladder stones, dilated intrahepatic bile ducts and extrahepatic bile extending to 1.1 cm. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis following oral and intravenous contrast administration demonstrated a stone in the common bile duct (CBD), which caused dilation of the biliary ducts. A diagnosis of obstructive jaundice secondary to choledocholithiasis was made, and the patient proceeded to an ERCP, sphincterotomy and stone extraction. After improvements in the patient’s clinical and laboratory conditions, and considering his comorbidities, a decision was made to avoid surgical intervention (cholecystectomy) and to provide symptomatic treatment only at this stage.
Four days following discharge, the patient was readmitted with jaundice, abdominal pain, vomiting and a fever of 38.3 °C. A diagnosis of ascending cholangitis was made and the patient was treated initially with antibiotics. A second ERCP was performed, which revealed a dilated CBD and choledocholithiasis . An initial attempt of stone removal with a basket failed, and a mechanical lithotripsy to release the basket also failed. Finally, the wires of the basket were ruptured and stacked in the CBD together with the stone. Therefore, a decision for surgical treatment was made, and the patient was transferred to the operating room. During exploratory laparotomy , adhesiolysis, a Kocher maneuver of the duodenum and a subtotal cholecystectomy were performed. Choledochotomy was done to directly remove the impacted wires together with the stone, but without success. Therefore, a duodenotomy and an extension of the sphincterotomy were performed to remove the impacted wires and the stone in the CBD . By means of a high-pressure lavage of the CBD, additional small biliary stones were removed. The choledochotomy and duodenotomy were closed by one-layer suture, and a prophylactic gastroenterostomy was performed as a protection, to prevent leakage from the CBD and the duodenum. The postoperative course was satisfactory; the patient recovered well from the surgery, and was discharged at 7 days postoperative. A 6-month follow-up was satisfactory without complications.