A previously healthy 64-year-old female was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University (Shenyang,Liaoning Province, China) with a large retroperitoneal tumor. The patient had been experiencing right lower quadrant abdominal pain for almost three years, but she had ignored the symptoms until the abdominal pain intensified with a radiating ache in the waist. During physical examination, a large, fixed mass with a diameter of 10 cm could be felt in the right upper abdomen without obvious haphalgesia. The patient presented with normal blood pressure and no swelling in either lower extremity. General laboratory work-up results were within normal limits (Blood routine test: white blood cells, 7,000/L, hemoglobin, 11.1 g/dl; serum creatinine, 0.48 mg/dl; urine routine test: white blood cells: 9.9/µl, red blood cells:19.40/µl; neurone specific enolase: 50.20 ng/ml). The tumor was further diagnosed by following imaging studies, including computed tomography (CT) and endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS), which were performed to investigate the abdominal pain. Contrast-enhanced CT scans revealed a large (7.8 cm * 5.5 cm * 5.0 cm) irregular hypodense retroperitoneal mass with heterogeneous enhancement and invasion of the IVC, and the right ureter was compressed with proximal ureteral dilatation and hydrops . EUS revealed a hypoechoic mass outside the distal wall of the descending duodenum. EUS-guided biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of a mesenchymal tumor with low malignancy potential. Dimensional CT of the IVC was performed to investigate the relationship between the tumor and the vessel. CT revealed that the IVC was encircled by the tumor with moderate invasion . To further investigate whether the left and right renal veins had been invaded by the tumor, IVC angiography was suggested, revealing that the IVC was compressed and narrowed . The right renal vein presented with normal imaging findings and no tumor invasion. Due to the lack of essential tools, left renal vein angiography was not performed successfully. To prevent pulmonary embolism resulting from the abscission of the tumor during the operation, an IVC filter was placed prior to the surgery. According to preoperative imaging, the right kidney needed to be resected due to invasion by the tumor. Preoperative emission tomographic imaging of the kidneys indicated that the left glomerular filtration rate(GFR) was 49.8 ml/min, the right GFR was 34.8 ml/min, and the total GFR was 84.6 ml/min. Given that the retroperitoneal tumor with the IVC and adjacent viscera was resectable en bloc, the patient underwent surgical resection.
During the operation, we found that a 6 cm segment of the IVC, the right kidney with ureter, the descending duodenum seromuscular layer and the origin of the left renal vein had been invaded by the tumor , therefore, the tumor was resected en bloc with the IVC (from the suprarenal to infrarenal segment), the right kidney with ureter, and the duodenum seromuscular layer. As the left renal vein was involved, it was ligated and resected to the proximal part of the left renal vein ahead of the genital vein drainage point. IVC reconstruction was performed with the interposition of a 20 mm diameter polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) prosthesis . The proximal and distal IVCs were occluded for 70 min during the operation.There was a high risk of renal insufficiency after surgery for this patient, since a single left kidney without a left vein can not provide sufficient function. After checking the specimen from the right kidney, we found that the right renal vein was not involved. Therefore, we used the resected right vein as a bridge between the reconstructed IVC and the left renal vein. After the right renal vein was trimmed, it was anastomosed between the left renal vein and the reconstructed IVC . When the vascular occlusion was lifted, left renal vein blood smoothly flowed through the interposed right vein. showed the resection of tumor carrying the kidney with ureter. Since the procedure is a little complicated, showed the drawing of the procedure to visually describe the operation steps. The patient had an uneventful recovery process with normal renal function (serum creatinine 0.71 mg/dl) after the operation, and urine routine test showed normal number of white blood cells (2.5/µl). However, follow-up CT indicated that the left vein was blocked two weeks after the operation, her renal function is still normal(serum creatinine 0.81 mg/dl). Pathological examination verified the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. The patient was discharged two weeks after the operation. She continues well with normal renal function (serum creatinine 0.89 mg/dl) and has no evidence of disease eight months after surgery.