A 34-year-old primiparous woman was referred to the obstetric anesthesia outpatient clinic at 26 weeks of pregnancy. The patient had histories of severe bruising in early childhood and difficulty in hemostasis after tooth extraction. She required blood transfusion during laparotomy for ovarian hemorrhage at the age of 15 years. Because of recurrent ovarian hemorrhage, her menstruation was controlled with estrogen and progesterone preparations. In addition, she had a family history of thrombocytopenia and intracranial hemorrhage. The patient’s platelet count hovered around 100,000/μL and was initially followed up as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. At conization at age 25, 400 mL of platelet concentrate was transfused prophylactically, and the postoperative course continued without hemorrhagic complications.
A thorough examination at the age of 29 demonstrated normal ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation, suppressed adenosine diphosphate (ADP) aggregation to 39% when ADP 3.00 μM was added (normal range 70–90%), and collagen aggregation to 20% when collagen 2.00 μg/ml added (normal range 70–90%), but normal CD41 (glycoprotein IIb/IIIa) antigen, leading to a diagnosis of autosomal dominant, but not previously classified, thrombasthenia. After confirming the negative platelet antigen, she underwent fertility treatment at the age of 30.
To avoid unnecessary blood transfusions and provide a basis for selecting the anesthesia method when a cesarean section was necessary, we performed TEGPM as well as usual blood tests at 26, 32, 36, 38, and 39 weeks of gestation, and at 1 day, 5 days, 2 weeks, and 1 month after delivery. The results of the tests are shown in Tables and . TEGPM results showed a normal to hypercoagulable state, and ADP aggregation was within the normal range until 38 weeks of gestation. The course of pregnancy was normal without obvious bleeding. The fetal growth remained within normal limits, and a vaginal delivery was planned.
The patient was admitted to the hospital with premature rupture of the membrane at 39 weeks of gestation. Two days after labor induction, an emergency cesarean section was performed with indications of labor arrest and nonreassuring fetal status. Because TEGPM results showed that ADP aggregation was within the normal range, blood coagulability had increased, and the patient did not manifest bleeding tendencies during pregnancy, we administered single-shot spinal anesthesia. The infant was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for transient tachypnea syndrome. The intraoperative blood loss was 480 g, and the postpartum blood loss was 210 g in the first 24 h after surgery. There were no postoperative complications and no prolongation of hospital stay. The baby was discharged from the neonatal intensive care unit on the fourth day after birth without bleeding tendency, and both mother and child were discharged on the sixth day. TEGPM revealed that ADP aggregation was not suppressed until delivery, although it continued to be suppressed after delivery and showed abnormal values 1 month later.