A 79-year-old lady with a background of multiple spinal fractures resulting in chronic back pain, poor mobility and falls, osteoporosis and mild cognitive impairment was admitted to the Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, during August 2015. She was found unconscious in the garden by a neighbour and the paramedics were called to the scene. She was unable to mobilise and had been positioned in the one location unnoticed for a minimum of 2 days. On admission to the local hospital’s Accident and Emergency (A&E) department, the patient was confused, dehydrated, septic and sunburnt. She had abrasions over her thoracic and sacral area with cellulitis. When her trousers were removed, it was noted that a fly flew out. Further investigations revealed maggots embedded in her vagina labia. A fracture to the right neck of her femur, rhabdomyolysis and a urinary tract infection were also noted.
The maggots, six in total, were removed from the labia using tweezers and sent to the Scottish Parasite Diagnostic and Reference Laboratory (SPDRL), Glasgow Royal Infirmary. On arrival at the SPDRL, the live maggots were killed by immersing in boiling water for 60 s before being submerged in 90 % ethanol. The final segment containing the posterior spiracles of the segmented body was dissected using a sterile blade before being submerged into 5 % potassium hydroxide. This was gently heated to 100 °C for 5 min. Once cooled, the segment was rinsed in distilled water then transferred to a glass slide and examined under both the dissecting microscope and a light microscope using ×10 magnification.
The second instar larvae showing the spiracles were identified as those from the Protophormia species northern blowfly of the family Calliphoridae .
The patient’s condition improved after complete removal of the larvae followed by cleansing of the infected area, intravenous fluids and antibiotics. She remained well enough to go to theatre for a dynamic hip screw 10 days post admission.
The patient was reviewed by the Gynaecology Team 4 days later, and there was no evidence of an ongoing vaginal infestation. The patient was transferred to a local rehabilitation centre and made good progress. She was discharged home late November 2015.