A 3 year and 2-month-old girl presented to the emergency department with a rash on her legs for 1 day and haematuria for 4 days. There was no accompanying fever. She was started on a course of oral cefaclor for presumed urinary tract infection 2 days ago. Urine culture showed no bacterial growth. Eight weeks earlier, the girl had a purulent nail infection and was treated conservatively. One year earlier, the girl had severe streptococcal tonsillitis. The throat swab at that time was positive for streptococci. Her symptoms improved after 10 days of antibiotic therapy. There was no known kidney disease in the family.
Physical examination revealed a hypertensive patient with a rash on her lower extremities but no peri-articular swelling. The rash disappeared on day 4 after admission. Pedal and eyelid oedema were present. No ear, nose or throat (ENT) pathologies, enlarged lymph nodes or ascites were observed.
Clinical examination demonstrated Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score 15, pulse 101 beats/min, capillary refill time 1 second, blood pressure 104/63 mmHg (99.P), respiration rate of 24 breaths/min, oxygen saturation (SpO2) 96%, temperature 36.8 °C, weight 16 kg (75.P), and height 96 cm (39.P).
Investigations showed negativity for myeloperoxidase antibodies, lactoferrin antibodies, proteinase 3 antibodies, bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein antibodies, cathepsin G antibodies, antinuclear antibodies and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and elevated levels of urea, uric acid, creatinine, perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, elastase antibodies, IgG and anti-streptolysin. The level of C3 was low (0.260 g/l). The results are shown in the supplementary table .
Urinalysis: Dipstick tests showed 3+ proteinuria, haematuria, and leukocyturia. The results were negative for nitrite and showed a normal urine pH. A 24-h urine test showed normal creatinine levels and elevated levels of protein(2.8 g/l), protein/g creatinine(7955 mg/g). See .
Renal ultrasound showed bilateral enlarged hyperechogenic kidneys. The volumes were 64 cm3 for the right kidney and 70 cm3 for the left kidney. There was no evidence of any urinary transport disorder. Otherwise, an age- appropriate abdominal sonogram was documented .
Echocardiography: There was no left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) or pericardial effusion. The tricuspid aortic valve and coronary outlets were normal. Physiologic regurgitation was observed in the pulmonary and tricuspid valves. There was no aortic or mitral insufficiency.
Renal biopsy was performed. Light microscopy showed 47 glomeruli, out of which seven showed segmental basal membrane rupture with leakage of necrotic fibrinoid material into the extra-capillary space and adjacent alternating strong extra-capillary proliferation. The remaining glomeruli showed significantly increased mesangial and endocapillary hypercellularity, with focal infiltration of the intra-capillary space by neutrophilic granulocytes and monocytes. The peripheral basal membranes were typical, with podocytes with flat cytoplasm. The afferent arterioles were not affected, and Congo red staining was negative .
Electron microscopy showed glomerular parts with typically structured basement membranes. An increase in mesangial cellularity was observed, along with electron-dense subepithelial humps and mesangial deposits. Endocapillary hypercellularity and granulocytic and monocytic infiltration were prominent .
Immunofluorescence revealed positive focal segmental mesangial and glomerular basement membrane staining for IgA and complement factor (C1q). The same pattern was observed to a lesser extent for IgG. A positive glomerular basement membrane staining in the form of humps for complement factor C3 was observed. A strong complement factor C3 and Fibrinogen staining was detected in the mesangium. The same pattern was observed to a lesser extent for IgM .
A causative organism was not identified and based on an initial clinical diagnosis of Henoch-Schoenlein purpura with heavy proteinuria, the girl was initially managed with methylprednisolone 300 mg/m2 i.v for three alternate days, followed by prednisolone p.o. 40 mg/m2. Renal biopsy findings were then consistent with IgA PIGN, and the patient was treated with 10 days of antibiotic therapy consisting of cefuroxime i.v. for 3 days followed by flucloxacillin p.o. for 7 days due to a presumed untreated staphylococcal skin infection (paronychia) 8 weeks prior. Prednisolone 40 mg/m2 p.o. was continued for a total period of 1 week and then weaned over next 6 weeks.
The patient experienced partial renal recovery (decrease in serum creatinine from 0.82 mg/dl to 0.31 mg/dl) and a reduction in nephrotic proteinuria (decline from 7955 mg/g to 782 mg/g creatinine) within 32 days. Her serum C3 level completely normalized on day 25 after admission.
At the 6-month follow-up visit, the patient’s creatinine level had improved to 0.25 mg/dL, with a urine protein to creatinine (UPC) ratio of 132 mg/g.