A 72-year-old man presented with a mass in the right parotid area that had become rapidly enlarged for 2 months. His medical history included a subtotal gastrectomy for a gastric ulcer 20 years earlier and low anterior resection for moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum (Stage T1N0) 1 year earlier. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) showed a relatively well-defined heterogeneous enhancing solid lesion with calcification in the superficial lobe of the right parotid gland, with no indications of metastasis to the regional lymph nodes .
Fine-needle aspiration specimen showed that the tumor contained many clusters of malignant epithelial cells and scattered atypical spindle cells on a necrotic background. Under suspicion of a malignant tumor, the patient underwent total parotidectomy. Gross examination of the specimen revealed a multifocal, ill-defined, grayish-white, and heterogeneous solid tumor, accompanied by calcification and measuring 3 × 2.5 cm. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of two malignant components, carcinoma and sarcoma , with multifocal invasion (> 1.5 mm) of the capsule and adjacent tissues on a background of pre-existing pleomorphic adenoma and the osteosarcoma component was diffusely positive for vimentin . Both components showed some degree of nuclear immunoreactivity for p53 .
Following surgery, the patient received postoperative radiation therapy. Six months later, he complained of abdominal pain. Abdominal CT showed a distension of small bowel with luminal narrowing and localized high density material in the abdominal cavity . The lesion was regarded as mechanical obstruction with postoperative adhesion because the patient had undergone previous abdominal surgery for rectal adenocarcinoma. After conservative management for several days, he experienced severe abdominal pain and an increased heart rate, and an emergency laparotomy was performed. Multiple hard calcified masses were observed in the abdominal walls, omentum, and mesentery, and mass excision with small bowel resection was done. On gross examination, bulky, gritty, and hemorrhagic mass adhered to the mesentery was identified . Microscopically, the tumors were identified as osteogenic sarcomas, with histologic features identical to those of the osteosarcomatous component of the carcinosarcoma of the parotid gland . The tumor cells were positive for vimentin on immunohistochemical staining . Because of its rapid development over 6 months and no history of osteosarcoma at any sites, we concluded that the abdominal osteosarcoma was metastatic from the carcinosarcoma of the parotid gland. The patient was postoperatively admitted to the intensive care unit and died of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) caused by aspiration pneumonia.