A 22-year-old Caucasian lady presented in 2014 with features of pulmonary fibrosis, chronic cutaneous problems, and symmetrical polyarthritis. She had previously been well without any comorbidities. A high-resolution computed tomography (CT) chest and lung biopsy were performed, with a diagnosis of hypersensitivity pneumonitis being made, in the context of significant mould exposure. Skin biopsies demonstrated spongiotic dermatitis (eczema). Echocardiography revealed right ventricular dilatation with mild tricuspid regurgitation. Left ventricular size and function was normal.
She was discharged and attended as an outpatient to a specialist centre for pulmonary hypertension, as it was assumed at the time that the right ventricular dilatation was a consequence of undiagnosed pulmonary hypertension. Here, right heart catheterization indicated normal pulmonary arterial pressure. Subsequently, no cardiology follow-up was arranged. The patient was treated with methotrexate, sulfasalazine, and intermittent prednisone over the next 4 years, although a single unifying diagnosis to explain her all of her symptoms was not identified.
In 2018, the patient attended a rheumatology clinic. The rheumatologist was concerned that there were clinical signs of pulmonary hypertension detected on physical examination, and thus a routine echocardiogram was performed. This study demonstrated severe right ventricular dilatation . There was now severe tricuspid valve regurgitation . The left ventricular size was normal, as was systolic and diastolic left ventricular function. There was no significant left-sided valvular disease. The patient was experiencing dyspnoea on walking 50 m on a flat surface, or at the top of a single flight of stairs. Additionally, she described four episodes of unheralded syncope, all occurring whilst seated. On physical examination, the blood pressure was 130/70 mmHg, the heart rate 88 b.p.m., and regular, with oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. The jugular venous pressure was elevated with prominent V waves. There was a right ventricular heave and a loud pan-systolic murmur audible at the left sternal edge. Pulsatile hepatomegaly was present. Fine crackles were present in both lung bases. Electrocardiogram demonstrated atrial fibrillation with a right bundle branch block .
Due to the concerning features on echocardiography and the symptoms of dyspnoea and syncope, the patient was admitted to a monitored cardiac ward for further investigation. Telemetry demonstrated non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) at a rate of 150 b.p.m. , of which the patient was symptomatic with palpitations but there was no haemodynamic compromise.
Right heart catheterization revealed normal pulmonary arterial pressures (22/10 mmHg), but elevated right atrial pressures (16/14 mmHg). Cardiac output (5.4 L/min) and pulmonary vascular resistance (88 dynes.s/cm5) were normal.
The patient underwent transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) and successful electrical cardioversion, restoring sinus rhythm. The TOE excluded atrial thrombus, any intracardiac left-to-right shunt, and all four pulmonary veins communicated with the left atrium.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not show any late gadolinium enhancement in either ventricle, and congenital anatomical anomalies were excluded. Cardiac positron emission tomography ( PET) did not reveal increased metabolic activity to indicate inflammation or features of active cardiac sarcoidosis. A CT chest demonstrated unchanged features of pulmonary fibrosis.
Myocardial biopsy was performed under fluoroscopic guidance. Histopathology revealed a predominantly lymphocytic chronic inflammatory infiltrate . A single well-formed small granuloma as well as a second focus of scattered giant cells was noted. Moderate to severe myopathic features were seen, including myocyte necrosis with features of myocytolysis and anisonucleosis, and patchy regenerative interstitial fibrosis. The diagnosis was consistent with lymphocytic myocarditis. The morphological pattern that comprised myocyte necrosis and a widespread lymphocytic infiltrate without predominating giant cells and granulomas was less likely to be consistent with cardiac sarcoidosis or giant cell myocarditis. There was a paucity of eosinophils, making the diagnosis of hypersensitivity myocarditis highly unlikely. The classic features of arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC) were also not seen, i.e. patchy to diffuse irregular replacement of myocytes by adipose tissue, with associated variable amounts of fibrosis, lack of significant lymphocytic infiltrate, and scattered enlarged degenerate vacuolated myocytes. A broad range of serological investigations had also been conducted, with no significant positive results.
Given the documented symptomatic VT, and the history of syncope, the patient was referred for a cardiac electrophysiology study, which demonstrated inducible VT originating from the RV apex that lasted for over 30 s. Following a multidisciplinary discussion, the patient consented to the implantation of an automated implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (AICD).
The patient was commenced on prednisone 25 mg daily, as well as sotalol 80 mg twice daily and apixaban 5 mg twice daily, prior to discharge. Since discharge, her prednisone has been ceased after being systematically weaned following commencement of azathioprine 100 mg daily. She has been stable thereafter, with no further arrhythmias and has returned to work. Occasional episodes of decompensated mild right heart failure have been treated successfully with oral diuretics, without the need for intravenous therapy or inpatient admission. An echocardiogram performed 12 months after discharge revealed a marginal improvement in right ventricular function, with residual severe tricuspid regurgitation. As the overall clinical condition of the patient has remained stable, repeat myocardial biopsy was not performed.
The process is considered chronic based on the first detection of right ventricular abnormalities 4 years prior. In addition, the chronic inflammatory infiltrate and interstitial fibrosis supports this conclusion.
Thus, we describe a case of an immunosuppressed young lady who was suffering from a chronic low-grade lymphocytic myocarditis of the RV resulting in dilatation of the chamber, severe functional tricuspid regurgitation, and arrhythmic complications including atrial fibrillation and VT. All cardiac imaging modalities demonstrated normal left ventricular size and function, suggesting this process demonstrated a preponderance to the RV.