A 76-year-old Japanese woman presented with neutrophilia, mild renal dysfunction, and proteinuria and was referred to our Department in year X . Her neutrophilia was first discovered during a medical check-up when she was 74 years old (year X-2), and thereafter, her neutrophil count progressively increased. Her serum G-CSF was 161 pg/mL , which was far beyond the normal range (< 39.0 pg/mL).
Her 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET/CT) scan showed intense uptake in the bone marrow but did not show any evidence of a malignant solid tumor or an occult abscess related to bacterial infection. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed on peripheral blood smears, and there was no clonality in the patient’s neutrophils. Her urine had tested positive for urinary occult blood since she was 50 years old, and she developed proteinuria after her neutrophil count increased above 20.0 × 103/μL in year X-1.
Her blood pressure was 118/59 mmHg; other vital signs were also normal. Physical examinations were unremarkable. When she was admitted in year X, the results of laboratory tests were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count, 35.9 × 103/μL (neutrophil count, 31.3 × 103/μL; 87.2% of the WBC count); hemoglobin level, 11.5 g/dL; platelet count, 27.3 × 104/μL; serum creatinine, 0.85 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate, 49.4 mL/min/1.73 m2; blood urea nitrogen, 16 mg/dL; lactate dehydrogenase, 170 U/L; total protein/albumin, 8.0/3.6 g/dL; and immunoglobulin G (IgG), 2901 mg/dL. Serum immunoelectrophoresis revealed a monoclonal IgG λ peak; however, the levels of other immunoglobulins were normal, and bone marrow aspiration showed less than 10% clonal plasma cells, thereby yielding the diagnosis of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS). Tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, and cytokeratin fragment were all within normal range. Both the levels of C-reactive protein and complements were normal, and both antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor were negative. Tests for hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus were negative. Her urinary protein excretion was 2.55 g per gram urinary creatinine, and the proteinuria selectivity index was 0.17. We found hematuria (20–29 red blood cells/high-power field) and granular casts in her urinary sediment.
A renal biopsy was performed, and sections evaluated by light microscopy showed many lobulated glomeruli. Mesangial proliferation and focal double contouring of the glomerular capillary walls were also present . Additionally, endocapillary proliferation was observed in the glomeruli . Immunoperoxidase staining for neutrophil elastase revealed some neutrophils infiltrating the glomeruli . Double immunofluorescence staining for neutrophils and macrophages showed that the infiltration of macrophages was mainly around the glomeruli, and the glomeruli contained more neutrophils than macrophages (data not shown). We identified intratubular cellular casts and interstitial expansion in the tubulointerstitial area . Immunoperoxidase staining for G-CSF did not show a specific staining pattern (data not shown). Immunofluorescent staining showed no deposition of immunoglobulins or complements (data not shown). Expansion of the subendothelial space suggesting injury of glomerular endothelial cells and effacement of the podocyte foot processes were seen in sections evaluated by electron microscopy . There were no electron dense deposits. Based on these biopsy findings, we diagnosed the patient with MPGN-like glomerulopathy.
The patient was conservatively treated with an angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker, but her proteinuria did not resolve. On the contrary, her proteinuria fluctuated in accord with the changes in her blood neutrophil count. Finally, the neutrophil count decreased without any medication, and the proteinuria diminished considerably .