A 65-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for assessment of a gallbladder tumor that had been detected by abdominal ultrasonography during a medical checkup. She had no symptoms. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a papillary lesion (25 mm in diameter) in the fundus of the gallbladder with irregular thickening of the gallbladder wall. The boundary between the tumor and liver was unclear, and the wall thickening extended from the fundus to the cystic duct . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography showed a complete filling defect in the cystic duct . Blood test showed inflammatory maker did not elevate. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was 2.1 ng/ml, and serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 level was 24 U/ml. According to these findings, we diagnosed the tumor as gallbladder cancer invading the liver and cystic duct, and we decided to perform extended cholecystectomy.
There were no adhesions around the gallbladder, while the gallbladder wall was thickened. The hard tumor was detected at the fundus. Intraoperative ultrasonography revealed the tumor did not invade liver obviously. Inflammation changes were seen around the neck and Calot triangle. After ligation and dissection of the cystic duct at the junction, the intraoperative frozen section of the cystic duct stump and 2 sentinel lymph nodes were negative for malignancy; therefore, we performed extended cholecystectomy with liver bed resection.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen showed a superficially spreading papillary tumor with thick mucus on its surface . The gallbladder wall was diffusely thickened. Pathological examination revealed that the gallbladder neoplasm was composed of atypical cells arranged in a papillary architecture along with the development of fibrovascular stalks. These tall columnar cells contained large amounts of mucus . Ovarian-like stroma was not detected. The nucleolus body was remarkable, but the tumor was noninvasive and showed no evidence of lymph node metastasis. These pathological findings were compatible with ICPN. In immunohistochemical staining, MUC5AC and MUC6 were strongly positive. CK7 and MUC1 were also positive, but not CK20, MUC2, estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor. Immunohistochemistry indicated that ICPN was predominantly gastric type, with focal pancreatobiliary type. In addition, many lymphocytes and multinucleated giant cells had infiltrated the thickened gallbladder wall with prominent Rokitansky–Aschoff sinuses. These finding were especially seen at the fundus and were indicative of chronic granulomatous changes within the fundus . Based on these pathological findings, we diagnosed the tumor as an ICPN concomitant with XGC.
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 with no complications. She was clinically well with no evidence of recurrence at 3 months after resection.