A 35 year old woman came to the hospital with unexplainable abdominal pain, accompanied by vomiting. The patient had been taking her medication regularly for five years after the diagnosis of lupus nephritis and had been taking medications irregularly until two months prior to the onset of LE. There was no history of intestinal diseases in her family. Our study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Xinqiao Hospital of Army Medical University (No. 2022-125-01) and received informed consent from the patient.
The physical examination upon admission and the pressure of blood, temperature, pulse rate, respiratory rate was normal.
On physical examination, the patient had diffused abdominal pain and pressing pain, without rebound tenderness. Laboratory tests revealed a high antinuclear antibody titer (ANA 1:100) and lower titers of C3 and C4. According to the European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) classification criteria[,], which added antinuclear antibodies to the entry criterion and provided an improved SLE diagnosis of combined sensitivity and specificity, the admission criterion ANA was equal or greater (1:80), the kidney biopsy of International Society of Nephrology (ISN) class IV lupus nephritis (diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis) was 10 score, lower complement C3 and C4 was a score of 4, and the total score was 14 (≥ 10). The diagnosis of SLE was clear. The sensitive indicator of active SLE often was a reduced level of complement C3.
An abdominal contrast enhancement computed tomography (CT) was performed the day after admission. CT showed that there was marked and dramatic whole colon and rectum edema with the target sign or doughnut sign [,], and the thickened intestinal wall was about 4mm to 13mm from the rectum to ascending colon. Ischemic and congestive changes were seen locally in the same bowel , which could be seen as partially discontinuous with the ischemic segment intestinal wall, with gas shadows of a discontinuous mucosal line . The mesenteric vessels were increased and thickened with the comb sign [,], which was accompanied by mesenteric fat attenuation , bilateral ureter-hydronephrosis and ascites .
In previous reports, an active disease of SLE was related to flares of LE, so LE was regarded as the expression in SLE. Consequently, we administered 10 mg of methylprednisolone sodium succinate and 100 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, hydroxychloroquine (100 mg) and nutrition support. After one week of the treatment, the symptoms, laboratory tests, and intestinal abnormalities on CT images were improved. A follow-up CT was performed 7 d before discharge and revealed no abnormal findings . The patient has been treated with a methylprednisolone and hydroxychloroquine tapering. The timeline for treatments and efficacy evaluations of this case is summarized in Figure .
She had no family history of intestinal diseases.
The kidney biopsy of ISN class IV lupus nephritis (diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis).
She has no personal and family history.
On admission, the blood pressure was 93/72 mmHg, the body temperature was 36.5 °C, the pulse rate was 116/min, and the respiratory rate was 20/min.
On physical examination, diffuse abdominal pain and pressing pain, without rebound tenderness.
The admission criterion ANA is equal or greater (1:80), the kidney biopsy of ISN class IV lupus nephritis (diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis) was 10 scores, lower complement C3 and C4 was 4 scores, the total scores was 14(≥ 10). The diagnosis of SLE is clear. A reduced level of complement C3 is often a sensitive indicator of active SLE.
An abdominal contrast enhancement CT was performed the day after admission. CT showed that there was marked and dramatic whole colon and rectum edema with the target sign or doughnut sign [,], and the thickened intestinal wall was about 4mm to 13 mm from the rectum to ascending colon. Ischemic and congestive changes were seen locally in the same bowel , which could be seen as partially discontinuous with the ischemic segment intestinal wall, with gas shadows of a discontinuous mucosal line . The mesenteric vessels were increased and thickened with the comb sign [,], which was accompanied by mesenteric fat attenuation , bilateral ureter-hydronephrosis and ascites .