The patient was a 64-year-old retired woman from Yichang, Hubei Province with a past medical history of cholecystectomy for cholecystitis 25 years prior. She had no history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, or diabetes. The patient presented with characteristic electric shock-like, lancinating pain in the right V2 distribution area accompanied by right pulsatile tinnitus. The pain was triggered by innocuous stimuli such as brushing teeth or washing her face over the affected trigeminal dermatomes. She was first treated with oxcarbazepine 450 mg daily for 1 month without significant relief. She was then switched to carbamazepine 200 mg daily, which provided initial control of her symptoms for 2 months. However, the pain gradually worsened, requiring an increase in carbamazepine to 600 mg daily. At this higher dosage, discomfort such as dizziness occurred, and the pain was still uncontrollable.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed multiple vascular flow void signals in the right cisternal segment near the trigeminal nerve. Further cerebral angiography revealed a right arteriovenous fistula that was supplied by the petrous branch of the middle meningeal artery of the right external carotid artery and the posterior meningeal artery branch of the right vertebral artery (A&B). The fistula was located between the tentorial dura mater and drained through the superior petrosal vein (SPV) to the basal vein (Borden class III). Hence, interventional embolization was performed through the enlarged right external carotid artery to the posterior branch of the middle meningeal artery. During the operation, a Marathon microcatheter was used for superselection to the fistula; the onyx spread well and the casting was satisfactory. Following embolization, the patient's pulsatile tinnitus resolved, however TN recurred on postoperative day 3 with identical location and characteristics as her preoperative pain. Her postoperative medical regimen consisted of carbamazepine 400 mg daily and the addition of pregabalin 300 mg daily in an attempt to control her persistent facial pain. According to the patient, this adjustment provided a modest decrease in frequency of painful paroxysms, though her symptoms remained suboptimally controlled. Six months postoperatively, follow-up angiography revealed complete obliteration of the DAVF .
Therefore, we decided to perform MVD via the retrosigmoid approach for this patient. Preoperative re-examination of the T2-constructive interference in steady state (CISS) high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance sequence showed that the vascular flow void signal was significantly reduced compared with that before embolization, but the significantly expanded flow void signal near the trigeminal cisternal segment could still be seen (C). During the operation, the SPV was found to be tortuously dilated and formed a venous lake. The blood vessels showed a post-embolization appearance, were dark blue, and had no arterial pulsation. The pontotrigeminal vein, which joins the SPV from the ventral side, was also tortuously dilated, dark blue in color, and hard in texture, and venous thrombosis was considered. The dilated vein pushed down the trigeminal cisternal segment from the ventral side (A). We attempted to separate the neurovascular vessels with spherical microvascular strippers, but the thrombosed veins were severely sclerotic and difficult to move. Therefore, bipolar coagulation was used to reduce the diameter of the vein in the intermittent 7 W of power so that the trigeminal cistern was no longer compressed. A Teflon pad was then placed between the draining vein and the trigeminal cisternal segment to further open the nerve–vessel space, and the branch of the superior cerebellar artery was found to form compression; therefore, we routinely used a Teflon pad on the responsible blood vessel in the REZ (D). The patient's right facial pain disappeared immediately postoperatively, and she had transient facial numbness that disappeared 3 weeks postoperatively.