Preoperative tests, including corneal topography utilizing a Zeiss ATLAS 9000 (Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany), were performed on a 44-year-old Caucasian male patient considering CLRS. The patient did not have medical, family, or psychosocial history that could indicate predisposition or existence of corneal abnormalities, nor did he show any symptoms that could suggest corneal aberrations. Moreover, the patient had never undergone previous eye interventions. No financial, language, or cultural challenges occurred regarding the management of this case. The results from the initial presentation (T = 0) (that is, topographic examination) did not indicate corneal abnormalities in either eye of the patient , nor any other ocular pathologies. For GP, a buccal mucosa sample was collected by using an iSWAB collection kit (Mawi DNA Technologies, Hayward, CA, USA). After DNA was extracted (QIAamp DNA mini kit, QIAGEN Inc. Hilden, Germany) from the sample, a next-generation sequencing (NGS) test (AvaGen, Avellino Lab, Menlo Park, CA, USA) targeting 75 genes specific to the structure and health of the eye was used to analyze the patient’s DNA. The sequencing results identified four potentially pathogenic variants located on chr 5 (ADGRV1), chr 8 (PTK2), chr 16 (ZNF469), and chr 17 (KRT15) within the patient’s genome . These DNA mutations were found to carry a risk factor for ECD based on the following analysis.
Adhering to the guidelines put forward by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) for the interpretation of sequence variants , the following criteria were applied to determine which variants within the patient’s test results were most likely damaging and thus carry a risk for ECD. Sequence variants were filtered based on their minor allele frequency (MAF) in the general population and protein coding changes, categorized as missense, STOP gain/loss, nonsense, or frameshift/non-frameshift indels. Variants with an MAF < 0.01 based on The Genome Aggregation Database were considered to be possibly pathogenic. The pathology for each variant was also gauged by using three in silico prediction tools: PolyPhen2-HDIV, LRT, and PROVEAN. Each tool aims to determine the likely impact on the transcribed amino acid sequence and translated protein due to a change in the DNA sequence. All genome positions were based on the Genome Reference Consortium Human genome build 37 (GRCh37.p13).
The filtering criteria resulted in the four heterozygous, missense mutations detailed in Table . The ADGRV1 and KRT15 variants were classified as possibly damaging, deleterious, and damaging by PolyPhen2-HDIV, LRT, and PROVEAN respectively, while the variants in the PTK2 and ZNF469 genes were classified as benign, neutral, or no data available by the in silico prediction tools we used.
A further analysis was conducted by using the GeneMANIA server to provide insight of gene function for the four genes and how these variants within each gene could affect the health of the cornea via coordinated molecular pathways . This analysis found that ADGRV1 and KRT15 are coexpressed and that ADGRV1, KRT15, and ZNF469 interact with PTK2 via integrins, transmembrane cell adhesion receptors that play important roles in the regulation of cell migration during development, wound healing, and inflammatory response . All four genes are integral to eye development and various molecular pathways. A few have been indicated in eye diseases of various types.
The missense variant located in ADGRV1 results in a change in the amino acid sequence of histidine to arginine at position 4661 (H4661R) within a region of the ADGRV1 protein that overlaps with a Calx-beta domain. The Calx-beta motif is a protein motif that is used for calcium binding and regulation, and this variant may lead to conformational changes in the protein that affects the binding of the ADGRV1 protein to its interacting partners by disrupting calcium binding sites. ADGRV1 is part of the USH2 complex, which plays an essential role in the development of hearing and vision via cell surface receptor signaling pathways . A variant within this gene has previously been reported in two brothers suffering from KC .
Currently, there is no evidence that links PTK2 to ECD. However, the PTK2 variant found in the proband induces an amino acid change of tyrosine to cystine (Y726C) in the functional domain of the PTK2 protein. PTK2 plays an essential role in regulating cell migration, adhesion, spreading, and reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton .
This missense variant in the ZNF469 gene results in the conversion of amino acid 3585 from glycine to valine (G3585V) within the ZNF469 protein. It is considered benign and neutral by PolyPhen2-HDIV and PROVEAN, respectively; however, the region where it is located overlaps with two regulatory regions that may affect binding of certain transcription factors (TFs) to their sites. There are numerous studies that have linked mutations in ZNF469 to KC and to brittle cornea syndrome (BCS), an extreme form of ECD [–].
KRT15 is expressed in corneal limbal epithelial cells and is involved in wound healing [, ]. The missense variant found in this gene, which results in an amino acid change from arginine to cysteine (R115C), overlaps with an intermediate filament rod domain in the protein structure. This plays a significant role during the protein assembly process, and mutations in this functionally important area disrupt end-to-end keratin interactions that could subsequently affect the corneal epithelia . This variant also falls within a regulatory region that serves as a TF binding site . Based on tissue and upstream signaling pathways, the related TF either enhances or suppresses the transcription of KRT15. Any dysregulation of KRT15 at this TF binding site caused by this variant could affect changes in the cytoskeleton and could possibly affect the development of the lacrimal gland .
After the results of GP determined the presence of potentially pathogenic variants, the patient was recalled and reevaluated with three different advanced tomographers (T = 52 days after initial presentation): a Pentacam (OCULUS, Wetzlar, Germany), an Orbscan (Bausch & Lomb, Rochester, NY, USA), and a SIRIUS (CSO, Florence, Italy). A deformity of the posterior profile of the cornea in the left eye (LE) was identified with all three instruments. The tomography measurements are shown in Fig. . The Pentacam produced a Belin/Ambrósio Enhanced Ectasia Display that highlighted a “warning” signal (yellow) that showed an elevation of 12 microns in the differential map of the back surface of the cornea . The Orbscan showed the presence of an alteration of the corneal posterior elevation of 0.058 mm . The results of the Sirius further confirmed the presence of an asymmetry of the curvature expressed in D (diopters) between the front and back face of the cornea in the LE, Slb = 0.24 D .