A 43-year-old Caucasian woman presented in her 32nd week of gestation with a tumor of the parotid gland. She had noticed the swelling increasing over the past six months. She was otherwise asymptomatic, without any pain, mouth-opening difficulties or facial nerve dysfunction. Ultrasonography of her neck showed a parotid lesion 40 × 30 × 27.5 mm in size, with an heterogeneous appearance. Considering her advanced state of pregnancy, we advised conservative management in the form of watchful waiting and regular review until the birth.
At our patient's next review, only five weeks later, we noticed rapid growth of the lesion with expansion into the parapharyngeal space. There was still no facial nerve involvement, although our patient's mouth opening was slightly limited. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck showed that the tumor had increased to 70 × 60 × 60 mm, reaching the parapharyngeal space with marked obstruction of the oropharynx of about 50% . Further diagnostic tests such as fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) were discussed. We were concerned about the risk of malignancy and increasing local complications due to the rapid growth. Considering the risk of spreading tumor cells and the unreliability of FNAC in identifying the malignant nature of parotid carcinoma , we decided to perform surgical resection to prevent further complications and to obtain a secure diagnosis.
After discussing this case with the gynecologists at our interdisciplinary tumor board meeting, it was decided to deliver the baby by caesarean section in the 38th week of gestation with epidural anesthesia using mepivacain and sufentanil. The surgical resection of the tumor was performed four days later. It was possible to completely remove the tumor via a standard cervicofacial incision without the need to resect the mandible. Although the tumor had stretched the facial nerve to double its usual length, there was no postoperative nerve dysfunction (House Brackmann grade I).
On histological analysis, the lesion was identified as a pleomorphic adenoma without evidence of malignancy . Immunohistochemistry did not show any positive expression of oestrogen or progesterone receptors. Our patient remained well with no evidence of recurrence after a follow-up of one year.