A 17-year-old male patient presented with pain in the lower left posterior region of the mandible. The patient had no significant systemic history and reported no previous extractions in the mentioned area. Clinical examination revealed the absence of Teeth 37 and 38. Palpation of the alveolar ridge showed no swelling or bony prominences.

Radiographic examination revealed that Tooth 37 was impacted transversely between Teeth 36 and 38, with Tooth 38 in a vertical position close to the occlusal plane, Stage Nolla 8. Tomographic imaging indicated that the crown of Tooth 37 was oriented lingually, with the roots separated; the mesial root was curved and thin, while the distal root was straight and thick.

The diagnosis was an impacted Tooth 37 in a transverse position with the crown oriented lingually and Tooth 38 retained in a vertical position. A consultation with the orthodontics department was made to define the treatment plan. Due to the position of the second molar and the lack of space for repositioning, flap extraction of Tooth 37 was planned, with subsequent eruption of Tooth 38 and fixed orthodontic treatment. The ultimate goal was to restore masticatory function by positioning the third molar in place of the second molar. The patient was informed regarding the surgical procedure, the risks associated with it, and the alternative treatments. He signed the informed consent through which he agreed to enter the study and to the use of images of the surgical procedure in scientific articles. The surgical intervention for flap extraction of Tooth 37 was scheduled. The procedure involved block anesthesia for the inferior alveolar nerve, lingual nerve, and buccal nerve. An L-shaped or monoangular incision was made at the level of the second molar. The mucoperiosteal flap was elevated to expose the bone plate. An osteotomy was performed in the occlusal bone to visualize the crown of the second molar. The separated roots were sectioned for removal due to the limited space between the first molar and the third molar and the width of the second molar crown.

The distal segment (crown and root) was extracted first due to better visibility during the process, followed by removal of the mesial segment (crown and root). Both segments were luxated with a flag elevator.

An alveolar curette was used to clean the bony crypt corresponding to the crown and remove the pericoronal sac, followed by irrigation with 0.9% sodium chloride. The procedure was completed with discontinuous suturing using 3/0 polyglycolic acid, with five simple sutures. The extracted molar was observed in two parts. Amoxicillin 500 mg every 8 h for 5 days and sodium diclofenac 50 mg and dexamethasone 4 mg both every 8 h for 3 days were prescribed.

Regarding follow-up, the patient was evaluated 6 months after the surgical intervention with favorable bone healing according to an x-ray. The report confirms “alveolar walls preserved, no evidence of spicules or bony defects; defined borders, no radiographic signs of osteitis”.