Multiple joint swelling for 10 years, which was aggravated for 1 year.
The patient was a 67-year-old woman who experienced bilateral knee swelling and pain 10 years ago without apparent cause and was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis at a local hospital. She treated herself with over-the-counter oral anti-rheumatic drugs. In the past year, the joint swelling and pain gradually worsened and affected the entire body, mainly involving the bilateral joints of the hands, knees, wrists, and shoulders. The swelling and pain were slightly more serious on bilateral shoulder joints and right knee. In addition, the patient had dry eyes and mouth and should drink water when eating dried food. She was then presented to Division of Rheumatology and Immunology. According to laboratory testing results, she was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis. Computed tomography (CT) revealed an anterior mediastinal tumor. She was subsequently transferred to the Department of Thoracic Surgery for surgical treatment.
Ten years of hypertension, without any medical treatment; systolic blood pressure 150 -160 mmHg, and diastolic blood pressure 95-105 mmHg.
There was no remarkable family history of related diseases.
Multiple joint swelling.
Laboratory testing results were as follows: SS-A, weakly positive; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 39 mm/h; antinuclear antibody, 1:320 (+); immunoglobulin G, 17.10 g/L; immunoglobulin M, 2.58 g/L; C-reactive protein, 11.10 mg/L; and rheumatoid factor, 941 IU/mL.
Chest CT showed a shadow of dense fat visible in the anterior mediastinum. Multiple fat-dense nodules of varying sizes were observed, with a maximum diameter of 44 mm × 28 mm. Calcification was observed around some nodules. No enhancement was seen on enhanced CT .
The border of the tumor and tissue was well-defined. The cut surface was grayish white or grayish yellow. The tumor had a soft to firm texture depending on the fat contents. Microscopically, the tumor cells were highly pleomorphic. Mature adipocyte areas admixed with spindle cells were observed. Some nuclei were mildly atypical. Floret-like giant cells were observed, and focal calcification was present. Thick-walled blood vessels were visible. Spindle cells with mild nuclear atypia and hyperchromatic nuclei were observed. The results of immunohistochemical analysis were CD117 (-), Dog-1 (-), S-100 (partial +), SMA (partial +), CK (-), desmin (-), vimentin (+), Ki67 (5%), CD34 (+), and CD68 (-) .