A 32-year-old woman referred regular menstrual cycles lasting 7 days with a normal flow and had no previous history of period pains. She was admitted to our hospital for abnormal vaginal bleeding for 2 months and lower abdominal pain for 4 days. The abnormal vaginal bleeding was described as persistent and the amount of blood loss was less than her normal menses. The lower abdominal pain was sudden and progressively worsening which she described as dull pain in nature, located over the lower abdomen, and resolved by changing to side lying position.
Physical examination revealed a well-healed cesarean section scar tenderness on palpation of the lower abdomen. Bimanual examination revealed that a cyst palpable in front of the uterus about 10 cm in diameter. It appeared to be attached to front of the uterus.
Laboratory examination showed red blood cell count of 3.2*10∧12/L, hemoglobin of 77 g/L. The C-reactive protein level was 24.4 mg/L.
Pelvic ultrasound was performed which demonstrated normal adnexae and an enlarged uterus. It revealed a 10.3*10.2*9.3 cm cystic mass in the front of the uterus , and a 7.1*6.5*4.6 cm medium echo mass in the cystic mass with no apparent blood flow signal was detected by CDFI , and 2.6*2.5*2.5 cm masses could be seen outside the lower part of the anterior wall of the uterus . The two masses were closely adjacent to the cesarean section incision in the anterior wall of the uterus. The whole abdomen CT scan showed that cystic mass could be seen in the front of the uterus, with a range of about 11.1 * 9.7 cm. The boundary between the lesion and the anterior wall of the uterus was unclear .
Based on the imaging studies and patient's history, suspicion of cystic adenomyosis was raised. We performed transabdominal surgery on the patient. The intraoperative exploration revealed a cystic mass with a size of about 10*10 cm arising from the cervical isthmus of the anterior wall of the uterus. We have detected a chocolate-like viscous liquid inside the cyst and noticed the adhesion of the anterior wall of the cyst to the anterior wall of the uterus and the bladder. The posterior wall of cyst adhered to the intestines, as shown in . There was an adenomyoma-like nodule about 3*3 cm deep in the cyst. It showed unremarkable adnexae.
She was nursed in the ward for a total of 5 days after the surgery and was discharged well without any post-operative complications. We asked the patient to continue treatment with GnRH after operation. Post-operative pathology confirmed cystic adenomyosis . The final diagnosis was cystic adenomyosis.
Two months after operation, we followed up the patient and no abnormality was found in ultrasonography . The patient remains asymptomatic.