A 59-year-old man with complaints of epigastric discomfort for 5 months underwent upper endoscopy in a local hospital in July 2018; the gastroscopy report described a “foreign body in the mucosa of the esophagus”. At that time, a nematode body was removed under endoscopy, and parasitic infection was considered. The removed worm body was discarded without further detection. The patient was then referred to our hospital after approximately two weeks in August 2018, and gastroscopy was recommended again.
The endoscopy showed a white movable worm-like object adhering to the esophageal mucosa at approximately 35–38 cm from the incisors, which was more clearly depicted by narrow-band imaging . Observing the peristalsis of the worm, we were able to distinguish its head and tail, and the worm was carefully removed in one piece using biopsy forceps to grab the head and placed in formalin . Parasitologists at our hospital confirmed that the object was a mature female G. pulchrum individual, which may have been living in the body for at least 1 year.
No other worms were found in the patient’s oral cavity, esophagus, stomach or duodenum. Physical examination and clinical examination revealed no abnormalities, and no parasite eggs were observed in multiple stool tests. This patient had no high-risk factors for esophageal cancer, such as smoking, flushing after drinking, or tumor history. He was a farmer in Hebei Province, China, and he had not traveled abroad. His living environment was relatively poor, and he also admitted to drinking unboiled water and eating uncooked vegetables that he grew with human feces fertilization. No animal was kept in his house. We suppose that the route of transmission was accidental ingestion of water or food contaminated by intermediate insect hosts.
In addition to the worm, this patient also had a large area of early esophageal cancer around the esophagus, which was 19–25 cm away from the incisors . Magnifying gastroscopy and ultrasound endoscopy indicated that the lesion was limited to the M2 layer , and no lymph node metastasis was found on enhanced computed tomography (CT). The patient underwent endoscopic submucosal dissection . The pathological report revealed M2-infiltrated early esophageal squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, with focal infiltration of the muscularis mucosa but no complete infiltration. As no tumor tissue was present at the resection margin, curative resection was achieved. The squamous cell carcinoma lesion did not contain any parasites.
Forty-eight hours after the operation, the patient began taking prednisone acetate 30 mg Qd to prevent stenosis and albendazole for 7 days as antiparasitic treatment. The patient developed esophageal stenosis after surgery, though it steadily improved after multiple dilations. There was no parasite recurrence after repeated gastroscopy, and the patient’s symptoms disappeared.