A 56-year-old male patient presented with a pancreatic cyst identified by abdominal ultrasonography on a comprehensive medical examination and was admitted to our hospital. He had a past medical history of type 2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and chronic hepatitis C for which he received interferon therapy for chronic hepatitis C more than 20 years previously. He had no family history of cancer. Laboratory tests revealed normal levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9, and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II) were absent. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a cystic mass measuring 13 mm in size in the pancreatic head and a low-density mass measuring 16 mm in size in the pancreatic tail , which was partially enhanced on the contrast-enhanced ultrasound image . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed branch duct type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms in the pancreatic head and an early enhanced nodule measuring approximately 10 mm in size in the pancreatic tail . An enhancement of the nodule lasted until the late phase, although its density was gradually attenuated. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not detect the corresponding nodule in the pancreatic tail.
Based on the above features, our initial differential was that of a neuroendocrine tumor or a solid pseudopapillary neoplasm (SPN). Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) was performed to make a definitive diagnosis. FNA cytology showed that the tumor cells exhibited an acidophilic cytoplasm with small, round nuclei. Immunohistochemistry was performed to differentiate between a neuroendocrine tumor, SPN, and acinar cell carcinoma. The tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin, nuclear/membranous β-catenin, CD10, and CD56 and were negative for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, progesterone receptor, vimentin, and Bcl-10. Therefore, we suspected that the hypervascular tumor in the pancreatic tail was suspected to be SPN, but the results were not convincing. Laparoscopic spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy was performed. Macroscopically, a well-circumscribed whitish-yellow solid mass, measuring 7 mm in the greatest dimension, was found in the pancreatic tail . Histologically, polygonal tumor cells with round nuclei and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm formed thick trabeculae. The differentiation was moderate . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for hepatocyte paraffin 1, AE1/AE3, and CD10 and negative for AFP, progesterone receptor, vimentin, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin . A canalicular pattern was confirmed on the polyclonal CEA staining . HC is characteristically hepatocyte paraffin 1 (HepPar1)-positive and has a canalicular pattern on polyclonal CEA staining. Finally, a diagnosis of moderately differentiated pancreatic HC was made. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged in good health 10 days after the operation. The patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy and remained recurrence-free at 6 months after the surgery. The serum levels of AFP (3 ng/mL) and PIVKA-II (28 mAU/mL) were normal at 1 month after the surgery. The latest serum levels of AFP (2 ng/mL) and PIVKA-II (25 mAU/mL) were normal at 6 months after the surgery.