A 27-year-old Caucasian man presented with frank hemoptysis preceded by a two-month history of shortness of breath and non-productive cough. Prior to this subacute illness, he was healthy, had no travel history, and was a long-distance endurance athlete. An intravenously-contrasted computerized tomogram of the chest revealed bilateral pulmonary emboli and a filling defect within his right ventricle. Duplex lower extremity ultrasonography was negative for deep vein thrombosis. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a mass at his right ventricular apex spanning proximally as pedunculated extensions through the tricuspid valve. Gadolinium-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a complex mass obliterating his right ventricular apex, insinuated between the chordae tendineae of the tricuspid valve and terminating in lobular stalks (Additional file ). Surgical excision was recommended as the mass was felt to represent high risk for recurrent embolic events. The gross appearance of the mass was smooth, yellow and lobulated . Two distinct heads projected through the tricuspid valve and extensively insinuated between the chordae tendineae, requiring right ventricular endocardectomy with excision and replacement of the tricuspid valve. On histopathological examination, normal myocardium was covered by thickened fibrous endocardium with dense collagen, rare non-specific inflammatory cells with no eosinophils and a layer of arterioles, small veins and capillaries at the interphase with the myocardium . These findings are pathognomonic of endomyocardial fibrosis.
Anticoagulation therapy was initiated post-operatively. Extensive work-up for coagulopathy was negative. Peripheral blood and bone marrow biopsy were normal; in particular, the percentage of eosinophils was normal at 2%. Cytogenetic study of the bone marrow showed no evidence of a malignant process. Other causes of endomyocardial fibrosis, including parasitic infections, carcinoid tumor and systemic diseases, such as Churg Strauss syndrome, periarteritis nodosa and Behçet syndrome, were excluded.