A 44-year-old Asian man was admitted to our hospital complaining of sensory disturbances in his four extremities and trunk, as well as weakness of his upper extremities, and clumsy hand and gait disturbances. He had an unremarkable childhood, but developed tics and was diagnosed with Tourette’s syndrome at age 24. At the age of 33, he noticed numbness in his right hand, which gradually worsened. He visited a hospital for his symptoms and was diagnosed with compression myelopathy at the C3-C4 and C5-C6 levels. At the age of 38, he underwent anterior discectomy and spinal fusion with ceramics at the C3-C4 and C5-C6 levels. Two weeks later, our patient underwent an iliac bone graft at the C3-C4 and C5-C6 levels because of displacement of the ceramics. Postoperatively, he was immobilized in a halo vest for 2.5 months. After the second surgery, his spinal fusion was successful and his neurological symptoms improved. However, 5.5 years after the second surgery, he began experiencing numbness in his left leg after sustaining a fall. Subsequent to that, he presented with weakness of his right leg. He was once again diagnosed with compression myelopathy that developed at the sandwiched (C4-C5) disc level, and he underwent a C4-C5 anterior discectomy and spinal fusion at the same hospital. After the third surgery, his symptoms were temporarily relieved, but recurred 3.5 months later (one month prior to his visit to our clinic).
On admission to our hospital, our patient was able to walk independently but his gait was slow and unsteady. His muscle strength in the lower limbs was normal, but his deltoid, biceps and triceps muscles were somewhat weak bilaterally. His pinprick sensation was reduced up to the level of the C6 dermatome. Hyperreflexia was present at his bilateral patellar and Achilles tendons, and patellar and ankle clonus were transiently positive bilaterally. His Babinski sign was present, and his bladder function was slightly disturbed. A myelogram showed pseudoarthrosis of the C4-C5 fusion and anterior compression of the dural tube at the C4-C5 level . A computed tomographic (CT) myelogram and a magnetic resonance (MR) image showed spinal canal stenosis at the C4-C5 level .
Our patient was prepared for surgical treatment, which was initially planned as a posterior fusion and an anterior decompression and interbody fusion with electrophysiological monitoring of spinal cord activity. We first performed posterior fusion of C3-C7 using Bohlman’s triple-wire technique, which was uneventful. Next, we performed anterior corpectomy of C4, C5 and C6, and spinal fusion at C3-C7 with a strut graft using autologous iliac bone .
Postoperatively, our patient was fitted with a halo vest for the first three months and a cervical collar for another three months. After application of the halo vest his tics worsened, possibly due to the discomfort he felt by the immobilization of his neck, and the pins became loose several times. We had to regulate the torque of the pins every day, and replaced them four times. We treated his tics with haloperidol and his involuntary neck movements were slightly reduced. However, we could not increase the dose because of drowsiness. Botulinum toxin was not used for treating such a patient in our hospital at that time. A midsagittal CT reconstruction three months after surgery showed a mature fusion mass . A T2-weighted MR image one year after surgery revealed that his spinal cord was well decompressed . A lateral cervical radiogram taken six years after surgery showed successful interbody fusion, and a T2-weighted MR image taken at the same time detected only slight degeneration of the adjacent discs of the fusion site .
Our patient’s neurological deficits gradually recovered after surgery. His clumsy hand movements disappeared four months after surgery, and at his last follow-up examination, 10 years after the surgery, he was able to perform all activities of daily living.