A 71-year-old woman was diagnosed with a branched intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreatic body. She was regularly followed up at a hospital for IPMN. MRI revealed no signs of high-risk stigmata until 2023. However, in 2024, MRI revealed a rapid dilation of the MPD. Endoscopic ultrasonography also showed dilation of the MPD and a contrast-enhanced mural nodule 10 mm in size in the proximal area of the IPMN. A biopsy performed during the endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed cellular atypia. The patient was referred to our hospital for treatment. In our hospital, CT and MRI revealed IPMN of pancreatic body and the dilation of MPD to 13 mm, which was a factor of high-risk stigmata in IPMN diagnosis. Her height and weight were 161.8 cm and 57.65 kg, respectively. The carcinoembryonic antigen: 1.9 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19-9: 4.1 U/mL, duke pancreatic monoclonal antigen type 2: 25 U/mL, s-pancreas-1 antigen: 6.8 U/mL, hemoglobin: 13.7 g/dL, leukocytes: 6730/µL, c-reactive protein: 0.04 mg/dL, creatinine: 0.68 mg/dL, asparate aminotransferase: 20 U/L, alanine aminotransferase: 19 U/L, total bilirubins: 0.7 mg/dL, amylase: 38 U/L, platelets: 201000/µl, prothrombin time international normalized ratio: 0.80, and hemoglobin A1c: 6.9%. She had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis, Sjögren syndrome, colonic polyps, and facial paralysis. The American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status classification system score was 2. Preoperative CT showed that the rCHA branched from the SMA and that the pancreatic parenchyma surrounded the rCHA. The main pancreatic duct meandered and ran behind the rCHA.

To maximize the surgical margin of the nodular lesion in the IPMN, robotic pancreaticoduodenectomy with D1 lymph node dissection was planned and performed. The operative time was 442 min and the estimated blood loss was 50 mL. The left posterior approach was used for SMA dissection, and the root of the rCHA was identified on the left side.11–13) Pancreas transection was performed with the transection line positioned to the left of the SMA at the point the dilation of MPD normalized. Intraoperative frozen sections confirmed that the pancreatic stump was negative for carcinoma. During dissection of the upper side of the duodenum, the peripheral part of the rCHA was identified, and the gastroduodenal artery branching from the rCHA was dissected. At the time of dissection between the rCHA and pancreatic parenchyma, we divided the cranial part of the pancreatic parenchyma along the rCHA and cut the MPD again. The main pancreatic duct was clipped bilaterally and divided to excavate the rCHA. Two thin arterial branches extending from the rCHA to the pancreas were identified, ligated, and divided. The remaining steps were performed as usual.

Postoperative course was good. There was a postoperative pancreatic fistula of Grade1 (Clavien–Dindo classification) and biological leakage (International Study Group of Pancreatic Surgery classification). The patient was discharged on the 13th day after the operation. The pathological findings included intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma, noninvasive nature of the pancreatic body, and no lymph node metastases.