Patient is a 90-year-old Caucasian female with a past medical history of gastroesophageal reflux disease symptomatically managed with pantoprazole 40 mg daily, hypothyroidism, depression, anxiety, and peripheral neuropath; who presented to the emergency department (ED) with nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. She also had a fever of 101.5 F and was complaining of chills. She initially went to a local ED where laboratory evaluation revealed a urinary tract infection. She was found to have elevated serum amylase (890 U/L) and lipase (3500 U/L) levels as well. Her white blood cell count was 11,000/mcL. Total bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels were normal. Her blood cultures grew Gram-negative rods and Gram-positive cocci for which she was started on vancomycin [1250 mg every 12 h] and Zosyn® [3.375 gm every 6 h].
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis without intravenous contrast was performed which showed a very large hiatal hernia compressing and deforming the heart amongst other structures. The majority of the stomach along with the body and tail of the pancreas were herniated into the mediastinum. There was a large amount of free fluid in the mediastinum. There was dependent cholelithiasis and a distended gallbladder with signs of acute cholecystitis. A right upper quadrant ultrasound (RUQ US) showed intra and extra-hepatic biliary ductal dilation with possible echogenic material within the common bile duct. There was gallbladder wall thickening and peri-cholecystic fluid, these findings were thought to represent either acute cholecystitis or secondary to pancreatitis. The patient underwent an echocardiogram which showed left ventricular ejection fraction of 74%. There were no regional wall motion abnormalities.
Based on the findings of RUQ US, an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram (ERCP) was performed which showed a normal esophagus, large hiatal hernia with most of the stomach above the diaphragm and a duodenal diverticulum. The major papilla was located entirely within the diverticulum. The entire main bile duct was dilated. Choledocholithiasis was found.
A repeat CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast was performed. The body and tail of the pancreas was found to be herniating into the mediastinum .
The patient was continued on vancomycin and Zosyn®. The bacteria were found to be ampicillin-sensitive Enterococcus durans and a pan-sensitive E. coli. She was switched to ampicillin [2 g every 6 h] for the next 2 days and finally to oral amoxicillin PO [500 mg every 8 h]. Given the findings of large hiatal hernia, General Surgery was consulted. Given the chronicity of the patient’s symptoms, her age and relatively good symptom control with proton pump inhibitors, a conservative approach to therapy was recommended with no surgical consideration for hiatal hernia repair. An elective cholecystectomy was offered to the patient and she elected to discuss this at a clinic visit in the upcoming weeks. On the day of discharge, the patient was tolerating a diet, had no pain or nausea, and was feeling well.