A 76-year-old male patient presented to the Department of Orthopedics of our hospital complaining of worsening progressive right hip pain, a limp when walking and weakness of the right hip. He was admitted to our hospital.
The patient’s symptoms started four years ago with recurrent swelling of the right hip with mild pain, which had worsened in the last 48 h.
The patient initially presented with neck pain and weakness in all four limbs 16 years ago and was diagnosed with cervical spondylosis, which was treated conservatively.
The patient had an unremarkable personal and family history.
The patient reported mild pain with flexion and extension of the cervical spine and activity limitation. Apparent swelling was observed in the left hip, and more than 110 mL of clear yellowish joint fluid was extracted. The active range of motion of the right hip was recorded as follows: flexion 90°, abduction 30°, internal rotation 20°, and external rotation 35°, with pain in all directions. The visual analog score was 6/10 points, and the Harris hip score (HHS) was 56 points. Neurologically, the sensation of pain and temperature in the upper and lower extremities was decreased, and proprioception and position sensation were normal. A pathologic reflex was not elicited. Both upper limbs and the right lower limb exhibited weakness with a muscle strength of 4/5, the muscle strength of the left lower limb was normal at 5/5, the right abductor had a muscle strength score of 5/5, and the modified Japanese Orthopedic Association score for CSM was 9/17 points. The bone mineral density (BMD) of the hip was 0.45 g/cm2, and the T score was -2.9. Laboratory results were nonspecific.
Blood biochemistry and urine analyses were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray and arterial blood gases were also normal. The BMD of the hip was 0.45 g/cm2, and the T score was -2.9.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine showed cervical syringomyelia at C4, cervical disc herniation and spinal canal stenosis from the C3 to the C7 levels . Cervical computed tomography (CT) revealed destruction of the vertebral body at C4 and C5–7 vertebral body assimilation . Three-dimensional CT reconstruction, CT scans, and X-rays of the right hip joint showed joint space loss, articular surface collapse, and destructive changes in the acetabulum and femoral head . T2W1 MRI of the right hip showed articular cartilage loss, degeneration of the joint, disordered soft tissue, and apparent joint fluid .