We report a case of 46-year-old male complaining of abdominal pain and obstructive jaundice. He was referred to the digestive surgeon at Fatmawati Central General Hospital. The physical examination revealed that the abdomen was distended with palpably enlarged spleen and liver. An abdominal contrast computed tomography (CT) scan found lobulated masses in the duodenal and ampulla of vater projection. Surgical intervention was decided and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) after a total pancreato-splenectomy due to a stage IIIb duodenal tumor.
During the preoperative assessment, we concluded that this patient was high risk due to anemia, obstructive jaundice, and decreased liver function. Intraoperatively, massive surgical bleeding (2500 cc) was sustained due to extensive tumor resection, and thus massive blood product transfusion was necessary.
Upon arrival at the ICU, our patient had decreased urine output. Therefore, we had to increase the vasopressor dose to 0.3 µg/kg/minute to maintain the mean arterial pressure above 65 mmHg and systolic blood pressure above 95 mmHg. Laboratory examination revealed a lactate level of 5.8 mmol/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 30 mg/dL, white blood cell counts of 26,700/μL, and procalcitonin level of > 32 ng/mL. These findings showed that the patient had a systemic inflammation response syndrome (SIRS) due to the surgery. Furthermore, 12 hours after the surgery, he showed signs of AKI, including urine production of < 0.3 cc/kg/hour. Hyperglycemia was another problem observed in the patient, with the highest glucose level recorded at 511 mg/dL within 3 hours after the surgery. Glucose management therapy was started with an insulin infusion drip of up to 7 IU/hour.
We decided to initiate early continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) for this patient. The CRRT was initiated within 24 hour following the diagnosis of postoperative AKI on the basis of Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcome (KDIGO) criteria stage 2. CRRT was conducted using the continuous veno-venous hemofiltration (CVVH) method. The effluent dose was 27 cc/kg/hour with 0 cc fluid removal. After 3 hours of CVVH initiation, the patient showed signs of improvement. His urine output increased to 0.5–0.6 cc/kg/hour, and the vasopressor dose was quickly tapered. We decided to administer furosemide infusion within 18 hours after CVVH, and the patient’s urine output increased to 1–4 cc/kg/hour .
The patient’s inflammation was assessed on the basis of his CRP levels. On day 1 after the surgery, the patient’s CRP level was 35 mg/dL. Following the initiation of CVVH on the third postoperative day, his CRP level decreased significantly to 15.1 mg/dL. The inflammation was significantly reduced as the CVVH continued . After the initiation of CVVH, the patient’s blood glucose was controlled and the insulin infusion drip rate was reduced to 0.3 U/hour .
On the second postoperative day, the patient’s white blood cell count and procalcitonin level increased, indicating an ongoing infection. We changed the antibiotic course and administered an empirical broad-spectrum antibiotic instead, with 3 × 2 g intravenous meropenem. We observed a good clinical response after the CRRT was initiated . Urine output was increasing and we could reduce the norepinephrine dose. The CRRT was stopped on the third postoperative day and furosemide was started at 1 mg/hour for renal support.
On the fourth postoperative day, the patient was alert and cooperative with minimal ventilatory and hemodynamic support. The patient was extubated and respiratory support was provided with a nasal cannula .