A 34-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital due to vaginal bleeding, fatigue and shortness of breath for 4 d without chest pain, hemoptysis, dyspnea or other symptoms.
Computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a filling defect in the IVC before admission, which was initially thought to be a thrombus. Anticoagulant therapy was administered immediately. No other conditions were recorded when admitted to our hospital.
Seven years ago, the patient had undergone a hystero-myomectomy (no medical records/pathological specimens were available). No other significant history of past illnesses was identified.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
Physical examination showed a surgical scar in the lower abdomen. A palpable hard mass was found in the lower abdomen, with poor mobility and mild tenderness. Vital signs were stable with a blood pressure of 135/80 mmHg, a heart rate 90 bpm, respiratory rate of 21 breaths/min and O2 saturation of 98%. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and incomplete right bundle branch block.
The laboratory examinations showed elevated levels of cancer antigen 125 (47.73 U/mL), FDP (20.31 μg/mL) and D-Di (6.06 μg/mL), while the results of other laboratory examinations were in the normal range.
Transvaginal ultrasonography showed that the uterus was 10.0 cm × 8.5 cm × 8.9 cm in size with multiple heterogeneously echogenic lesions. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a strip-shaped mass extending to the right atrium and right ventricle, and protruding into the pulmonary artery . The diameter of the pulmonary artery was widened, and the pulmonary artery pressure was 66 mmHg. An enlarged uterus and multiple mixed-density masses in the myometrium were found on enhanced CT images . Filling defects were observed in the right iliac vein, ovarian vein, IVC, right atrium, right ventricle, pulmonary trunk and bilateral pulmonary artery branches . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed extensive myometrial thickening which was heterogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted images . Diffuse infiltration of the cervix and vaginal vault was noted without rectal or pelvic wall involvement. Increased signal intensity of the lesions was observed on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) . Following an intravenous injection of contrast medium, contrast enhancement of the lesions was heterogeneous and less intense than in the myometrium. The vessels around the uterus and cervix increased, and filling defects in the right iliac vein and left ovarian vein were noted . 18F-FDG positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) demonstrated slightly high 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake of the tumor in the IVC , and the maximum standard uptake value was approximately 2.8.