A 57-year-old female patient with a diagnosis of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease underwent DDLT for polycystic liver disease (PCLD). She did not have any background lung disease or smoking history, as shown in her clear preoperative chest radiograph. Her right diaphragm was severely elevated due to PCLD, which caused persistent atelectasis in the right lower lobe. DDLT was performed uneventfully. A small hole was made on the right diaphragm, which was repaired with a multifilament suture, and a thoracic drain was placed. Although the patient required reoperation on postoperative day 2 (POD 2) due to a persistent bile leakage, she recovered well without further major complications.

A chest radiograph revealed a round hypertranslucency with air–fluid levels on the right side since POD 1, and no further evaluation was made at that time. However, because the hypertranslucency persisted, follow-up computed tomography (CT) was performed on POD 18, and revealed an air–fluid level above the diaphragm in the right thoracic cavity. The patient was initially considered to have an intrathoracic hematoma, and thoracoscopic evacuation of the hematoma was planned.

Regarding the immunosuppressants for liver transplantation, tacrolimus and methylprednisolone were initiated intravenously immediately after the transplantation without any induction therapy. No mycophenolate mofetil was used. Tacrolimus was maintained with a target level of 12–16 ng/mL, and methylprednisolone was tapered according to the institutional protocol. Both tacrolimus and methylprednisolone were switched to oral administration when ready. The liver graft was functioning well with normal transaminases and bilirubin levels, and there were no signs of rejection throughout the course. On the day of the surgery for the pneumatocele (POD 19), the doses of tacrolimus and methylprednisolone were 18 and 16 mg/day, respectively.

Contrary to our initial expectation, thoracoscopic investigation revealed no intrathoracic hemorrhage; instead, there was a large cystic change inside the lung parenchyma, which was thought to be a pneumatocele that had formed at the basal area of the right lower lobe. Surgical resection was preferred given the risk of pneumatocele infection due to intra-cystic hematoma and immunosuppression for liver transplantation. Wedge resection was satisfactory to preserve as much remaining lung parenchyma as possible. From a different perspective, wedge resection was a better way to lower the risk of postoperative empyema, which is higher in lobectomy or segmentectomy. However, simple wedge resection was impractical considering the thickness of the lung parenchyma adjacent to the pneumatocele. It was thought that if the intra-cystic hematoma was evacuated, the thickness of the adjacent lung parenchyma would become thinner and would allow wedge resection with a stapling device. Therefore, the pneumatocele was incised, and the intra-cystic clot was removed to reduce its size. Wedge resection was subsequently performed using a stapling device. The staple line was reinforced with 4-0 polypropylene sutures, a polyglycolic acid sheet (Gunze, Osaka, Japan), and fibrin glue (KM Biologics, Tokyo, Japan). The postoperative course of the patient was uneventful, and she was discharged 18days after resecting the pneumatocele.

Histopathological examination revealed a cyst-free wall, which consisted of visceral pleura with fibrosis and microvascular proliferation. The parenchymal side of the cyst wall was fibrotic and organized with hemorrhage and bronchiolar dilation.