A 65-year-old Moroccan man with a history of diabetes and cigarette smoking had no relevant exposure to chemical industrial products in the past, and no notable surgical or family history.
The patient presented 3 months before his medical consult with macroscopic hematuria, pollakiuria, and painful urination, without acute urine retention or digestive disorders, evolving in a context of conservation of the general state. Physical examination did not reveal any abnormalities. No mass was palpable on clinical examination of the abdomen.
Pelvic ultrasound showed an echogenic irregular mass on the left lateral wall of the bladder associated with soft dilatation of the upper urinary tract . The baseline blood workup, including NSF and Glomerular Filtration Rate, did not reveal any abnormality.
Cystoscopy revealed a non-papillary massive mass on the left lateral wall of the bladder, and a transurethral resection of the bladder tumor (TURBT) was performed at the same time. Pelvic MRI was not done due to lack of means.
Histopathological analysis of the resected tissues showed a biphasic epithelial and mesenchymal proliferation, with invasion of the lamina propria and muscularis, compatible with the diagnosis of bladder carcinosarcoma, stage pT2. The transurethral resection was complete.
Staging including pelvic CT scan revealed a heterogeneous mass of the dome and the left wall of the bladder, measuring 10 × 6 cm, invading the bladder wall until serosa . There were no iliac lymph nodes, the ipsilateral ureteral orifice was intact, and there weren't any signs of upper urinary tract obstruction. Thoraco-abdominal CT, as well as bone scan, were free of metastasis. The patient was classified as T3N0M0.
After urology tumor board meeting, the patient underwent radical cystoprostatectomy with ileal conduit urinary diversion (Bricker), and an extended pelvic lymph node dissection. There were no post-operative complications. Histopathological examination of the specimen revealed a high-grade carcinosarcoma invading the bladder wall until the serosa and the trigone, with the prostate and the urethra free from tumor extension. Two of eight pelvic lymph nodes were positive for metastatic carcinosarcoma without extra-nodal extension. All surgical margins were negative for tumor. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity of Pan-cytokeratin, GATA3, and vimentin, and negativity for CK7, myogenin, desmin, and PSA .
After discussion with the multidisciplinary board, an adjuvant chemotherapy based on gemcitabine-cisplatin was indicated, and a total of six cycles were received with no significant toxicity. The patient was scheduled for trimestrial clinical visits, Cystoscopy · months after finishing treatment, UroTDM performed each semester. Twelve months after treatment, the patient is still under follow-up with no locoregional or metastatic disease.