This case is regarding a 27-year-old male with a medical history of intravenous (IV) opioid use disorder who was brought to the ED by emergency medical services following an assault with a complaint of right-hand pain. No further history was provided by the patient. Upon arrival, he was ill-appearing with vital signs of temperature 36.5° Celsius, heart rate 104 beats per minute, blood pressure 114/58 millimeters of mercury (mmHg), respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 100% on room air. Physical exam revealed bilateral periorbital ecchymosis, anterior neck ecchymosis, petechial rash on his chest, anasarca, and widespread necrotic wounds. An embedded ring was noted at the base of his right fourth finger with significant surrounding edema, erythema, and necrosis.
Upon chart review of the prior two months, we found that the patient had presented to multiple surrounding EDs with the same chief complaint of right-hand pain with ring entrapment. His first presentation to an outside hospital consisted of unremarkable lab work. The patient left against medical advice (AMA) prior to ring removal. He presented an additional nine times with similar outcomes: lab work would be obtained and the patient would leave AMA prior to ring removal. Thirteen days prior to this case presentation, the patient’s ED workup revealed leukocytosis of 68.2 ×109 cells per liter (L) with 19% blasts and thrombocytopenia of 15 × 109/L, which were not addressed due to the patient leaving AMA.
On this current presentation (day zero), a radiograph of his right hand was significant for “tourniquet syndrome” of his right fourth digit with extensive circumferential periostitis . The admission CBC was remarkable for a white blood cell count of 157.8 × 109 cells/L (reference range: 4.0–11.0 × 109 cells/L) with blasts of 61% and a subsequent pathology report consistent with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) . See for hospitalization laboratory results.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for sepsis secondary to osteomyelitis of the right fourth digit requiring broad spectrum IV antibiotics. Shortly after admission, he developed a change in mental status requiring endotracheal intubation. Computed tomography of the brain did not reveal any acute abnormalities.
Hematology/oncology was consulted and emergently reviewed the peripheral smear, which revealed blast cells, increased cytoplasmic granules without Auer rods, occasional schistocytes, and a negative Coombs test. Results were consistent with AML, DIC, and auto-tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) due to abnormalities all noted in . He was emergently treated with rasburicase 6 mg intravenously, hydroxyurea 2 g orally every eight hours, allopurinol 50 mg orally daily, and IV fluids. For treatment of DIC, he received a total of eight units of packed red blood cells, five units of platelets, and one unit of cryoprecipitate. On day three of hospitalization, the patient developed hypotension requiring vasopressor support. He was transferred to an outside hospital for advanced treatment of his AML and succumbed to his illness shortly thereafter.