The patient was a 79-year-old man with a history of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection (acquired during brain surgery), mitral regurgitation (MR), chronic atrial fibrillation for 9 years, and decreased left ventricular contractility.
He had eight long-term hospitalizations during which he underwent multiple operations. Metal allergies to nickel (Ni) and cobalt (Co) were detected 8 years prior. The MR gradually worsened and became more severe. Dyspnoea on exertion appeared approximately 2 years prior and gradually worsened.
One year prior, he was hospitalized for heart failure. Soon after discharge, he gained weight and experienced dyspnoea on exertion, accompanied by lower-leg oedema. Echocardiography showed severe MR, reduced ejection fraction (EF, 50%), and deterioration of pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary pressure: 37/16/25 mmHg).
Because of recurrent heart failure, an elective surgery was planned after the previous hospital admission, following the successful management of heart failure. Preoperative echocardiography showed the following: left ventricular internal end-diastolic (LVEDD) and end-systolic diameters (LVESD) of 68 and 48 mm, respectively—EF of 45%, severe MR with central jet (tenting height, 12 mm) ( and ), moderate tricuspid regurgitation (TR) (tenting height, 8 mm) , a left atrial diameter of 66 mm, and progressive MR with increased diuretics. Using coronary angiogram and technetium-99m, cardiologists ruled out ischaemia and amyloidosis as the cause of LV dysfunction. Although the LV size was large, the LVEF was over 40% and the wall thickness was approximately 13 mm. Therefore, it was not a typical dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM); yet DCM could not be excluded as the cause of LV dysfunction.
Prosthetic valves, rings, and TEER containing Ni and Co were contraindicated. Additionally, the sternal closure required a Ni- and Co-free sternal wire. We selected Ni- and Co-free rings for mitral and tricuspid annuloplasty. We used titanium wire for sternal closure as stainless steel can contain traces of nickel. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established through median sternotomy using standard aortic and bicaval cannulation. Antegrade blood cardioplegia was administered, and the left atrium was accessed via a transseptal approach.
No chord rupture was observed. Left atrial ablation was performed using a modified maze procedure with cryoablation. The left atrial appendage was then resected. A 28-mm Ni- and Co-free Séguin Ring (Séguin Semi-Rigid Annuloplasty Ring; Abbot Medical, Austin, TX, USA) was chosen for mitral valve repair. After the annular mattress sutures were tied, they were passed around the annuloplasty ring again, taking additional bites of atrial tissue and tied again (the double-suture technique). The tricuspid valve was examined after the closure of the interatrial septum. The diameter of the annulus was 55 mm. In addition to annulus enlargement, tethering was also contributing to regurgitation.
Subsequently, a pledgeted CV4 suture (GORE-TEX® Suture; W. L. Gore & Associates Inc., Newark, DE, USA) was placed at the base of the anterior papillary muscle (PM) and continuously sutured clockwise to the base of the secondary and then inferior PM. The CV4 suture crossed the interventricular septum and externalized the septal ring of the right atrium. After tricuspid annuloplasty using a 27-mm Ni- and Co-free ring (Duran Flexible Partial Ring; Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) the CV4 suture was passed through the ring. Suture length adjustments were performed under a water test, and the sutures were tied (spiral suspension technique).
Next, a pledgeted CV4 suture was passed through the head of the anterior and posterior PM via an aortotomy. It was passed from the left ventricular cavity through the mid-septal fibrous annulus and exteriorized through the aortic wall beneath the commissure between the non-coronary and left coronary aortic cusps (PM repositioning) ( and ). Aortotomy was closed with two layers of continuous sutures, and the sternum was closed with a pure titanium wire (Yokozuna wire; USCI Holdings, Tokyo, Japan). Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed that the MR and TR had disappeared. Postoperative transthoracic echography revealed a trivial MR (tenting height, 8 mm) and disappearance of TR.
After undergoing treatment for heart failure in the cardiology department, the patient was discharged from the hospital on the 26th postoperative day without dialysis intervention. Two years after surgery, MR and TR had not worsened on echocardiography .