A 52-year-old woman was admitted with acute myocardial infarction due to a spontaneous right coronary artery dissection. Her medical history was notable for a conservatively managed left posterolateral branch myocardial infarction at the age of 39 with normal left ventricular (LV) function. At 51, she was treated for breast cancer with a curative intent.

At presentation, an emergency percutaneous coronary intervention of the right coronary artery was performed. The post-procedural course was complicated by ventricular tachycardia (VT) and fibrillation for which she was successfully resuscitated. During the following hours she developed cardiogenic shock due to failure of the right ventricle (RV) that was refractory to fluid resuscitation and inotropes. She was transferred to the intensive care unit of a tertiary heart failure referral centre and was stabilized using peripheral veno-arterial (VA) extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Echocardiography showed a dilated RV with severely impaired function, paradoxical septal motion with signs of RV volume overload and severe tricuspid regurgitation with elevated filling pressures. The LV function was slightly impaired.

She developed heparin-induced thrombocytopaenia (HIT) and was rejected for an urgent heart transplant listing due to the recent oncological history. The VA-ECMO was exchanged for percutaneous veno-pulmonary ECMO in order to allow for recovery of the RV. Five weeks after the start, weaning was initially successful.

However, within days after discontinuation of the ECMO, she developed fast recurrent VTs that were haemodynamically poorly tolerated and resulted in hypotension and elevated lactate levels. Intravenous administration of amiodarone resulted in further progression of RV failure due to the negative inotropic effects and the development of a slow junctional rhythm that was poorly tolerated haemodynamically, limiting further pharmacological options.

Escalation in the inotropic regimen in the days after ECMO weaning further contributed to the incessant VTs and resulted in a persistent decrease of organ perfusion (INTERMACS profile 2).

After careful consideration and discussion with the electrophysiology team, an ablation procedure was deferred due to the proposed haemodynamic triggers of the VTs and the estimated low chance of a curative procedure. Invasive haemodynamic evaluation revealed a cardiac output of 3.05 L/min (CI 1.61 L/minute/m2) and low pulmonary pressures (mean pulmonary arterial pressure 9 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance 1.9 WU).

Because of persistent inotropic dependency and recurrent VTs in the setting of progressive RV failure, VA-ECMO was re-initiated, and both a right ventricular assist device (RVAD) and a bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis (BCPA) with TV repair were explored. In a BCPA, the superior vena cava (SVC) is disconnected from the right atrium and anastomosed end-to-side to the right pulmonary artery, redirecting a substantial proportion of the venous return directly to the lungs, bypassing the RV. Due to the recent HIT and the chance of recovery of RV function in the near future, a decision was made to perform a BCPA with a concomitant TV annuloplasty.

Two months after her initial presentation, the patient underwent BCPA and restrictive TV annuloplasty. She had an arterial oxygen saturation of 95% in ambient air and could be weaned off VA-ECMO and inotropes within 3 weeks after the operation. Echocardiography showed normalization of RV dimensions, moderate to severely impaired RV function and trivial TV regurgitation.

Because there was an indication for an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) (secondary prevention), a subcutaneous ICD (S-ICD) seemed most appropriate because the BCPA now limited transvenous lead access. However, due to a sternal wound infection, implanting the device was postponed. One month after surgery, she was discharged home with guideline-dictated medical therapy and a LifeVest Wearable Defibrillator (Zoll Medical Corporation, Chelmsford, MA, USA) as a bridge to an S-ICD. The peripheral oxygen saturation at discharge was 99%, and she subsequently completed a cardiac rehabilitation program. Her New York Heart Association functional class IV improved to III (INTERMACS profile 2 to 7) at the 6-month follow-up examination, and there have not been any heart failure-related admissions.