A 16-year-old Ukrainian boy was admitted to the Department of Children’s Infectious Diseases in Warsaw, Poland, due to jaundice lasting for four days with malaise, diarrhoea, and vomiting. The boy has lived in Poland for 1.5 years; he was working (training) in the profession of a hairdresser. The medical interview revealed that he had a tattoo made at home by his mother’s partner six months earlier and a finger was also cut by hairdressing scissors six weeks before the admission. The patient confirmed that he had two secured heterosexual encounters during the last six months. In Ukraine, he had been vaccinated against tuberculosis, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, poliomyelitis, measles, mumps, and rubella; he has not been vaccinated against hepatitis B. He negated any dietary errors and had never had blood transfusion nor surgery. He was once hospitalized due to acute gastroenteritis (in Ukraine). The physical examination revealed jaundice, hepatomegaly (2 cm below the rib arch), and a tattoo on the right forearm. Laboratory tests showed a significantly elevated level of aminotransferases (alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 2439 IU/L and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1418 IU/L). Serological testing was positive for HBsAg and anti-Hbc IgM antibodies, and negative for hepatitis A and hepatitis C viruses. The HBV viral load was 5.82 copies/mL and HBV genotype A was confirmed. Acute hepatitis B was diagnosed and the patient was treated conservatively. There were no signs of hepatic failure. During observation, hepatic parameters were firstly elevated, but after 14 days they improved and the patient was discharged home with the recommendation to appear for the follow-up examinations after six months (in order to exclude or confirm chronic hepatitis B). The patient did not appear for the visit. After 15 months, he wrote a message on Facebook to his practitioner asking if he had to report on a follow-up, as he felt good. A visit in the clinic was arranged for him. Hepatic parameters were normal, testing towards the hepatitis B antigen was negative, and the chronic HBV infection was excluded. The extended interview revealed a urinary tract infection a year before and unprotected sexual encounters of both homo and heterosexual relations. During physical examination, a small ulcer around his anus was found. Thus, additional tests for HIV, syphilis, gonorrhoea, and chlamydia trachomatis were ordered and they were all negative except for syphilis. Due to risky sexual behaviour, the patient was offered pre-exposure prophylaxis. The patient applied for further treatment of syphilis to the Clinic of Dermatology and Venereology in Warsaw.

