A 12-year-old male boy complained of crampy, lower abdominal pain that had been going on for four days. Additionally, he had a history of appetite loss, constipation, and mucoid diarrhoea. He also expressed abdominal distension, however, he had never vomited. No family history of similar symptoms was identified. He resides with his parents, three siblings, and grandparents. There were no recognized medical conditions in the child or his family.

On evaluation, the patient was acutely sick looking, appeared to be in severe agony. His vital sign was remarkable for tachycardia (pulse rate of 134 beats per minute), a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, a temperature of 36.40°C, and a blood pressure of 110/75 millimetre of mercury. He lacked a depressed eyeball and had moist buccal mucosa. His abdomen was distended, moves with respiration, and tender everywhere else but the epigastrium. An 8 cm by 5 cm firm, tender mass across the left lower quadrant with the lowest boundary out of reach, and no evidence of fluid accumulation. The assessment of other systems was normal.

Investigations
Blood tests were conducted which revealed a white blood cell count 10,300/micL with a neutrophilia of 78.5%, with moderate anemia (Hg 8.6 g/dl, Hct 28%), MCV 86 fl and platelet 775x103/micL. Ultrasound investigation identified a whirlpool sign at the splenic vessel, and the spleen is held in place in the lower abdomen with change in echogenicity. Wandering spleen with focal area infarction was the ultrasound diagnosis.

Treatment and Outcome
The patient was kept nil by mouth and was put on maintenance fluid. He was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics and analgesia. After stabilizing the patient an emergency laparotomy was done. Intraoporately slightly enlarged spleen located intraperitoneally below the level of umbilicus. Vascular pedicle torsioned 720° was found unusually entering via the convexity of the spleen. Areas of necrosis apparent as soft pale patchy areas were noted. There was adhesion to the tip to appendix and loop of terminal ileum. There was no accessory spleen. Appendix tip was erythematous with petechial bleeding up on releasing from its adhesion to the spleen but the ileum was released from the adhesion uneventfully. With an intraoperative diagnosis of wandering spleen with multifocal infarction secondary to splenic volvulus plus secondarily inflammed appendix, splenectomy and appendectomy was done. Post-operative period is uneventful. He stayed for 2 hours in recovery and was then transferred to a surgical ward and stayed for seven days. After seven days stay, the patient was discharged with PO amoxicillin prophylaxis and appointed after a week for pneumococcal conjugate vaccine.