An 83-year-old man with a history of third-degree AV block and a single-chamber (RV lead) permanent pacing system (in situ 9 years) was referred to our institution with worsening breathlessness (NYHA III). There were no other heart failure symptoms, and clinical examination revealed signs of fluid overload (elevated jugular venous pressure and bilateral lower leg oedema) with no murmurs on auscultation.
This included an ablation for cavo-tricuspid isthmus dependent flutter in 2009, and mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. There was a remote history of alcohol excess and transthoracic echocardiography at the time of original device implantation showed preserved left ventricular systolic function (LVEF 55%).
Drug therapy included Ramipril 10 mg o.d., Spironolactone 25 mg o.d., Bendroflumethiazide 2.5 mg o.d., Simvastatin 40 mg o.d., Omeprazole 20 mg o.d., Tiotropium 18 µg o.d., Symbicort Turbohaler 200 µg/6 µg 1 puff BD, and Warfarin according to internal normalized ratio. Betablockers had not been commenced due to concerns about airways disease with a degree of reversibility on pulmonary functional testing.
Twelve-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with AV dissociation because of RV-only pacing . Device interrogation confirmed 100% RV pacing with underlying complete AV block with a broad escape rhythm (left bundle branch block [LBBB], QRS duration 132 ms). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a non-dilated LV with moderately impaired systolic function (LVEF 40–45%) with evidence of dyssynchrony (apical rocking and early septal activation) consistent with RV apical pacing (see , ). RV function and pulmonary pressures were normal, with no significant valve abnormalities.
The most likely diagnosis explaining this presentation was PIC, differentials included alcohol-induced cardiomyopathy, or post-ablation atrial arrhythmia.
Despite guideline-directed medical therapy his heart failure symptoms persisted. Considering the LV impairment and dyssynchronous ventricular activation, he was offered a device upgrade to a CRT-P with either a conventional LV lead or a His-bundle lead, in addition to a right atrial (RA) lead to improve VV and AV synchrony, respectively. Prior to implantation, left-sided venography was performed to evaluate vein patency which showed an occluded SCV . Options considered included the following: (i) a contralateral CRT-P implantation; (ii) implanting a right-sided RA and LV lead and tunnelling across to the left; (iii) venoplasty facilitated CRT upgrade; (iv) lead extraction of the functional RV lead for recanalization and upgrade; (v) surgical epicardial lead placement; and (vi) a conservative approach. After careful discussion, the patient elected to proceed with an upgrade strategy (including venoplasty and lead extraction). An epicardial approach was felt too high risk given his co-morbidities.
As a centre with experience in HBP, and in alignment with recent guidelines, we targeted CRT-P via this approach. The least aggressive strategy was preferable and therefore prior to opening the left-sided pocket, the SCV occlusion was probed in a retrograde manner using a multipurpose catheter (6F MPA1 Impulse, Boston Scientific, MA, USA) from right femoral venous access (secured for temporary pacing wire support). In doing so, we were able to direct the catheter to the brachio-cephalic vein and define the occlusion in detail. Furthermore, contrast highlighted a large collateral branch, which we felt could be punctured directly from a left sub-clavicular approach (see , ). We left a 0.035 in J-wire in this branch, and successfully secured venous access through the Seldinger technique (see , ). A passive lead to the right atrial appendage was implanted and a 69 cm Select Secure 3830 lead (Medtronic Inc., MN, USA) was deployed via a C315 sheath (Medtronic) at the His-bundle. Final lead positions are shown in .
Intracardiac electrograms confirmed underlying complete AV dissociation with an intrinsic His-QRSend interval of 192 ms. With HBP, non-selective capture was achieved resulting in a shortened Stim-QRSend of 158 ms with a threshold of 1 V at 0.5 ms ( and ). The device was programmed DDD-60 with an ‘LV’ to RV delay of 60 ms, to allow protective back up RV pacing in the event of loss of His capture. There were no complications and post procedural 12-lead ECG confirmed non-selective His capture.
After 2 months, the patient was NYHA I, euvolaemic and LV systolic function had normalized (LVEF >55%, see , ). Device interrogation revealed atrial pacing of 56% and HBP 99% of the time.