The patient was a 3-year-old male from Frontino, Antioquia, a municipality considered an endemic area for malaria. No significant medical or family history was reported.

The patient was admitted with a clinical picture of 12 days of evolution of fever peaks quantified with 801 parasites/µl of P. vivax. After diagnosis and after 12 days of symptoms, the patient was treated with 150 mg daily of chloroquine (10 mg/kg) and 10 mg of primaquine daily. This last corresponded to more than twice the recommended dose for his age and weight, as he received 0.6 mg/kg/d, when the correct dose according to clinical practice guidelines was 0.25 mg/kg/d. The same day of diagnosis and start of treatment, the patient was transferred to a hospital of higher complexity, with diagnosis of uncomplicated malaria, but with alarm signs. The child was hospitalized in general conditions acceptable, with hepatomegaly already described and without other alterations in physical examination. In the admission laboratory tests, the anaemia persistence was reported (haemoglobin of 9.9 mg/dl and haematocrit of 29.6 %). Thrombocytopenia (31,000 platelets/µl) and normal leukocytes (6,400 cells/µl) were also reported. In arterial gases, pH of 7.44, partial pressure of CO2 of 33 mm Hg and O2 of 129 mm Hg, HCO3 of 22.4 mEq/L and base excess of 0.6 mmol/L were reported. The thick gout test was again positive for P. vivax (7,200 parasites/µl). The treatment was continued with 150 mg daily of chloroquine (10 mg/kg) on the second day and 75 mg daily (5 mg/kg) on the third day, until completing three doses. The dose of primaquine was adjusted to 5 mg/day (0.33 mg/kg) to continue from the next day, until completing 14 days. The patient finished the treatment with chloroquine and continued with primaquine. However, on the fourth day of treatment, after receiving four doses of primaquine, he presented hypoxaemia of up to 76 %, with slight cyanosis peribucal not associated with signs of respiratory distress, with no pathological findings at the time of pulmonary auscultation. Supplemental oxygen was initiated with little improvement, maintaining saturations of 85 % with mask without re-inhalation. The chest radiograph showed normal findings and in another arterial gases test, O2 of 129 mm Hg, HCO3 of 25.5 mEq/L, base excess of 0.6 mmol/L, lactate of 0.9 mmol/L and haemoglobin of 9.5 mg/dl, which corresponded to respiratory alkalosis with normal lactate and haemoglobin. However, the difference in oxygen saturation obtained between arterial gases and pulse oximetry was noted. For this reason, with the suspicion of methaemoglobinaemia, it was requested to quantify the methaemoglobinaemia in the arterial gases test at 6 hours. As a result, a methaemoglobinaemia value of 17.1 % was reported and an increase in the partial pressure of oxygen (pH of 7.48, partial pressure of CO2 of 30 mm Hg and O2 of 301 mm Hg, HCO3 of 23.2 mEq/L), base excess of 0.6 mmol/L, lactate of 0.9 mmol/L and haemoglobin of 9.5 mg/dl, which corresponded to respiratory alkalosis with normal lactate and haemoglobin. However, the difference in oxygen saturation obtained between arterial gases and pulse oximetry was noted. Despite this, and even with the use of supplemental oxygen with a mask without re-inhalation, oxygen saturation was not improved. For this reason, the toxicology service indicated treatment with ascorbic acid and proposed the use of methylene blue. However, given the improvement in clinical response with ascorbic acid, methylene blue was not administered. The patient was discharged with serial thick gout test, as indicated by the toxicology service, and administration of ascorbic acid for one week.
