A woman in her 60s presented to the emergency department on April 27, 2021 with a sudden onset left hemiplegia and a severe, sudden onset, holocranial, oppressive headache in the last two hours. She had no history of vascular risk factors or heart or renal disease. She confirmed no heparin treatment in the previous 100 days. The first dose of the ChAdOx1-S vaccine was administered 16 days earlier.

The physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg. Initially, the patient was alert, but with moderate dysarthria, left hemiplegia and forced rightward deviation of the eye, with a score of 16 on the National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS).

Urgent cranial computed tomographic (CT) scan showed a hemorrhage in the right frontal lobe with no evidence of intracranial hypertension and computed tomographic angiography revealed no underlying vascular abnormality to the hematoma. There was no evidence of cerebral venous thrombosis visible on computed tomographic venography. Blood work showed moderate thrombocytopenia of 51,000/uL (reference: 140,000-400,000/uL), with normal hemoglobin and leukocytes. Coagulation laboratory results showed elevated levels of D-dimer of 2,317 ng/mL (reference: 0-250 ng/mL). Biochemical analysis showed a slight elevation of alanine transaminase (114 U/L; reference: 5-31 U/L) and aspartate transaminase (56 U/L; reference: 10-31 U/L). The ion, renal profile and cardiac markers were within normal ranges. Urine drug screen was negative. The patient had normal previous hematologic and coagulation parameters in tests performed in our center during the last five years. She had not received heparin or other drugs prior to admission.

The patient's level of consciousness deteriorated over the next two hours, with no ocular or verbal responses and flexion of the right limbs to painful stimuli, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 6. She was subsequently evaluated by neurosurgeons and intensive care doctors. The neurosurgeons decided to drain the haematoma. No vascular abnormalities were observed during surgery. A platelet transfusion was required for the procedure. She was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit, where the post-operative CT scan showed signs of rebleeding as well as uncal and subfalcular herniation. Blood pressure values remained below 120/80 mmHg at all times. CT angiography and venography were repeated post-operatively with no evidence of vascular abnormalities or cerebral venous thrombosis.

A progression of thrombocytopenia and a D-dimer increase was observed in the control blood tests showing a severe thrombocytopenia (19,000/uL; references: 140,000-400,000/uL) and higher levels of D-dimer (3,840 ng/mL; references: 0-250 ng/mL). In contrast, no data of disseminated intravascular coagulation was found. Antibodies against platelet factor 4 (PF4) were detected with the ELISA technique, suggesting a possible TTP, which was confirmed with a platelet activation induced by heparin. Therefore, it was treated with intravenous immunoglobulins from day 2 to 5 (Flebogamma© 5%, 1 g of weight adjusted to day) and methylprednisolone from day 6 to 11 (1 g of weight adjusted to day), without clinical response with either treatment. No prophylactic anticoagulation was administered.

While in the ICU, the patient developed an irreversible intracranial hypertension syndrome with uncal and subfalcular herniation with a poor prognosis. A decision was made to limit the therapeutic effort and immunoglobulin and corticosteroid treatment was discontinued. Palliative sedation was initiated and the patient finally died on day 21 after the event.
