An 8-month-old female patient was referred to our center due to severe cough, short of breath, fatigue and fever. The patient had nine episodes of pneumonia and cardiomegaly since she was two-month-old. Physical examination revealed cleft lip, which was surgical repaired when she was 6 months old, and cleft palate. Her finger oxygen saturation was 94%. Transthoracic echocardiography showed there was a 0.5 × 0.6 cm ASD with a 2.4 cm right atrium. Laboratory test showed NT-proBNP was 963 pg/ml. Some of autoimmune antibodies, including dsDNA-antibody, SSA/Ro 60kD antibody, anti-cardiolipid antibody, and anti-β2GPI antibody, were positive. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reaction protein (CRP) were normal. IgG was slightly elevated at 18.40 g/L, and C3 was 0.83 g/L. Significantly increased pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR, 17 WU) was seen in her first right heart catheterization despite of the slightly increased pulmonary artery pressure (PAP, 38/17/24 mmHg). Oral furosemide and antisterone were given since then. She was also suggested to inhale oxygen at home even though she maintained her daily activities without additional requirement of oxygen. The patient was re-hospitalized several times because of recurrent pneumonia and heart failure thereafter. Her finger oxygen saturation dropped to 75% at lowest, and stayed at 95% or higher when given nasal catheter oxygen inhalation. Hemodynamic parameters turned worse in the second measurements, where PAP increased along with PVR (PAP, 100/50/67 mmHg; PVR, 42 WU). Further examination included chest computed tomography (CT) scan. CT showed infiltration in upper lobes at both sides , and lung atelectasis in left upper lobe . Pulmonary artery and right atrium were significantly dilated . No thrombosis was seen in pulmonary artery. The patient and her parents received whole exome sequencing test. A new splicing variant (exon34: c.5417-1G > A, p.-) in the FLNA gene was found only in the patient. Diuretics, dopamine, and oral Bosentan (12.5 mg twice daily) were used to relieve her symptoms. No intubation or other advanced life supports were required during hospitalizations. Patient’s family refused any further intervention during her last hospitalization at age of 2 years. She became significantly cyanosis after last discharge. Unfortunately, the patient didn’t response well to medication therapy, and she died from a severe pneumonia 5 months later.