A 78-year-old Greek (Caucasian) male, a smoker with a BMI of 25.7 kg/m2 who was classified as an American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status grade III patient and therefore had a medium risk of anesthesia, was diagnosed with osteoarthritis of the left hip and thus was scheduled for an elective total hip replacement. His cardiac history included hypertension and dyslipidemia, with a normal pre-operative echocardiography examination (ejection fraction: 60%, with no abnormalities) and no history of pulmonary disease. He was also a type II diabetic, managed by oral medication (metformin) and had undergone a total knee replacement in the past without complications. His preoperative laboratory examination was within normal parameters and he was hemodynamically stable (pre-anesthesia assessment vitals: blood pressure: 137/67 mmHg, heart rate: 77 bpm, SpO2: 99%). The anesthesia plan included the use of a combined lumbar epidural and spinal anesthesia and analgesia.
Upon arrival in the operating room (OR) standard monitoring including continuous electrocardiography (ECG), oxygen saturation (SpO2) and non-invasive blood pressure measuring was commenced. An oxygen mask administering 6 lt/min was used throughout the procedure. The neuraxial spinal technique was performed aseptically, by a second year anesthesia trainee who had previously performed more than 40 procedures, supervised by a senior consultant anesthetist, with the patient in a sitting position at the level of the L4-L5 intervertebral space using a midline approach. After local anesthesia with 5 ml of 2% lidocaine, an 18-Gauge Tuohy needle attached to a syringe filled with approximately 8 ml of air was used. Intermittent pressure was applied to locate the epidural space using the loss of resistance to air technique.
The epidural space was located relatively easily after a single redirection of the needle. A needle-through-needle approach with an adjustable locking mechanism was used to locate the subarachnoid space. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flowed freely through the spinal needle without the presence of blood. A mixture of 1,9 ml of ropivacaine 0.75% wit 0,2 ml (10 mcg) of fentanyl for a total volume of 2,1 ml was introduced into the subarachnoid space. The spinal needle was carefully removed, and the epidural catheter (Portex Epidural Minipack System 1, Smith’s Medical) was then placed in the epidural space. The spinal block was confirmed using the temperature differentiation method and both sensory and motor block were present. An arterial continuous blood pressure monitoring catheter was inserted in the patient’s radial artery prior to the commencement of the procedure. The patient exhibited stable baseline hemodynamics with a mean arterial pressure of 90 mmHg and a heart rate of 70–80 beats/min.
For surgery the patient was subsequently placed on the right lateral side with his left hip facing upwards. He received no intravenous anesthetic or analgesic medication throughout the procedure. Approximately 2 h after the spinal blockand and the initiation of the procedure the patients’ blood pressure suddenly dropped from 163/84 mmHg to 82/45mmHg and his heart rate decreased to 45 bpm. He was alert and responsive but stated that he felt dizziness. Sinus bradycardia was apparent on the ECG. The anesthesiologist in charge administered promptly 5 mg of ephedrine and a total of 1 mg of phenylephrine in consecutive boluses over a period of 30 s. Simultaneously O2 administration via a face mask was increased to 15 lt/min and intravenous fluid administration was increased. There was no improvement in the patient’s hemodynamic state and his blood pressure dropped further to 55/35 mmHg and the patient then became unresponsive. Fearing imminent patient arrest, the anesthetic incident alert was raised for additional help and 1mg of adrenaline was given intravenously by the consultant anesthetist. This produced an immediate rise in the blood pressure (up to a peak of 183/88 mmHg which required the administration of small 0.05 mg/ml boluses of nitroglycerin to prevent extreme hypertension) and the patient’s mental status promptly returned to normal. An immediate cardiology assessment was requested. A point of care echocardiogram demonstrated no new cardiac abnormalities or changes compared to the patients’ preoperative assessment echo. During the episode, there was a small drop in the patient’s SpO2 from 97% from 100% but his arterial blood gasses were normal. No dyspnea or chest pain was recorded during or after the episode.
After the end of the procedure, the patient was admitted to the post-anesthetic care unit (PACU), where continuous monitoring of his vital signs was performed. No additional epidural medication was administered and his epidural catheter was removed. A computed tomography pulmonary arteriogram (CTPA) was performed, which was negative for a pulmonary embolism. A chest and abdomen CT was also performed, which demonstrated air in the subcutaneous tissue, the intermuscular space, the spinal canal around the spinal cord (pneumorrachis), at the left side of the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies and inside the mediastinum para-aortically .
Post operatively, the patient underwent a complete and thorough cardiovascular assessment including a clinical examination by a cardiologist, cardiac echocardiography, cardiac enzymes and a carotid triplex ultrasound with no abnormal findings. He was put on bed rest under continuous cardiac monitoring (blood pressure, heart rate and ECG) with no other such episodes of hemodynamic instability or hypotension been recorded. He was discharged home on the fifteenth postoperative day and was followed up as per routine clinical practice by his orthopedic surgeon.