A 31-year-old woman was sent to the emergency department of a tertiary referral center due to an unknown diagnosis. The patient was feeling nauseous and complained of intensifying pain in the upper left abdominal quadrant.
The woman was hemodynamically stable. During physical examination, abdominal muscle tension was observed, and there was no rebound tenderness. Ultrasound revealed a mass in the upper left side of the abdomen and a small amount of unclear fluid around the intestines. In the blood test, only leukocytosis of 17.3 × 109/L was abnormal.
Three weeks earlier, in a regional hospital, she was diagnosed with ectopic pregnancy (7 weeks of gestation) in her left fallopian tube. Left laparoscopic salpingostomy was planned, although salpingectomy was performed due to heavy bleeding. Data on ultrasound findings before surgery was not available. The serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) concentration was not tested. Histological reports showed no chorionic villus, and only several trophoblasts were seen in the surgically removed material. In the past, the woman had had two normal deliveries, pelvic inflammatory disease and one more ectopic pregnancy in her right fallopian tube. Therefore, she underwent laparoscopic right salpingectomy.
A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to differentiate the mass found on ultrasound. Abdominal and pelvic CT showed a 68 × 60 × 87 mm heterogenic mass, likely a hematoma, which was below the spleen. Pelvis was filled with hemorrhagic fluid, and the uterus was enlarged. Arterial extravasation was spotted from the lower spleen pole. Conventional angiography of the splenic artery was performed, and extravasation was identified in the region below the spleen. The vessel was embolized (A–E). Due to the unknown origin of the hematoma and the recent history of surgery for ectopic pregnancy, and gynecologist consultation was sought. The gynecologist ordered a urine pregnancy test, which was positive. The serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) concentration was 3363.6 U/L. The clinical case was considered a rare pathology of extratubal secondary trophoblastic tissue reimplantation. As the bleeding was stopped with embolization, a conservative two-dose methotrexate (MTX) treatment protocol with MTX 50 mg per square meter of body surface area intramuscularly (mg/m2 BSA i/m) on day 1 and day 4 was administered. Abdominal pain did not intensify; subjectively, the woman started feeling better. The decrease in serum hCG concentration between days 4 and 7 was 24.1% (i.e., more than 15%); thus, hCG testing was repeated weekly . Menstruation renewed 29 days after the first dose of MTX. Seven months later, the CT scan showed that the size of the heterogenic mass below the spleen decreased to 18 × 14 × 16 mm (F).