A 39-year-old black male with known sickle cell trait presented to the emergency department with lower extremity swelling with blisters and odynophagia. He developed petechial lesions on both feet that progressed to ulcers on the bilateral lower extremities. The odynophagia started 2 weeks prior to presentation and was associated with a tongue ulcer. He had been evaluated by an infectious disease team during a previous visit and had an unrevealing workup. He was not on any treatment for lower extremity lesions. He denied fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, night sweats, recent travel, and history of IV drug use.
His initial vital signs were BP 156/86, HR 114, temperature 102.2 F, and O2 saturation at 98% on room air. Physical exam was remarkable for oral thrush with right tongue ulceration and healing ulcers on the dorsal surface of his feet bilaterally. His complete blood count (CBC) and basic metabolic profile (BMP) were within normal limits. Urinalysis was positive for blood and 2+ proteinuria. His urine toxicology was positive for oxycodone. He was initially treated for Systemic Inflammatory Response System (SIRS). Blood cultures were drawn and he was started empirically on vancomycin and piperacillin and tazobactam. Bilateral venous duplex was negative for deep vein thrombosis. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed multiple irregular nodules with suspected infectious versus inflammatory etiology and septic emboli could not be excluded . Transthoracic echocardiogram was negative for infective endocarditis. Bilateral foot ulcers drained serosanguinous fluid with cultures positive for Enterococcus faecalis and Serratia but four sets of blood cultures remained negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left foot was normal and MRI of the right foot showed metatarsal stress reaction versus early osteomyelitis. Skin biopsy showed extensively necrotic fibroadipose tissue with acute inflammation. Right lateral oral tongue ulcerative lesion biopsy showed predominantly hyperplastic squamous mucosa showing an ulcer site and abscess with fragments of necrotic squamous epithelium associated with cytologic atypia and colonies of bacteria, and one fragment of necrotic squamous epithelium displayed vague papillary architecture. The patient later developed right eye conjunctivitis. Appropriate consultations with nephrology, pulmonology, and podiatry were obtained.
Based on the constellation of oral and cutaneous ulcers, CT chest findings, bilateral foot ulcers, and conjunctivitis, a rheumatologic process was suspected. The antinuclear antibody (ANA) was negative, rheumatoid factor was with 1 : 640 titer, C-ANCA (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody) was positive with 1 : 1280 titer, and the diagnosis of Wegner's granulomatosis was made. He was started on rituximab 375 mg weekly and methylprednisolone 250 mg every 6 hours for 3 days. He later had a renal biopsy which showed granulomatosis with polyangiitis and mild interstitial fibrosis with tubular atrophy and a pauci immune crescentic glomerulonephritis . He underwent debridement of his bilateral foot ulcers and received an additional dose of rituximab. Following the second dose of rituximab, the oral ulcers improved. Toward the end of his hospitalization, his hemoglobin decreased and he was noted to have blood streaked sputum. Repeat CT chest was ordered and was consistent with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage . Unfortunately, he left prior to pulmonology evaluation. He was called and encouraged to come back to the hospital but declined and ultimately sought further medical attention at another hospital where he was ultimately admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Nephrology was consulted and began plasmapheresis for a total of 7 treatments. He was given a one-time dose of cyclophosphamide on initial presentation and then an additional dose of rituximab following plasmapheresis. He gradually improved and was discharged home 8 days after admission.