A 68-year-old female underwent phacoemulsification + intraocular lens implantation + pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) + ILM peeling + 18% sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) tamponade in January 2016 due to an epiretinal membrane and a lamellar MH. Unfortunately, macular hole retinal detachment (MHRD) occurred one month after surgery. She received PPV + extended ILM peeling + silicone oil tamponade in February 2016 and underwent removal of silicone oil in October 2016. The retina had attached well, although the MH became refractory, and her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/500. She underwent two PPV + free ILM flap transplantation + 15% C3F8 treatments in April 2017 and July 2017, with unsatisfactory results. Due to her repeated surgeries, an autologous free ILM flap could not be harvested. We decided to perform a neurosensory retinal free flap transplantation for the repair of this refractory MH after discussion with the patient.
A standard 25-g, 3-port PPV (Constellation; Alcon) was performed under general anesthesia. Endolaser photocoagulation was applied to outline the retinal free flap at the temporal retina. The neurosensory retinal free flap was approximately twice the diameter of the MH. The retina was cut with vertical scissors along the inner edge of the laser spots and was gently dissected with back-flush needle irrigation until a neurosensory retinal free flap with a 2-MH diameter area was harvested. The infusion was stopped temporarily to prevent turbulent flow. A drop of whole blood was placed within the MH, and the neurosensory retinal free flap was then placed on the blood. We performed fluid-gas exchange and flushed the vitreous cavity with 15% C3F8 at the end of the surgery . All of the techniques were performed under standard 25-g, 3-port PPV. We did not use a bimanual approach under chandelier illumination (see Additional file ). The patient was instructed to maintain a prone position for 14 days postoperatively and to avoid any unnecessary movement.
Three weeks after surgery, optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed closure of the MH. The flap was visible on OCT and had filled the MH without overlapping of the neurosensory retina. The 2-month postoperative OCT examination still showed the MH closure. The patient reported an improvement of visual acuity and a decrease in her scotoma area. The patient’s BCVA improved from 20/500 preoperatively to 20/50 at 2 months postoperatively.