A 50-year-old housewife presented in the emergency department of our level 1 trauma center with complaints of pain and immobility of the left hip joint and inability to bear weight forthe past 20 days. She gave a history of bilateral anterior groin pain (left > right) for thepast 4 months. She also had a history of limping, difficulty in sitting cross-legged, and squatting for the same period. The pain was insidious in onset and progressed over time to make her bedridden. On examination, there was tenderness over bilateral hip joints (left > right), external rotation deformity, and 1cm shortening of the left lower limb. Movement of the left hip joint was extremely painful and was not encouraged. There was pain at extremes of motion of the right hip joint. The patient was able to do straight leg raise on the right side but not on the left side. Neurovascular examination was bilaterally unremarkable. The patient had no comorbidities and was not on any long-term medication. There was no history of trauma (trivial or overt), excessive physical activity, or fragility fractures in the past. The patient was postmenopausal for2 years. The patient was actively mobile before the onset of symptoms. She consulted a local practitioner during initial stages of her discomfort who had prescribed her NSAIDs. However, there was no relief and pain progressed to such an extent that she was not able to bear weight. A 20 days earlier anteroposterior pelvis with bilateral hip radiograph showed sclerosis over bilateral inferomedial femoral neck with cortical breach in the right side and an undisplaced complete fracture line over the left side. The neck shaft angle was 130° on the right side and 114° on the left side. Plain radiographs were orderedon presentation which showed a displaced fracture neck of femur on the left side collapsed in varus and sclerosis over inferomedial aspect of the right femoral neck with cortical breach. A computed tomography scan confirmed the X-ray diagnosis . Blood investigations showed a normal calcium profile, Vitamin D, and serum parathyroid hormone levels. DEXA scan showed normal t- and z-scores in hip and spine. Whole spine radiographs revealed no abnormalities. Thus, a diagnosis of bilateral FNSFs was made and the patient was admitted for surgical stabilization. She underwent osteosynthesis with three cannulated screws on the right side and 2 days later underwent total hip arthroplasty for displaced fracture on the left side . Postoperatively, she was allowed full weight-bearing mobilization on the left side and toe touch on the right side. There were no post-operative complications. Radiographs were repeated at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year postoperatively which showed union at the right side with no further varus collapse or implant failure . The left side with hip prosthesis was also normal. At 1-year follow-up, the patient was pain free, able to walk full weight-bearing without support and carry out her daily activities comfortably.