A 57-year old man with uremia on hemodialysis complicated by severe renal anemia, hypertension and heart failure, presented with a two-week history of recurrent fever and cough with purulent sputum. Chest pain, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea and night sweat was denied. He had been diagnosed with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) nearly 2 months ago, and the etiology was primary glomerulonephritis. Hemodialysis with the central venous catheter started at that time. Two weeks before admission, he suffered from recurrent epileptic seizures, characterized by convulsions of the whole body, unconsciousness and fecal incontinence in other hospital. Shortly afterwards, fever and cough with yellow phlegm gradually appeared. His labs were notable for white blood cell count (WBC) of 11.6 × 10 9 /L with 87% neutrophils, hemoglobin (Hb) 61 g/L, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 74.06 mg/L. Blood and sputum cultures were negative. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed pneumonia. Intravenous vancomycin (0.5 g three times a week) and meropenem (0.5 g Q8H) was administered empirically for suspected aspiration (given his lethargy after epileptic seizure). Then the symptoms improved gradually and indicators of infection dropped to normal during 1 week. Unexpectedly, the patient had fever again on the day of admission, with a temperature of 38.8 °C, accompanied by deteriorating general status. Therefore, he was transferred to our hospital for further treatment.
Physical examination was significant for appearance of severe anemia, a temperature of 38.8 °C, decreased breath sounds at the lung bases bilaterally, a diffuse moist rale on respiratory exam and a slight exudation around the right jugular hemodialysis catheter. Initial laboratory investigations revealed WBC of 7.0 × 10 9 /L with 74.2% neutrophils, Hb 55 g/L, CRP 25.29 mg/L, procalcitonin (PCT) 3.02 ng/ml, Scr 557.1umol/L and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) greater than 5000 pg/ml. Chest CT demonstrated multiple exudation of both lungs, bilateral pleural effusion and atelectasis of both lower lobes . No valvular vegetation was found in echocardiography, and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 43%. Initial diagnosis of admission was ESRD with hemodialysis, sever renal anemia, community acquired pneumonia, heart failure and suspected catheter-related infection. Treatment with intravenous piperacillin / tazobactam (2.25 g Q12H) for pneumonia and correction of heart failure and anemia were commenced. The dialysis catheter and urinary catheter were removed and peripheral blood cultures were collected. But his fever with a maximum temperature of 40 °C still persisted. Three consecutive blood, sputum culture and catheter cultures were negative. Additionally, thoracentesis and drainage were performed and hydrothorax culture was also negative. Laboratory detection of tuberculosis and fungi was all negative. Antibiotics were switched successively to cefoperazone sodium / sulbactam sodium (1.5 g Q12H) + moxifloxacin (0.4 g/day) + fluconazole (0.2 g/day), and vancomycin (0.5 g three times a week) + meropenem (0.5 g Q8H), according to consultation results of respiratory department. However, no apparent improvement was noted, and his general condition deteriorated progressively. Response of temperature and indicators of infection to antibiotic therapy was shown in Fig. and Fig. . A repeated chest CT showed increased multiple exudation of both lungs . Finally, fourth blood culture became positive for E. faecium at>105 CFU/ml (vanA genotype) on hospital day 13. At that point, antibiotic therapy was switched to intravenous linezolid (600 mg Q12H) based on the sensitivity pattern of isolates that were vancomycin, moxifloxacin, gentamicin, penicillin, rythromycin and ampicillin resistant, and linezolid, teicoplaninand and tegafycline sensitive. In the following days, the fever subsided gradually . And the CRP and PCT levels decreased steadily . The patient completed a four-week course of linezolid with complete resolution of chest CT abnormalities .