A 20-year-old black woman, previously healthy, was admitted to the emergency
department (ED) of the University Hospital of Londrina (UH) complaining of
odynophagia, a single episode of unmeasured fever and generalized myalgia with onset
five days past. She was self-medicated with dipyrone and ibuprofen but did not get
better and sought a basic health unit where amoxicillin was prescribed. On the same
day, she reported appearance of petechiae on the face, and upper and lower limbs.
She sought the secondary hospital, where she developed an large amount of petechiae
, followed by confluence to
clusters, worsening of general condition, and alteration of laboratory tests
results; she was then referred to the UH. In the physical examination, she was
slightly hypertensive (150/70 mmHg), pale, tachycardic, hyperemic, with purulent
tonsils, cyanosis of the extremities, and purpuric plaques on the face and upper and
lower limbs. The patient was anuric and required dialysis on admission. Laboratory
tests showed anemia (Hb 10.7 g/dL), leukocytosis (44,990/µL),
thrombocytopenia (24,000/µL), impaired renal function (Cr 4.15 mg/dL),
hyponatremia and hyperkalemia, and elevation of LDH to 3,579 U/L.
The initial diagnostic hypotheses on admission were meningococcemia and
staphylococci. Blood cultures were collected and antibiotic therapy (ceftriaxone and
vancomycin) was started. Despite the antibiotics, the patient continued with
worsening of the clinical condition, hypotension, tachycardia, and tachypnea, and
purpuric lesions became bullous . The
presence of schistocytes and elevated serum LDH levels indicated a possible TMA. The
patient did not present neurological alterations, thus excluding the diagnosis of
thrombotic TTP. Considering the hypothesis of aHUS, we started investigating the
possible causes of TMA. All blood cultures and rheumatologic tests were negative.
The serology performed was also negative, except IgM positive for dengue, collected
on the sixth, twelve and twenty-eight days of medical history, all positive. The
result for arboviruses (dengue 1, 2, 3 and 4, chikungunya and zika) was negative.
However, this was collected on the sixth day of the onset of the disease, and
ideally, the arbovirus survey sample is collected on the first day of symptoms and
is acceptable up to the fifth day of the disease.
The patient completed the antibiotic regimen and afterwards, she was maintained only
in supportive treatment, performing daily hemodialysis due to anuria and frequent
need for transfusion of red blood cells due to anemia. On the fifteenth day of
hospitalization, after sustained improvement in thrombocytopenia, she underwent
renal laparoscopic biopsy, which identified extensive areas of ischemic and
hemorrhagic infarction, interstitial hemorrhage, and medium-sized vessels with
fibrin thrombi . Skin lesions were
also analyzed by biopsy, which identified inflammatory infiltrate with extensive
necrosis in adipose tissue, absence of signs of vasculitis in muscles, and absence
of dermis and local epidermis surrounded by areas of epidermal repair. These lesions
evolved with rupture of blisters and necrotic areas that progressively deepened,
reaching the dermis, subcutaneous tissue, musculature, and tibial bone exposure
. There was a need for frequent
debridement of the necrotic areas in lower limbs, performed by the plastic surgery
team of the burn treatment center of the service. As there was incessant progression
of the lesions in legs and feet soft tissues, it was considered that the underlying
disease that was causing the necrosis was be active. All available markers were
negative for vasculitis and there was no purulent secretion or positive culture that
would justify the clinical evolution. On the 32nd day of hospitalization,
plasmapheresis was chosen as an alternative measure since there was association with
TMA, and initially, aHUS was one of the diagnostic hypotheses. Around the
40th day of hospitalization, the patient started to show a
significant diuresis and the necrotic areas in the legs stabilized. Hemodialysis was
suspended and the plastic surgery team started skin grafting with good response
. The patient was discharged
after 68 days of hospitalization and the diagnosis of TMA and idiopathic PF
associated with AKI was established.