A 46-year-old male cadaver was found to have an extra-hepatic biliary system with rare morphological anomalies. This was identified during a descriptive-prospective cross sectional study of the morphological characteristics of the extra-hepatic biliary system in humans.
The anterior abdominal wall was opened longitudinally along the midline. The abdominal wall was separated on to the right side along the central margin up to the mid axillary line. Then the abdominal wall was divided from the right side of the pubic bone up to the anterior superior iliac spine. The anterior abdominal wall flap was reflected laterally. The stomach was retracted to the left side and the second part of the duodenum, free margin of the lesser omentum, epiploic foramen and gall bladder identified. Dissection was done to demonstrate the extra-hepatic biliary system and its vascular pattern.
The right and left hepatic ducts were not seen extra-hepatically and the common hepatic duct drained directly into the gall bladder neck, with absence of the common bile duct. Further drainage of the bile away from the gallbladder and into the duodenum was provided by the cystic duct. The gall bladder was lying in the gall bladder fossa in the right lobe of the liver in a transverse plane. The width and the length of the gall bladder were 2.5 cm and 4.5 cm respectively. The length of the common hepatic duct was 2.6 cm and the cystic duct that drained the gall bladder to the duodenum was 6.9 cm .
Apart from the anomalous extra-hepatic biliary morphology, a rare abnormal arterial pattern was observed. The cystic artery was anterior to the common hepatic duct and it was originating from the right hepatic artery. The division of anterior and posterior branches of the cystic artery was not noted. The right hepatic artery was found to be communicating with the left hepatic artery by a "bridging artery" after giving rise to the cystic artery. An accessory hepatic artery originated from the "bridging artery" forming a "cruciate" hepatic arterial anastomosis .