A 59-year-old woman was diagnosed with IgG kappa MM in May 2002, when she presented with Durie-Salmon stage III A disease with lytic destruction of the pelvis. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) performed on a bone marrow aspirate in 2006 did not reveal any high-risk cytogenetic abnormalities. Induction therapy with vincristine/doxo-rubicin/dexamethasone was followed by double autologous stem cell transplantation after conditioning with high-dose melphalan (200 mg/m2), resulting in a PR that lasted for 2 years. At first relapse, 4 cycles of bortezomib and subsequent bortezomib maintenance were administered and led to a PR for further 3 years. Third-line treatment with lenalidomide, bendamustine and dexamethasone produced only a short-lived response. Therapeutic attempts with the Hsp-90 inhibitor AUY-922 (phase I-Ib/II study) and bortezomib/dexa-methasone resulted in disease progression. Salvage treatment using multidrug combinations of two novel agents (bortezomib plus lenalidomide), alkylating agents (cyclophosphamide or melphalan) and dexamethasone also failed to induce a durable response. With high-grade plasma cell infiltration of the bone marrow , increasingly severe pancytopenia developed, causing chronic fatigue and impaired quality of life and eventually led to treatment discontinuation.
In August 2010, at the age of 68 and 8 years after primary diagnosis , we started treatment with pomalidomide (4 mg days 1–21 of a 28-day cycle) and low-dose dexamethasone (40 mg weekly) in combination with doxorubicin (4 mg days 1–4 by continuous infusion). Due to grade 3 thrombocytopenia, the pomalidomide dose was reduced to 2 mg from cycle 2 onwards, resulting in improved tolerability, serological PR and hematological improvement. However, myeloma therapy had to be stopped after six cycles due to the reactivation of a hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection (11.7 × 106 copies/ml), which the patient supposedly acquired in 1945 and which had never emerged during therapy before. Antiviral treatment with entecavir was initiated, which led to a sufficient drop in viral load (9.7 × 102 copies/ml).
Five months after the interruption of antimyeloma treatment, the patient suffered from serological disease progression and a pathological humeral fracture requiring surgical treatment . To prevent further disease progression, one more cycle of pomalidomide/doxorubicin/dexamethasone was administered. For the subsequent cycles, doxorubicin was replaced by bendamustine (40 mg/m2 days 1–2) in light of the published data reporting an increased risk of HBV reactivation in patients receiving anthracyclines. However, two cycles of the new combination regimen resulted in transfusion-dependent anemia and grade 3 neutropenia, and only stable disease was observed.
Since the patient was not eligible for treatment within one of the active clinical trials at our institution, individualized therapy was initiated, whereby pomalidomide (2 mg on days 1–21 of a 28-day cycle) was combined with bortezomib (1.3 mg/m2 day 1, 4), cyclophosphamide (250 mg days 1–3) and dexamethasone (10 mg days 1–3, weekly thereafter). As ninth-line therapy, this individualized combination regimen inhibited the progression of the bone lesions, and the patient continued to experience a good quality of life. When the symptoms of sensory polyneuropathy worsened after 18 cycles, bortezomib was reduced to 1.0 mg/m2 and the cycle length was extended to 43 days. Neuropathy improved gradually; however, we observed a steady rise in serologic disease activity. For the subsequent cycles, the pomalidomide dose was increased to 3 mg days 1–21 and the cycles were repeated on day 29, resulting in sustained PR. Due to an extended treatment-free interval after 34 cycles of pomalidomide + VCD (bortezomib/cyclophosphamide/dexamethasone), we observed an increase of serologic markers. More than 12 years after primary diagnosis and 4 years and 4 months after the first treatment with pomalidomide, regrettably, our patient succumbed to a fulminant pneumogenic septicemia in grade 1 neutropenia.