An 11-month-old female infant presented with bilateral corneal opacity, which was first noted at the age of 3 months. The patient was born full term with an uneventful birth history, and no history of maternal infection or family history of ophthalmologic disease. Ophthalmic examination revealed central corneal opacity approximately 3.0 mm in diameter in the right eye and 2.0 mm in diameter in the left eye, with an underlying keratolenticular adhesion and a cloudy cataract, and that the patient could not trace the light . Contact ultrasound A-scans revealed axial lengths of 18.28 mm and 18.39 mm in the right and left eyes, respectively. Intraocular pressure (IOP) were 14 mmHg in both eyes, measured by a handheld tonometer (Icare Finland Oy Vantaa, Finland). There were no systemic anomalies.
The patient’s parents hesitated to accept PKP and fully understood the risks of performing PKP in infants because they had consulted several surgeons before coming to our clinic to seek a second opinion. Her parents were subsequently offered an option of adhesiolysis and adhesive membrane removal combined with lensectomy and vitrectomy. Surgeries were performed at the age of 11 months on 17th and 19th October 2017 in the right and left eye, respectively.
Surgeries were performed by an experienced surgeon (Y.E.Z.) under general anesthesia using the Accurus with the venturi vacuum system (Alcon Laboratories, Inc.); the cut rate was 2000 per minute and vacuum was 350 mmHg. A corneoscleral incision was made superiorly and four 1.0 mm paracentesis were created in each quadrant. The anterior chamber was initially filled with ophthalmic viscosurgical device (OVD), and the neck of the keratolenticular adhesion was cut using intraocular scissors. There was comprehensive iris posterior synechia. The pupillary aperture was enlarged by four iris hooks through paracentesis in each quadrant after adhesiolysis. Then, a partially resorbed lens and peripheral anterior capsule contraction with zonular elongation were noted underneath the keratolenticular adhesion. The anterior capsular defect was extended to an anterior capsulorhexis of approximately 5.0 mm diameter using a 23-gauge vitrector, while the anterior chamber was maintained by a 23-gauge infusion cannula. After the mode was switched to irrigation/aspiration, the cortex was carefully aspirated. Next, a posterior capsulotomy with a 3.0 mm diameter was performed with the vitrector and the anterior part of the vitreous volume was removed using the same vitrectomy settings. Before the end of the procedure, the residual adhesion was gently peeled off by capsulorhexis forceps curvilinearly following the demarcation line. Surgery was concluded with reformation of the anterior chamber with balanced salt solution and closure of the corneoscleral incision with 10–0 nylon sutures, leaving both eyes aphakic (Additional file 1). No unexpected intraoperative complications were encountered. Clinical manifestations were similar in both eyes.
Topical treatment consisted of steroidal eye drops gradually tapering over 4 weeks, antibiotic eye drops 4 times daily for 2 weeks, and mydriatic eye drops (phenylephrine hydrochloride and tropicamide compound) once a day for 4 weeks. A gradual reduction in central corneal opacity and improvement in the visual acuity (VA) was noted . Non-contact specular microscopy at one year postoperatively showed large heteromorphic endothelial cells at the borderline between the normal endothelium and the central defect . At the latest follow-up that was two years after surgery, the corneal had excellent transparency, with corrected Teller VA of 20/50 in both eyes and IOP of 15 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg in the left eye. There was no evidence of glaucoma.