A 31-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with atrial tachycardia and cardiogenic shock. He had been diagnosed with HS during childhood and undergone splenectomy because of splenomegaly at the age of 26. He never received any red cell transfusions. He had suffered from dyspnea on exertion one to two years before admission, and his symptom had gradually worsened. At the same time, he had suffered from erectile dysfunction. He had a history of a small amount of alcohol intake.
On admission, he had mild anemia and jaundice. He did not have any skin pigmentation. His blood pressure was 93/63 mmHg with a regular pulse of 150/minute (atrial rate was 250/minute). Hemoglobin was 9.4 g/dL, and direct and indirect bilirubin were 0.7 and 5.0 mg/dL, respectively. Hepatobiliary enzymes were elevated as follows; aspartate aminotransferase 81 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 51 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 330 U/L, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 78 U/L. Hemoglobin A1C was 4.7%, indicating that the glucose metabolism was normal. Plasma brain natriuretic peptide level was increased to 925 pg/mL. Serum ferritin, serum iron, and transferrin saturation levels were markedly elevated to 4068 ng/mL, 216 μg/mL, and 90.7%, respectively. After cardioversion for atrial tachycardia, the electrocardiogram showed lower atrial rhythm, and inverted T waves in V4-V6 leads. Chest X-ray showed bilateral pulmonary congestion and pleural effusion. The echocardiography revealed the left ventricle was dilated with end-diastolic diameter of 63 mm, and wall motion was diffusely and severely reduced with left ventricular ejection fraction of 13%. The wall thickness of intraven- tricular septum and posterior wall were 9 mm and 8 mm, respectively.
His cardiac function did not improve even after the cardioversion for atrial tachycardia, and he suffered from recurrent heart failure. Finally, right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy revealed multiple myocardial hemosiderin deposits. In addition to the iron deposition in the heart, the loss of myocyte and severe interstitial fibrosis were present.
Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with cardiac hemochromatosis associated with HS. Despite intensive medical treatment for heart failure and arrhythmias in combination with iron chelation therapy, he eventually died of progressive and refractory heart failure. Autopsy findings revealed systemic deposition of hemosiderin, especially in the heart and liver. Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with liver cirrhosis due to hemochromatosis.