A 60-year-old Japanese man with a 9-year history of T2DM presented at the emergency department of Kariya Toyota General Hospital with anuria and severe general fatigue. On admission, the patient was transported by ambulance due to his difficulty in moving. On evaluation, the patient reported fatigue, malaise, weight loss, and intermittent nausea and vomiting. He reported no headaches, joint, or muscle pain. He denied having a fever or contact with another sick individual.
Apart from T2DM, his past medical history included hypertension and lumbar disc herniation. He had no history of psychiatric disease and no known drug allergies. He had no family history of diabetes mellitus, lived alone, and his educational status was not obtained. The patient had smoked 1 pack of cigarettes per day for 45 years and consumed approximately 540 mL of Japanese sake daily. His medications included Met (500 mg three times daily), sitagliptin (50 mg once daily), pioglitazone (15 mg once daily), dapagliflozin (5 mg once daily), amlodipine (5 mg once daily), azilsartan/amlodipine (20 mg/5 mg once daily), rosuvastatin (2.5 mg once daily), and a hydrogel patch containing loxoprofen sodium.
Renal function was normal before admission and the Met dosage used to treat T2DM was suitable for this patient. No abnormality was found in the patient’s blood tests (data not shown) when he had visited his doctor 13 days before admission. Notably, 12 days before admission, his work had changed from office to physical work (approximately 30,000–40,000 steps per day). He had noted a gradual decrease in urinary output for several days before admission, but had no other symptoms. Two days before admission, he developed anuria, dizziness, and nausea.
The initial laboratory findings are shown in Table . The time-course changes in serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels after admission are shown in Fig. . The lactate concentration of the patient was 4.27 mmol/L and the arterial pH was 7.31. Considering the previously established definition for lactic acidosis (lactate > 5 mmol/L and pH < 7.35) , the patient did not meet these criteria. However, a recently updated definition of lactic acidosis revealed that this patient taking Met fulfilled the criteria for the diagnosis of lactic acidosis because the lactate concentration was > 4 mmol/L .
The physical examination at admission indicated the following: height of 172.3 cm, weight of 69.3 kg, blood pressure of 159/94 mmHg, regular pulse of 96 beats per minute, body temperature of 36.3 °C, and oxygen saturation of 99% breathing ambient air. There was no sign of hypoglycemia since blood glucose was 129 mg/dL . This case is considered to be different from either diabetic ketoacidosis or euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis. Despite the presence of normal glucose levels, he was not in the insulin-dependent state characteristic of euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis and did not present with the physical symptoms of ketosis (tachypnea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and impaired consciousness). The patient was alert and appeared well. Cardiac auscultation revealed a regular rhythm without murmurs or gallops and an audible S1 and S2. Respiratory sounds were clear to auscultation with no crackles, wheezes, or bronchial breath sounds. The abdomen was non-distended, soft, and non-tender. His legs had no edema or muscle weakness, and the remainder of the examination was unremarkable.
A radiograph of the chest was normal. Computed tomography (CT) showed slight cortical atrophy in the bilateral kidneys; however, no kidney stone or hydronephrosis was observed. There was irregular thickening of the small bowel wall without adjacent fat stranding and no sign of inferior vena cava collapse.
Bilateral hydronephrosis and nephrolithiasis were excluded based on the CT scan data. Glomerulonephritis was also excluded based on the negative autoantibody findings. The ratio of urea nitrogen to creatinine was < 20, suggesting a possible cause for the intrinsic renal injury. There was no hematuria because the presence of red cells in the urine was due the trauma induced by urinary bladder catheterization on admission. Considering the low estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and high urinary protein/creatinine ratio (11.04 g/g Cre), urinary N-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase (420.3 U/g Cre), and β2-microglobulin/creatinine ratio (149 µg/g Cre) , the patient was presumptively diagnosed with acute tubular necrosis with metabolic acidosis (anion-gap 23.5 mmol/L). Renal pathology findings on day 3 after admission revealed that 3 of 23 glomeruli were sclerotic and no significant pathological alterations were observed with light microscopy. However, the proximal tubular cells were diffusely enlarged with vacuolar degeneration. The same pathology may be seen with Fabry’s disease and use of osmotic diuretics, but the patient’s history was negative. All immunofluorescence results were negative and, apart from the vacuolization and swelling of the proximal tubules, no obvious abnormal findings were observed by electron microscopy. Based on the pathological findings and clinical course, the diagnosis of acute tubular necrosis was confirmed.
After admission, intravenous hydration therapy was started. On the day of presentation at the emergency unit (day 0), he was hospitalized and hemodialysis (HD) was introduced to remove Met and improve acid–base disruption and anuria. In detail, HD was performed with a polysulfone dialyzer [Pinnafine® PN-100 (filter size 1.0 m2, Fresenius Medical Care AG and Co., Hessen, Germany)﻿ (at day 0, 1, and 3 with small molecule heparin) or Pinnafine® PN-140 (filter size 1.4 m2, Fresenius Medical Care AG and Co., Hessen, Germany) (at day 5 and 7 with Nafamostat Mesilate)] with blood and dialysate (Kidaly 4E solution, Fuso Pharmaceutical Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan) flow rates of 150 and 500 mL/min, respectively, for 3 hours per session. During the HD session, the patient’s condition was stable. The eGFR was calculated from serum creatinine levels on days 0, 3, 5, 7, 10, and 19 were 5.1, 4.5, 10.8, 31.9, 61.2, and 59.9 mL/min/1.73 m2, respectively . The patient resumed urination on day 2. On day 5, anuria was recovered after the third session of HD. Renal function gradually improved, and on day 11, the serum creatinine level reached 1.78 mg/dL. The patient was discharged 13 days after hospitalization, and no major prognostic problems were observed.
The plasma concentrations of Met were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)–ultraviolet (UV) as per a previous report , with slight modification and in accordance with the validation criteria guidelines of the US Food and Drug Administration . The Met concentrations on days 3, 5, and 7 were 8.95, 2.58, and 0.16 µg/mL, respectively. The semilogarithmic concentration–time plots for Met showed good linearity (R2 = 0.954, Fig. D). The one-compartment model pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis yielded an observed ke (day 3–7) of 0.04 hours−1 and calculated t1/2 (day 3–7) of 16.5 hours. Moreover, the t1/2 (day 3–5) was 26.7 hours, and t1/2 (day 5–7) was 11.9 hours.