A 46-year-old woman was hospitalized with a 2-year history of dull pain in the right upper abdomen. Her appetite was normal and she had no history of diarrhea, flushes or dyspnea. There was no pertinent past medical or surgical history. On examination, she was well nourished with stable vital signs, and no pallor, jaundice, or significant lymphadenopathy. Abdominal examination revealed no tenderness, organomegaly, or abnormal mass.
Laboratory investigation revealed normal hematological findings and serum electrolyte levels. The laboratory data of Liver function were within normal limits. The results of assays for tumor-associated antigen revealed that the serum levels of CEA, CA-50, CA19-9 and CA125 were within normal limits. Urine and stool routine examinations proved normal. Because of no suspicion for the diagnosis of carcinoid tumor before treatment, we did not measure the levels of the urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) and plasma serotonin. The chest X-ray revealed no unusual findings. Abdominal ultrasound showed a 4.5 cm protruding tissue mass in the body and fundus of the gallbladder lumen . This mass appeared to arise from the wall of the gallbladder. Contrast-enhance abdominal computed tomography was performed and revealed a high-density mass in the gallbladder on the atrial phase . Low-density lesions in the right hepatic lobe were not detected. No evidences of calcification in the mass and biliary dilatation were noted.
With a preoperative diagnosis of gallbladder carcinoma, the patient was referred for surgical opinion and laparotomy was subsequently performed. At laparotomy, a 4 × 5 cm mass was found within the gallbladder, located on the free surface of the body and fundus of the gallbladder. Neither metastases nor direct invasion to the liver was found. The entire mass and gallbladder were excised and intact. Pathological findings were as follows: On grass inspection of the operated material, the gallbladder measured 10 × 6 × 5 cm, and had a smooth external surface. On opening the specimen, an intramural tumor 5 cm in diameter located in the free wall of the body and fundus of the gallbladder . Histologically, the tumor was seen infiltrating into the mucosa extensively, and some penetrated the muscular layer but not through the serosa of the gallbladder into the liver. The gallbladder with tumor was completely excised with free resection margins. The tumor consisted of nests of small oval cells with round-to-oval neclei and these nests were separated from each other by thin fibrovascular bands. The tumor showed moderate pleomorphism with scattered mitotic figures, but no definite evidence of vascular permeation, perineural invasion or lymphatic permeation was seen . Immunohistochemical studies of paraffin sections revealed strong positivity for chromogranin A and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) . It was diagnosed as a classical carcinoid tumor of the gallbladder. After surgery, the patient had an uneventful recovery without incident. No recurrent lesion was found using abdominal ultrasound examination and CT scan 12 months after cholecystectomy.