A 15-year-old girl presented to our clinic with long-term nasal obstruction, which was bilaterally and more severe on the left side. The initial examination revealed that the patient had no history of epistaxis, trauma, headache, previous rhinoplasty, or constitutional symptoms. Moreover, the case lacked a history of any drug abuse, cocaine, and long-term nasal sprays. She also lacked any drug allergies and was healthy in other aspects, and the results of routine laboratory tests were normal. In the anterior rhinoscopy, a mass on the mucosal surface was observed, which almost completely filled the right nasal cavity. On the left side, there was a very severe nasal septal deviation that almost reached the lateral wall of the left nasal cavity. The endoscopic exam of the case showed a huge middle turbinate on the right nasal cavity that compressed the mid-portion of the nasal septum and made it deviate to the left side. Due to severe nasal septal deviation, the endoscope did not pass through the left side. No perforation was observed through the endoscopy. Since the endoscopic exam was not satisfactory, we requested a computed tomography (CT) scan of the paranasal sinuses without contrast to evaluate the whole system. Computed tomography imaging was consistent with giant CB on the right nasal cavity that passed through the nasal septum and extended somehow through the nasal septum. The septum seemed to be perforated, and there was a severe nasal septum deviation to the left side. This imaging also showed bilateral pneumatized superior concha and hypertrophic inferior conchae on the left side; nevertheless, no sinusitis was observed .
According to , giant concha bullosa on the right nasal cavity passed through the nasal septum and extended through the nasal septum, and the septum perforation can be noticed.
The patient was scheduled for surgery. Functional endoscopic sinus operation was performed under general anesthesia. After local anesthesia, 2 ml of 2% lidocaine and epinephrine 1: 100,000 was injected along the anterior parts of the middle turbinate. Separated the outer and inner slices of the large middle concha, and then, resect the inner slice to assess the nasal septum. The middle turbinate had pneumatized in preference to the anterior ethmoid cells. As expected, there was a circular perforation with preserved mucosa on its margins. As the pressure was reduced, we managed to perform an endoscopy on the left side .
Histopathological examination of the excised lesion revealed fibroconnective tissue and inflammatory cell infiltration with no evidence of granulomatous reaction or malignancy. Purified protein derivative skin test was considered negative and perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) and classic-ANCA and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels were within normal range. Chest X-ray examination was normal. The microbial smear and culture of the specimen were negative. After the operation, the patient's symptoms alleviated rapidly.