The patient is a 28.9-year-old woman, born after a full-term pregnancy from unrelated healthy parents. Maternal age was 44 years and paternal age was 40. Foetal movements were decreased during pregnancy. Caesarean section was necessary because of premature rupture of the membranes. Birth weight was 2450 g. After delivery the patient showed severe muscular hypotonia, weak cry, sleepiness, poor deep tendon reflexes and abnormalities in thermoregulation. Feeding problems were noted due to a poor sucking reflex and the baby required gavage. She was discharged with diagnosis of congenital benign hypotonia. She had a psychomotor delay, non-specific mild dysmorphisms and strabismus. Karyotype was normal (46, XX). Neonatal screening for CH showed normal thyroxine (T4) levels and a slightly elevated TSH (24 μU/ml), both of which were confirmed with a blood sample. Nevertheless, she was not treated. The patient was firstly admitted at our hospital at 9 months of age because of elevated serum level of TSH (40 μU/ml - nv <4 μU/ml), with normal FT4 (8 pg/ml – n.v. 5–12.5 pg/ml). She had a supine length of 66 cm (<10th percentile), a body weight of 8 kg (<25th percentile) and a head circumference of 45.5 cm (97th percentile). The thyroid ultrasound revealed the absence of the gland in the neck , while the 99mTc-pertechnetate thyroid scintigraphy showed a small, ectopic, sublingual thyroid gland .
Thus, levo-thyroxine therapy was promptly initiated (8 μg/kg/die) and the dose was gradually adjusted over several months with normalization of FT4 and TSH levels.
Due to the persistence of hypotonia and poor response to stimuli, associated with the absence of sucking reflex in the first weeks of life, a brain computed tomography scan was done at 12 months of age, which showed ventricular enlargement and craniosynostosis.
Two years later, at the age of three, the patient showed poor physical and developmental progress, despite being biochemically euthyroid on levo-thyroxine substitution therapy, and associated hyperphagia, weight gain, short stature and decreased growth velocity. In addition, physical examination revealed a more distinctive phenotype, characterized by peculiar facial features (narrow bifrontal diameter, dolichocephaly, almond-shaped eyes, downturned angles of the mouth) with abundant thick saliva, small hands and feet. At this age a severe scoliosis was diagnosed, treated initially with a corset. The patient later required surgery at the age of 13.
To evaluate growth retardation, two growth hormone (GH) stimulation tests (clonidine 0.150 mg/m2 orally and insulin tolerance test 0.1 UI/kg i.v. bolus) were performed and both of them were consistent with a diagnosis of GH deficiency [GH peak 1.7 ng/ml and 5.6 ng/ml, respectively (nv >10 ng/ml)]. The combined test [GHRH (1 μg/kg) + Arginine (0,5 g/kg iv)] confirmed the presence of reduced GH response [GH peak 8.7 ng/ml (nv >20 ng/ml)]. Pituitary MRI revealed an empty sella with a small, hypoplastic pituitary gland at its base.
Therefore, GH therapy was initiated at 0.24 mg/kg/week, subsequently dose adjusted based on IGF-1 levels and growth curve, and continued until the age of 12.9 years.
At the age of 9, given her constellation of signs and symptoms, PWS diagnosis was considered, as a possible cause of her clinical picture, but because of the mother’s initial refusal genetic tests were performed only at the age of 16. Methylation analysis and DNA polymorphism analysis of chromosome 15 confirmed the presence of UPD15.
Since the age of 10.2 both central and obstructive sleep apnea were noted on polysomnographic study, for which the child subsequently required non-invasive ventilation (NIV).
She also presented skin-picking starting at age 11 and worsening with age.
At the age of 14.1 a right ovarian cyst was removed. Since our patient had no spontaneous menarche, she underwent a LHRH test at age 22 that documented a complete hypogonadism of central origin with concomitant low estradiol levels. Consequently, sex steroid replacement was initiated.
Corticotrophin deficiency was excluded because cortisol response to low-dose ACTH test was normal (22 μg/dL - nv >18.1 μg/dL).
Starting from transition phase, she had episodes of psychosis that required antipsychotic therapy. Over the years a progressive worsening of obesity was observed, due to her uncontrolled eating habits and poor compliance with diet therapy. At the age of 24 a bioenteric intragastric balloon (BIB) was inserted for treatment of morbid obesity, with a transient weight loss of 13 kg in 9 months.
At the last examination (28.9 years), the patient’s anthropometric data were the following: height 142.8 cm (−3.07 SDS); weight 119.2 kg, body mass index (BMI) 59 kg/m2. Blood pressure was normal. She presented mild mental retardation, outcomes of operated scoliosis and skin-picking, and continued utilization of NIV for sleep disordered breathing. Oral glucose tolerance test was normal, but hyperinsulinism was present. She is on therapy with L-thyroxine (125 μg/die), sex steroids replacement and psychotropic drugs (risperidone and carbamazepine) for recurrent psychotic crises.