The patient is a 64-year-old Asian male with a past medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia. The patient had no known family history of malignancy, though he had a personal history of high-risk prostate adenocarcinoma, which was diagnosed 7 years prior to his presentation for OS. This was staged as cT2N0M0 with a Gleason score of 4 + 5 = 9. He was treated with definitive radiation and androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) with leuprolide depot for 2 years. While off ADT, his prostate specific antigen remained less than (nadir + 2) with a nadir of 0.12.
The patient presented to his primary care physician with a right-sided thigh mass. Before further workup could be completed, the patient presented to the emergency department (ED) with progressive shortness of breath and right lower-extremity edema. In the ED, he was noted to be tachycardic and hypoxic and admitted for further workup. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest was negative for pulmonary embolism but positive for innumerable pulmonary metastases up to 4.0 cm in size. A contrast CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a large, multilobulated, destructive mass of the superomedial right thigh and pelvis with associated pathologic fractures, as well as multiple hepatic lesions . A core biopsy of the right lower-extremity soft tissue mass was consistent with high-grade OS and stained positive for vimentin . The patient’s respiratory symptoms subjectively improved, and he maintained oxygen saturation on 1–2 L of supplemental oxygen; he was discharged home on supplemental oxygen as well as mechanical support for ambulation.
Approximately 1 week later, the patient was seen in an oncology clinic and noted to be tachycardic with 130 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 38 breaths per minute, and hypoxic to 87% on room air. He was admitted that same day for consideration of urgent chemotherapy given the size and number of his pulmonary metastases. CT-guided biopsy of right lung mass was consistent with high-grade OS. Orthopedic evaluation determined he was not a surgical candidate for a hemipelvectomy given the extensive lung disease and oxygen requirements. Systemic chemotherapy was initiated with a planned 28-day cycle of cisplatin (100 mg/m2) over 2 hours on day 1 and doxorubicin (25 mg/m2) over 4 hours on days 1 through 3. Prior to doxorubicin being started, the patient decompensated requiring additional supplemental oxygen support with high-flow nasal cannula (50 L, 60%). Laboratory results were not consistent with TLS; potassium and phosphorus were within reference ranges and unchanged from prior, while uric acid was slightly elevated (8.5 mg/dL, reference range upper limit of normal 8.2 mg/dL). Repeat CT scan was negative for pulmonary embolism. Given worsening bilateral lower-extremity edema and significant fluid administration with cisplatin, hypervolemia was determined to be the cause of his worsening respiratory status, and the patient was diuresed with intravenous furosemide. He developed a multifactorial acute kidney injury (AKI) (CT contrast, cisplatin), though it resolved over time without hemodialysis. As his respiratory status improved, he received 3 days of doxorubicin therapy to complete cycle 1 of cisplatin/doxorubicin. Ten days after the completion of doxorubicin, the patient was briefly transferred to the MICU for hypotension, while in the ICU he was found to have an extended spectrum beta-lactamase Escherichia coli bacteremia that was treated with meropenem. The remainder of his hospital course was uncomplicated, and he was discharged home with home intravenous (IV) antibiotics and oxygen on hospital day (HD) 28.
The patient was readmitted 9 days later for scheduled cycle 2 of cisplatin/doxorubicin systemic treatment. Shortly after the cisplatin and doxorubicin infusions were started on HD 0 (34 days after initial cisplatin dose), he became more hypoxic, requiring bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP) support to maintain his saturation. IV fluids and chemotherapy were immediately held, and the patient was upgraded to the progressive care unit (step down). At the time, the patient was clinically volume overloaded with significant bilateral lower-extremity edema. Over the next several days, the patient was diuresed; he continued to require BiPAP support to maintain SpO2 ≥ 92%.
Given persistent hypervolemia, the decision was made for a trial of reduced dose ifosfamide (1000 mg/m2) monotherapy, with the plan to give daily on days 1 through 5. The patient received his first dose of ifosfamide on HD 7. On HD 8, the patient developed worsening hypoxia and tachypnea. The patient developed worsening metabolic and respiratory acidosis, and the diagnosis of TLS was made. The patient's laboratory values are summarized in Table .
The patient was treated with 4 mg of rasburicase, IV furosemide, and intravenous fluids. In accordance with patient and family wishes, the patient was not intubated for respiratory failure and hemodialysis was not offered. Overnight into HD 9, the patient continued to have worsening lactic acidosis despite maximal medical management and noninvasive ventilatory support. The patient’s sinus tachycardia decompensated to asystolic cardiac arrest on HD 9, and he was pronounced deceased.