A 38-year-old male complained of palpitation and exertional dyspnea on his first visit to a local hospital in February. He never had a fever, arthralgias, weight loss or fatigue, nor did he have a personal or relevant family history of cardiovascular disease or neoplasms. A grade II/6 pansystolic heart murmur was heard during physical examination. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a large mass in the left ventricle, attached to the anterolateral papillary muscle and chordae tendineae. The local doctor made a preliminary diagnosis of suspected intracardiac fibroelastoma or myxoma, and suggested surgical resection for this intracardiac neoplasm through conventional median sternotomy. However, the patient was deterred by the invasiveness of sternotomy, and refused to have surgery in his local hospital. In May, as he learned about our experience in minimally invasive cardiac surgery, he came to our center.
We reexamined the patient. The TTE confirmed a mobile round cystic mass inside the left ventricle. The mass had a hyperechogenic wall and hypoechogenic content and was attached to the anterior mitral leaflet . In systole, the mass prolapsed into the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) with accelerated peak velocity (2.5 m/s), which led to mitral regurgitation . The LVOT appeared normal without subvalvular ridge or asymmetric septal hypertrophy. Complementary thoracic and abdominal computed tomographic (CT) scans did not show any evidence of the existence or potential spread of noncardiac neoplasms. All laboratory examinations including tumor markers were unremarkable.
Non-invasively distinguishing aggressive from non-aggressive intracardiac tumors is an important clinical challenge. Preoperative biopsy for histopathological diagnosis is inapplicable to intracardiac tumors. In this case, fortunately, the TTE provided significant information on morphology, localization, biological characteristics, as well as tumor vascularity-perfusion. The mass had a smooth surface, clear border, and low echodensity. No imaging evidence showed any features of malignancy like vascularity-perfusion, invasion or filtration into the cardiac structure, permeation to the great vessels, or pericardial effusion. So, there was a fairly high probability that this mass would be benign. We made a diagnosis of a primary intracardiac cystic tumor according to the obtained information, and decided to resect the tumor.
Generally, a benign intracardiac tumor in this location and size can be accessed via trans-aortic or mitral orifice approach through mini-thoracotomy. Since we have enough experience of totally endoscopic mitral surgery, we decided to perform the operation in a totally thoracoscopic approach, and manage the possible deformation and dysfunction of the cardiac structure if necessary.
Tumor resection was planned and performed through a totally endoscopic, video-assisted approach with thoracoscopy and femoral cannulation (Supplemental Video). The cardiopulmonary bypass and the surgical approach were established as the conventional endoscopic mitral surgery . A 35-mm working port was made in the fourth interspace, lateral to the midclavicular line. After deflation of the right lung, two additional ports were then placed: a camera port through the anterior axillary line in the fourth interspace, and an 8-mm port in the lateral fifth interspace for a transthoracic Chitwood clamp (Scanlan International, Minneapolis, Minn). We used the Chitwood clamp to occlude the ascending aorta and administrated the antegrade cardioplegia. A left atriotomy was performed, and the atrial retractor was applied. The mitral orifice and the mass were then clearly visualized . The mass was oval and reddish, partly attached to the chordate structure of anterior papillary muscle and A1 area of anterior mitral leaflet via two pedicles . We completely excised the mass through the roots of the pedicles, and then carefully cauterized the margin of excision. The size and structure of the mitral leaflets and subvalvular apparatus appeared to be normal. No surgical injuries were found during further exploration . The saline test showed no mitral regurgitation.
The excised mass was 25 mm*20 mm*20 mm in size . Pathologic diagnosis confirmed a simple blood cyst, consistent with blood-filled space lined with a single layer of endothelium. The patients had an uneventful recovery. He was able to walk on the first postoperative day and was discharged three days after the operation. The patient was symptom-free and working full time during follow-up.