A 63-year-old, right-handed female presented with new complaints of shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and severe progressive headache over the course of 3 weeks. Her past medical history was complicated with a longstanding history of hepatitis C acquired from a blood transfusion in the 1970s. Unfortunately, she developed end-stage liver disease, cirrhosis, PPHTN, and coagulopathy. Her neurologic examination was grossly intact. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head demonstrated a 13-mm, left-sided lentiform-shaped hyperdensity suggestive of subdural hematoma with midline shift of 7 mm and minimal transtentorial herniation . She had an international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.55 and a platelet level of 47,000/μL. At the time of our consultation, she was undergoing a continuous treprostinil infusion and taking oral sildenafil for PPHTN. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and medical, hepatology, and pulmonary consultations were sought. Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and platelets were administered, and she was monitored closely. According to our critical care colleagues, the treprostinil could not be discontinued. Repeat laboratory studies yielded an INR of 1.50 and a platelet level of 90,000/μL. Over the ensuing 10 h, her level of consciousness diminished and she acquired mild right-sided hemiparesis. Most concerning was the development of an enlarged left pupil. Repeat head CT at that time revealed the SDH had increased to a maximum width of 16 mm and midline shift of 9.5 mm .
She was taken to the operating room for a left frontotemporoparietal craniotomy and evacuation of the subdural clot. A small, bleeding pial artery that had coagulated was the likely source of the hematoma. Treprostinil infusion and sildenafil were continued throughout the surgery. Intraoperatively, hemostasis was obtained in routine fashion without undue burden from excessive bleeding. The brain was nicely pulsatile at the conclusion of surgery, a patch duraplasty loosely sewn, and the bone flap replaced. Tack-up sutures were used, and a subgaleal drain was left behind. Postoperatively she had an INR of 1.45 and a platelet count of 136,000/μL. She awoke immediately and began following commands. Her anisocoria and weakness improved. She became obtunded several hours after the operation and showed signs of herniation (Glasgow Coma Scale 4). A head CT scan demonstrated a large extra-axial hyperdense fluid collection with a midline shift of 19 mm in the same location as the SDH . She was taken emergently to the operating room for reopening of the craniotomy and evacuation of the hematoma. On repeat operation hemostasis was more challenging. The scalp, temporalis muscle, and external dural surface were hemorrhaging diffusely. The hematoma was found in the epidural space, and it was evacuated. There was no significant blood in the subdural space. The coagulopathy was felt to be qualitative, and cryoprecipitate, FFP, and additional platelets were administered in an effort to obtain hemostasis. Various techniques and products including bipolar electrocautery, irrigation, thrombin-soaked Gelfoam® (Pfizer), Gelfoam Powder® (Pfizer), Avitene™ (Davol, Inc.), and Floseal Hemostatic Matrix (Baxter BioSurgery) were utilized to stop the bleeding. At the conclusion of the case the brain was again found to be pulsatile and the decision was made not to replace the bone flap. Subdural and subgaleal drains were placed and the wound was closed using a 2-0 Vicryl™ (Ethicon) on a CT-1 needle and then stapled. In the first hours postoperatively, she began to follow commands and move all of her extremities with strength. Her treprostinil and sildenafil were continued.
A postoperative CT scan demonstrated resolution of midline shift and some persistent fluid within the operative bed . Her INR measured between 1.4 and 1.7 throughout the remainder of her hospital stay, which lasted just over 1 month. Platelet counts remained between 45,000 and 225,000/μL. Multiple platelet function assays demonstrated dysfunctional platelets while on treprostinil infusion therapy. She was weaned from the ventilator and began to eat. Given her acute medical condition she was no longer a candidate for liver transplant. Over the course of several weeks in the hospital she was weaned from the treprostinil infusion and the tunneled infusion catheter removed. She was transferred to inpatient rehabilitation and eventually was discharged home. Her 2-month postoperative scan showed resolution of fluid in the operative bed . She underwent cranioplasty roughly 6 months after the initial surgery . At that time, she had stable mild right hemiparesis and was ambulatory with a walker. Currently, she is being considered for rechallenge with treprostinil therapy as a bridge to liver transplant.