Our patient was a healthy 72-year-old Japanese man, with an unremarkable previous medical history. He was referred to our institution due to jaundice and impaired hepatic function found during a health examination. We observed stenosis in the middle bile duct on a preoperative endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) image , whereas class V adenocarcinoma was detected by biliary abrasive cytology. The preoperative image indicated low bifurcation in the posterior segmental branch. A pancreaticoduodenectomy was conducted due to the diagnosis of middle bile duct cancer. Because our patient had no post-surgical complaints, even given mildly increased inflammation, he was discharged on postoperative day 22. However, we found increased inflammation on blood withdrawal when he visited our institution on postoperative day 30. On computed tomography (CT) we observed abscess formation with suspected bile leakage around the hepaticojejunal site and posterior segmental bile duct dilatation . We initially completed percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD). During contrast radiography with PTBD, only the posterior segmental branch was visualized, but there was no bile leakage into the elevated jejunum . Later, we completed contrast radiography from the hepaticojejunal anastomosis site with the use of an endoscope, and only the anterior segmental branch and left branch were visualized . Thus, we concluded the damage was on the low bifurcation in the posterior segmental branch. Bile (approximately 250 ml/day) was discharged by PTBD on consecutive days.
We conducted a drip infusion cholecystocholangiography (DIC)-CT test to determine the positional relationship between bile duct and elevated jejunum. We found contrast agent discharged into the elevated jejunum from the anterior segmental branch and left branch . We dorsally visualized the bile duct in the isolated posterior segmental branch . From the DIC-CT test, we at that time detected an unclear positional relation between elevated jejunum and posterior segmental branch. We determined that there was no intrusion of other organs between the elevated jejunum and the bile duct. Consequently, percutaneous transhepatic internal drainage of the posterior isolated bile duct, to the elevated jejunum, could be conducted.
To secure the bile duct, we made a puncture in the bile duct under CT guidance , and visualized the hepaticojejunal anastomosis site by inserting an endoscope. We vibrated the bile duct wall by inserting a guide wire through a puncture needle, and verified the vibrations with the endoscope. We found a partially compressed elevated jejunal wall upon guide wire insertion; therefore, we could verify a puncture needle penetration into the elevated jejunum by endoscope on insertion . We also successfully inserted an 8.5-Fr pigtail catheter into the elevated jejunum . We removed all drains after percutaneously inserting an uncovered metallic stent (5 cm 10 mm; Fig. ). Our patient’s subsequent clinical course was unremarkable, and he visits our institution on an out-patient basis, without stent occlusion even after 6 months.