A 7-year-old Japanese boy was referred to our hospital because of painless swelling of the bilateral inguinal lymph nodes which had gradually increased for 7 months. His past medical history included atopic dermatitis, and his family history included type 1 diabetes mellitus in his mother. Hematological examination showed the following abnormal values: soluble interleukin-2 receptor, 2,599 U/mL; and immunoglobulin E, 568 IU/mL. A biopsy of a left inguinal lymph node lead to the diagnosis of Hodgkin lymphoma (nodular lymphocyte predominant type). Fluoro-18 fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (F-18 FDG PET)/computed tomography (CT) showed a high accumulation (maximum standardized uptake value, SUVmax) at 17.02 in the left common iliac lymph node, left external and internal iliac nodes, and left inguinal lymph node. On the basis of the F-18 FDG PET/CT results and B symptoms, such as weight loss and night sweats, the final staging was determined to be IIB. The patient underwent chemotherapy according to the protocol of the EuroNet-PHL-C1 protocol with 2 cycles of the OEPA regimen (vincristine, etoposide, prednisone, and doxorubicin) and 2 cycles of the COPDAC regimen (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, and dacarbazine). Chemotherapy was to be followed by radiotherapy at a dose of 19.8 Gy (11 fractions of 1.8 Gy per day) focused on residual lymph node lesions.
Two days after the end of the first cycle of the COPDAC regimen, the patient complained of headache and of blurred and decreased vision in both eyes. The first ophthalmologic examination showed a corrected visual acuity of 20/32 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure could not be measured in the right eye and was 15 mmHg in the left eye. The anterior chamber depth was normal, with no evidence of inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber. Posterior ocular findings showed swelling of the optic nerve papillae in both eyes and serous retinal detachment. . Optical coherence tomography (OCT; Carl Zeiss Meditec AG) showed significant serous retinal detachment in the macular area and significant swelling of the optic nerve papillae in both eyes. Fluorescein angiography of the fundus showed fluorescent leakage from the optic nerve papilla in the early phase and petechial fluorescent leakage in both eyes . Indocyanine green angiography showed hypofluorescent dark dots in both eyes in the early phase . Ruled out as causes of a possible infectious uveitis via immunological examination were hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis, and human T lymphotropic virus type 1, and ruled out via DNA analysis were herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, and cytomegalovirus. Cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed an increased cell count. Moreover, human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR4 was positive. Because the patient fulfilled items 1 to 4 of the revised diagnostic criteria proposed by the International Workshop on VKH , incomplete-type VKH disease was diagnosed.
To treat the VKH disease, the patient received steroid treatment with intravenous prednisolone 60 mg/m2/day for 7 days. After improvements in visual acuity and serous retinal detachment were confirmed, 1 cycle of the COPDAC regimen with the dosage increasing from 40 mg/m2/day to 60 mg/m2/day was started. Prednisolone (60 mg/m2/day) was administered for a total of 20 days. Thereafter, the administration of prednisolone was changed from intravenous to oral, after which the dose was gradually tapered. The minimum visual acuity before treatment was 20/400 in the right eye and 20/63 in the left eye. After 22 days of treatment with prednisolone, the visual acuity had improved to 20/20 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye, and the intra-anterior chamber inflammation and serous retinal detachment in the macula had disappeared. The steroid treatment was changed to hydrocortisone on day 65 after starting prednisolone. However, anterior chamber inflammation appeared on day 82 of steroid treatment, so the steroid treatment was changed to the dosage increased oral prednisolone again and dexamethasone eye drops were started. Subsequently, the flare-up of inflammation disappeared, and oral prednisolone and dexamethasone eye drops were discontinued.
The findings of OCT changed over the course of treatment . Serous retinal detachment was marked before treatment , but had disappeared after 21 days of steroid treatment . On day 43 of steroid treatment, visual acuity had improved, but irregular retinal pigment epithelial cells were observed . On day 82, when the intracameral inflammation flared up, the irregularity of retinal pigment epithelial cells worsened and continued .
One year after the diagnosis of Hodgkin lymphoma and 9 months after the diagnosis of VKH disease, multiple vitiligo appeared in the patient’s abdomen, and complete VKH disease was finally diagnosed. However, a sunset glow fundus was seen, but Sugiura sign was not. The patient has been doing well and has improved visual function, without evidence of recurrent Hodgkin lymphoma and VKH disease for 10 months after treatment with prednisolone had discontinued.