A 50-year-old Asian female presented to the hospital with dysphagia, diarrhea, retractable nausea and vomiting, and persistent orthostatic hypotension. She was admitted for further workup due to debilitating orthostatic hypotension and dehydration.
Her medical history was notable for gastrointestinal amyloidosis (diagnosed via stomach biopsy; unknown mutation due to lack of records), persistent nausea, peripheral neuropathy, and carpal tunnel syndrome. However, due to the patient recently immigrating to the United States from Vietnam, it was difficult to ascertain complete medical history without any available documentation from her doctors in her home country.
Prior to the diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis, the patient was taking 40 mg pantoprazole twice daily for acid reflux symptoms and metoclopramide as needed for nausea.
On initial physical examination, she was afebrile with a blood pressure of 86/73, heart rate of 88 beats/min, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and pulse oximetry saturation of 97% on room air. Her chest was clear to auscultation; she had a regular rhythm and no audible murmurs; her jugular venous pressure was not elevated; her abdomen was non-tender to palpation. She had good pulses bilaterally in both the upper and lower extremities. She did not complain of fever, headaches, vision changes, myalgias, fatigue, chest pain, palpitations, skipped beats, shortness of breath, or edema. She later did endorse bilateral upper and lower extremity paresthesia, syncopal episodes, and dizziness in addition to her presenting complaints.
On initial presentation at the hospital, she was volume resuscitated with intravenous fluids without improvement in orthostasis. Midodrine and fludrocortisone were started, as well as antiemetics and proton pump inhibitors for symptom relief. With improvement in her hemodynamic status, she was able to be discharged and followed up in our cardiomyopathy clinic for further management.
Routine blood tests and cardiac biomarkers were obtained . To first rule out gammopathy, serum and urine electrophoresis, serum-free light chains were obtained and were negative for Amyloidosis light chain (AL).
The chest radiograph did not show any acute findings. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm with first-degree atrioventricular block, left axis deviation, and low voltage in limb leads. No prior echocardiogram (ECHO) was available, so an initial ECHO was obtained showing preserved ventricular ejection fraction (EF), moderate left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), stage II diastolic dysfunction, and small pericardial effusion ( and ).
Owing to the complexity and the multisystem involvement, along with the patient’s symptoms and history of GI amyloidosis, the main differential diagnosis was cardiac amyloidosis. Other differentials, such as high-output heart failure and restrictive cardiomyopathy, were considered but were less consistent with the patient’s presentation.
Next, we performed a 99Technetium pyrophosphate (99mTc-PYP) planar scintigraphy . A quantitative analysis of the heart retention pattern showed a heart-to-contralateral lung (H/Cl) ratio of 1.66 , strongly suggestive of amyloid deposition. To differentiate the type of cardiac amyloidosis, genetic testing was obtained and revealed a heterozygous pathogenic mutation in the TTR gene, diagnostic for TTR amyloidosis.
Of note, the patient does have a strong family history of amyloidosis. She has stated that four out of her seven siblings have passed away from amyloidosis in Vietnam (three brothers and one sister). It is unknown if the patient’s parents also suffered from this disease. Unfortunately, family history cannot be verified, and therefore, a pedigree chart cannot be completed. Cascade screening performed for her two sons living in the United States was found to be negative.
Hereditary transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis secondary to Gly67Ala mutation.
The main goal of her treatment was to optimize her cardiac function and symptom management. Our patient had numerous manifestations of both cardiac and GI amyloidosis that affected her daily life. She underwent multiple esophagogastroduodenoscopies (EGD) for her ongoing dysphagia, complaint of food being stuck in her throat, as well as persistent nausea and vomiting. Initially, she was diagnosed with reflux esophagitis, but with repeat imaging studies, she was eventually also diagnosed with gastroparesis, for which she was continued on metoclopramide and pantoprazole. Her orthostatic hypotension was treated with 2.5 mg midodrine three times daily and 0.1 mg fludrocortisone daily. She was sent to a neurologist for further evaluation of her peripheral neuropathy. She underwent nerve conduction and EMG studies and was found to have moderate axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy with superimposed bilateral median nerve neuropathy. She was initially prescribed gabapentin with mild relief of her symptoms, but it was discontinued due to the patient’s persistent syncopal episodes. She was then started on TTR-specific medication 284 mcg/1.5 mL Inotersen subcutaneously weekly for her neuropathic symptoms related to TTR amyloidosis. Although Inotersen somewhat reduced her symptom of neuropathy, it was eventually discontinued due to persistent thrombocytopenia, and unfortunately, Tafamidis was not approved at that time. She was later started on Patisiran infusion, at which point she was finally able to stand up with minimal dizziness. However, approximately six months after the initiation of Patisiran, it too had to be stopped due to the patient’s intolerance to this medication, with the main complaints of debilitating fatigue and persistent nausea and vomiting. At that time, the patient did agree to start Tafamadis, and ongoing efforts are being made to make this drug available to this patient.
Her overall condition and response to treatment were closely monitored in our clinic with monthly follow-up visits. The patient initially tolerated medications as stated above. However, despite medical management, her overall condition has been deteriorating. She continued to have a poor appetite and lost a significant amount of weight which further contributed to her weakness and fatigue. She has been hospitalized a multitude of times throughout the last two years with ongoing dysphagia, hypotension, orthostasis, syncope, nausea, and vomiting, ultimately being admitted for dehydration and malnutrition. The patient eventually underwent further evaluation by her gastroenterologist, and a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube was placed for nutrition purposes. She continues to follow up with cardiology and gastroenterology clinics. She was also hospitalized on several occasions with obstructive urinary tract infections and urinary retention, which ultimately resulted in the placement of a chronic foley catheter. She is now being closely monitored by urology services as well. The patient had several repeat ECHOs without major changes from imaging obtained on the initial clinic presentation. The most recent ECHO is without any significant changes. Her EF continues to be normal, and she continues to have moderate LVH and stage II diastolic dysfunction with persistent, small pericardial effusion. Fortunately, she was never hospitalized with symptoms of heart failure. Her current medication regimen includes pantoprazole, amitriptyline, gabapentin, fludrocortisone, midodrine, droxidopa, and metoclopramide. Her main complaints remain to be orthostatic hypotension, syncope, dizziness, weakness, and peripheral neuropathy with resultant insomnia.