We hereby present the case of a 72-year-old woman with an extended cSCC of the leg with tibial infiltration, developed on a chronic ulcer that developed on top of NL, without diabetes mellitus . Eighteen years before, the patient had developed the same condition on the contralateral leg and a below the knee amputation had been performed. After biopsy for confirmation and staging including whole body CT scan and regional lymph node sonography, the tumor board recommended the curative resection of the localized tumor. A curative en bloc resection of the tumor together with the soft tissue and 15 cm of involved tibia was performed . A polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) spacer was used to bridge the tibia and an external fixator stabilized the leg . The wound was temporarily closed using negative wound pressure therapy (NPWT). The histopathological findings showed macroscopically a 165 × 152-mm large tumor, microscopically with 22-mm invasion of the fatty tissue and 10-mm invasion of the tibia, with a at least 18-mm tumor-free margin on the surface and at least 5 mm deep (pT4a, pNx, L0, V0, Pn0, G2, R0) . After achieving the R0 resection, a reconstruction plan was developed. Digital subtraction angiography was performed, showing a three-vessel supply of the leg. Being the only leg in an otherwise healthy patient who was mobile with a leg prosthesis on the right side, the indication for limb preservation was established. Seven days after the first surgery, the reconstructive surgery took place. The PMMA spacer was removed and a proximal pedicled fibular bone flap was harvested. The bone length was 18 cm. The bone ends were then beveled to fit the tibial medullary cavity and the fibula was then press-fitted in the tibia, reconstructing the 15-cm bone gap with 1.5 cm of fibula lying proximally and distally in the tibia . Two centimeters of proximal fibula was resected to ensure a tension-free pedicle positioning. A plate and screw osteosynthesis was performed, bridging the fibula graft, but fixating the beveled edges to the tibia. The external fixator was now removed. The muscles of the anterior and lateral compartment remained supplied by the anterior tibial vascular pedicle. The remaining soft tissue defect of 26 × 20 cm was measured and a template was transferred to the right thigh, centered on the descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery. An extended ALT fasciocutaneous flap measuring 26 × 14 cm including two perforator vessels was harvested. The vessel anastomosis at the recipient site was performed to the anterior tibial artery as a flow-through flap and to the venae commitantes using vessel couplers . The medially exposed gastrocnemius muscle was split skin grafted . The donor site was also split skin grafted from the contralateral side. Postoperatively antibiotic treatment was initiated. The distal part of the flap (8 × 4 cm) showed a demarcation due to inadequate perfusion . At revision surgery, after flap debridement, pus emptied from the plate surroundings. A thorough debridement with lavage of the site was performed. NPWT was used for one cycle to control the infection. Bacteroides fragilis could be isolated and the antibiotics were adapted to the antibiogram. At the next surgery, further debridement and lavage with the exchange of the plate and screws was performed. The remaining soft tissue defect was covered with a second ALT flap measuring 16 × 7 cm from the left thigh, including the fresh split skin donor sites, using two perforator vessels . The flap anastomosis was performed end-to-side to the posterior tibial vessels, distal to the first anastomosis. The donor site was closed primarily. Postoperatively, all wounds showed primary healing. The antibiotics were administered for a total of 6 weeks starting from the last surgery. After 4 weeks, mobilization with partial weight-bearing of the leg was initiated. Twelve weeks postoperatively, ambulation using a wheeled walker was started.
One year postoperatively, the CT scan showed insufficient bony consolidation at the proximal and distal tibia-fibula transition despite exogenic ultrasound therapy, so a revisional surgery was performed. The extended ALT flap was longitudinally split to provide access to the plate while avoiding the lesion of the vascular pedicle. Two osteosynthesis plates were used to stabilize the leg medially and laterally and to ensure bone consolidation. Autologous cancellous bone was applied at the transition between the fibula and tibia proximally and distally. Postoperatively, the wounds healed without issues. After 6 weeks, mobilization of the leg was started using a fitted boot with pressure distribution to the tibial tuberosity and the foot. After 3 months postoperatively, the exogenic ultrasound therapy was continued for another 3 months. The pressure distribution was progressively switched from the tibial tuberosity to the foot.
Two years after the beginning of treatment, the boot was completely removed. The patient was mobile on the reconstructed leg and below-the-knee prosthesis on the contralateral side . The extension of the foot was actively possible (Video 1). The X-rays and CT-scan showed a fibular hypertrophy of about 90% of the tibia as well as no local recurrence of the tumor and no metastasis. Considering the age of the patient, R0 resection of the lesion, no lymph node metastasis or other metastasis, no adjuvant therapy was performed.