A 73-year-old (S.M. 24–08-39) woman presented at the gynecological first aid of the Grande Ospedale Metropolitano di Reggio Calabria (Italy) on the 22nd May 2012 referred with acute abdominopelvic pain. Her weight and height were, respectively, of 55 Kg and 155 cm. A detailed history with particular emphasis on gynecological data was taken. The woman was virgo, had a laparotomic appendectomy in childhood, had no pregnancy, and had been in menopause since the age of 50 years, receiving medication for hypertension. No other clinically relevant datum resulted from her medical and family history.
There was no history of weight loss or loss of appetite. Bowel and bladder habits were normal. The physical examination (including rectal examination) showed a palpable abdominopelvic mass with abdominal tenderness. The woman reported an increasing abdominal girth during the last 2 months. During the clinical examination, the patient had also nausea and vomiting. At admission, she was tachycardic (95 bpm) and tachypneic (16 breaths per minute). Initial transabdominal ultrasound examination was performed in an emergency. A pelvic mass consisting of a uniloculated cyst of about 24 cm of maximum size with multiple small mobile hyperechoic internal lesions was observed . A solid and inhomogeneous structure of about 2 cm located in the inferior cystic wall was also observed . No fluid or ascites was detected. An expert operator continued the ultrasound examination showing extreme mobility of the endocyst formations to the movements impressed by the probe and a “honeycomb” aspect was observed with the use of tridimensional ultrasound (3D-USG) . No (typical/atypical) vascularization of the pelvic mass was detected at color Doppler velocimetry. Due to acute abdominal pain non-responsive to aggressive treatment with pain drugs, including a high dose of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAD) (Toradol, ketorolac tromethamine, 2 vials of 10 mg/ml ev) plus (Contramal, tramadol hydrochloride, 1 vial of 100 mg/2 ml), it was decided for emergency surgery. The patient underwent a preoperative blood sample (for complete blood count, coagulation, and ovarian cancer markers) and electrocardiograms were transported to the operating room. Serum tumor markers, in particular, cancer antigen 125 (Ca 125), cancer antigen 19.9 (Ca 19.9), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alphafetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) resulted in all normal ranges.
In consideration of the large mass and the little size of the abdomen, a longitudinal midline umbilicus-pubic skin incision was initially performed. Upon exploration of the abdomen, the pelvic mass was found to involve the entire left ovary, was mobile, and in partial torsion on its vascular peduncle. A left ovariectomy was initially performed without intra-abdominal spillage. The macroscopic aspect of the left ovary after surgical excision is shown in Fig. . The tumor was opened and inspected . It had the macroscopic aspect of the MCTO and appeared to contain citrine liquid and numerous, small and identical neoformations. A calcific parietal implant with hair with a near area of about one centimeter of papillary tissue was also detected at the inspection of the internal capsule . A biopsy was performed on this papillary structure for intra-operative histological examination. An intra-cystic area of squamous cell carcinoma was detected at the frozen section. Thus, a complete surgical staging for ovarian cancer, including total hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy, infracolic omentectomy, pelvic and para-aortic node dissection, and peritoneal washing, was performed. No local and/or distant suspected lesion was detected at the direct exploration of the pelvis, and the low and high abdomen. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the fifth day. No short- and long-term intraoperative or postoperative complications were found.
The definitive histological examination confirmed the presence of an MCTO measuring 21 × 19 × 17 cm with multiple neoformations of adipose tissue of about 6 mm each. A unique calcific parietal implant with hair was also observed. A papillary area of about one centimeter was described at the macroscopic examination. A total intra-cystic squamous cell carcinoma of moderate differentiation (grading 2) was also confirmed at microscopy. No local and/or distant metastasis was detected in all samples (uterus, surface of the left ovary, right ovary, left and right tubes, omentum, 8 right iliac nodes, 7 left iliac nodes, and 6 aortic nodes) sent for definitive microscopic examination. No cancer cells were also detected at the cytologic examination of the intracystic fluid and of the peritoneal washing. Thus, a Ia stage ovarian cancer according to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics was diagnosed.
After 30 days from hospital discharge, a computer tomography (CT) of the abdomen was performed confirming no disease. In consideration of the definitive histological report, the multidisciplinary group suggested only clinical follow-up. Follow-up visits were performed every 6 months for the first 3 years and subsequently yearly. The patient died of myocardial infarction on May 10, 2021.