A 52-year-old gentleman was admitted electively for his third redo debulking of right occipital parafalcine meningioma in November 2017. At the time of anesthetic induction, he desaturated and required high ventilator pressure support and high FiO2 requirements to maintain oxygen saturation over 90%. An urgent chest X-ray (CXR) revealed that the endotracheal tube was appropriately positioned, and an incidental large well-delineated left upper lobe nodule was noted. The lung fields were otherwise clear, and there was no associated lung parenchymal abnormality. The following day, a formal CXR was performed , the patient was back to his baseline and the surgery was postponed. A CXR performed in 2016 revealed no lung lesions.
A subsequent chest computed tomography (CT) was arranged and confirmed the presence of a 19-mm left upper lobe nodule and a total of five other smaller bilateral pulmonary nodules ranging from 4 to 13 mm, giving a cannonball appearance [Figures and ]. As these nodules were very well circumscribed and appeared benign, the respiratory and multidisciplinary teams felt that the best course of action in this patient would be a repeat chest CT in 6 months.
This patient's medical history included right occipital parafalcine meningioma diagnosed in 1994 which was surgically resected in Auckland, New Zealand. This was followed by the insertion of a left-sided ventriculoperitoneal shunt for postoperative hydrocephalus. Histopathology confirmed WHO Grade I meningioma. On surveillance imaging in Melbourne, Australia, in 2013, he was found to have a recurrence, leading to the first redo craniotomy and debulking. Histopathology in this instance revealed transformation to atypical WHO Grade II meningioma. In February 2016, he developed intractable seizures which lead to his second redo debulking at the same unit. The histopathology remained unchanged.
This patient's third redo debulking procedure was rescheduled to February 2018, approximately 3 months after the diagnosis of the multiple pulmonary lesions. A Simpson Grade 2 resection of recurrent right occipital parafalcine meningioma was performed. Histopathology again showed features consistent with atypical WHO Grade II meningioma ; however, although it did not fulfill criteria for anaplastic WHO Grade III meningioma, the higher Ki-67 proliferation index suggested that it may behave more aggressively than the conventional WHO Grade II meningioma. Postoperatively, he developed no new focal neurology and had significant improvement in seizure-free periods. He was treated with postoperative radiation therapy 60 Gy in 30 fractions and had no symptoms to suggest residual acute radiation toxicity.
A repeat chest CT was performed in May 2018 and revealed all six lung lesions with interval increase in size, the largest now measuring 27 mm. A chest CT-guided core biopsy of the largest lesion was performed. This confirmed histopathological features consistent with metastatic meningioma .