A Hispanic 64-year-old woman was admitted with headaches, vomiting and confusion. A month earlier, the patient presented with subacute new-onset headaches, nausea, vomiting, gait impairment, and anorexia. There was no history of fever, cough, abdominal pain, previous medical disease or immunosuppressant drug use. Blood pressure was normal. Physical examination was unremarkable. Neurologic examination showed an unsteady gait, without motor weakness or ataxia. Cognitive tests showed a Mini-Mental Status Exam (MMSE) score of 18/30, impaired attention, executive functions, verbal fluency and episodic memory .
Brain MRI disclosed diffuse and symmetric confluent nonenhancing white matter lesions, that were hyperintense in T2/FLAIR images . Corresponding apparent diffusion coefficients (ADC) maps suggested vasogenic edema . MRI angiography was unremarkable (not shown). Multivoxel spectroscopy, dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) perfusion (T2*) and dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) permeability (T1) did not disclose relevant abnormalities . Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a normal cell count (4 cells/mm3), protein (32 mg/dL) and glucose (80 mg/dL) levels, normal protein electrophoresis values, negative oligoclonal bands and polymerase chain reaction for infectious agents (including tuberculosis). Systemic evaluation was negative for cancer, autoimmune diseases (Anti-nuclear antibodies = negative, Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies = negative), and infectious diseases. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed nonspecific patchy lung infiltrates. Blood laboratory tests were normal (i.e. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate = 2 mm; C-reactive protein = 1,3 mg/L; Leucocytes = 6,880/mm3). Electroencephalogram EEG showed mild diffuse slowing and brief bursts of diffuse delta waves. The patient underwent two brain biopsies that showed tissue rarefaction with vacuolation, very mild inflammatory cell and macrophage infiltrates, absence of demyelination, malignant cells or granulomas, and no signs of tissue infarction or hemorrhagic changes . Immunostaining showed scarce CD45+ lymphocytes and CD68+ macrophages, without axonal or myelin damage, with few reactive astrocytes and low aquaporin-4 staining in the lesion compared to the normal surrounding areas. Aquaporin-1 staining was also reduced in the lesion, less extensively than aquaporin-4.
The patient was treated initially with intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g/day for three days), followed by oral dexamethasone (10 mg/day) for six months. Clinical and neurologic status and brain MRI remained unchanged. Activities of daily living were impaired, with a Functional Activity Questionnaire (FAQ) score of 25 and MMSE score of 18. Whole body positron emission tomography-computed tomography obtained at this point revealed a hypermetabolic right pulmonary mass. Lesion histology showed granulomas containing Mycobacterium abscessus. The patient was treated with levofloxacin, clarithromycin and amycacin. Steroids were tapered and discontinued. A year later, cognitive functions and functional status were improved (MMSE = 21; FAQ score = 10) , and brain MRI disclosed remarkable resolution of white matter changes .