Here, we present the case of a 59-year-old woman who developed a rapid onset dementia with salient frontal executive dysfunction beginning in February 2016. One month earlier, she had shown prodromal symptoms with a decreased energy level, increased rumination, sleep disturbances, and a loss of appetite with weight loss. No psychoactive causes were identified. In February 2016, she showed rapid worsening of symptoms with increasing loss of interest in daily activities, withdrawal from other people, and reduced spontaneous speech output. Over the next few days, she developed a stuporous state with catatonic features; she lost all personal initiative and moved rarely, her movements appeared to be frozen, she stopped speaking, and she stared blankly. Since then, she has no longer been able to communicate adequately. Verbal exchanges were reduced to answers to questions using one or two words and dramatically prolonged response latencies. Pharmacological treatment with various antidepressants (citalopram up to 20 mg/day, venlafaxine up to 150 mg/day), neuroleptics (amisulpride up to 400 mg/day, aripiprazole up to 15 mg/day, flupentixol up to 1.5 mg/day, quetiapine up to 200 mg/day, risperidone up to 4 mg/day), anxiolytics (lorazepam up to 5 mg/day), and methylprednisolone (5 mg × 500 mg for five consecutive days for presumed SREAT) were administered over the course of more than 6 months, until September 2016. However, all these approaches were unsuccessful. Steroid treatment led to worsening apathy and cognitive slowing. Therefore, the patient was continuously treated in an inpatient setting.
Upon admission to our clinic (September 2016), she was still in a stuporous state and her perception, concentration, attention, and working memory were severely disturbed. She was aware of her state but negated emotional involvement. Mental fluency and judgment were compromised. She had no energy and was apathetic. However, hallucinations and delusional symptoms were not reported. The neurological examination showed evidence of primitive reflexes (orbicularis oris reflex) and a significantly disturbed Luria’s three-step test. In addition, the patient reported a new micturition disorder.
This patient’s developmental history was negative for in utero or birth complications, febrile convulsions, inflammatory brain diseases, and cerebral contusions. There was no evidence of any neurodevelopmental or personality disorders. The premorbid personality was described as vivacious, cheerful, and outgoing. She smoked but did not consume alcohol or illegal drugs. Until the onset of the symptoms at age 58, she was mentally healthy. Her somatic medical history included only complex regional pain syndrome of the right upper extremity (in 2005) and Hashimoto thyroiditis. Her family history of neuropsychiatric or malignant diseases was unremarkable.
This patient’s serum anti-TPO and anti-TG antibodies were increased; however, no antineuronal antibodies against intracellular antigens were found. The CSF analyses showed normal findings; antibodies against neuronal cell surface antigens and markers of dementia were negative. A screening for rheumatological autoantibodies was negative. The cMRI showed multiple lesions in deep and peripheral white matter whithout diffusion restriction or contrast enhancement, while intermittent slow activity was detected in the EEG . [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed mild-to-moderate medial and superior dorsolateral frontal hypometabolism, which did not allow a clear distinction between early-stage frontotemporal lobar degeneration and secondary non-specific changes (e.g., due to reduced consciousness/apathy, atrophy). An additional [123I]FP-CIT-SPECT revealed a normal striatal dopamine transporter availability . Neuropsychological test batteries for dementia, following the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease (CERAD), showed deficits in verbal fluency, word list memory, constructional praxis, and trailmaking A/B . The Behavioral Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome (BADS) showed severe impairment (sum-score: 6; average: 16–20; range: 0–24). More complex tasks, like the zoo map test and the modified six elements test, were nonexecutable, as the patient did not understand the instructions.
The dysexecutive syndrome (e.g., loss of motivation and ability to judge), cognitive deficits (e.g., working memory deficits), neurological signs (orbicularis oris reflex, Luria’s three-step test), new urinary incontinence, neuropsychological testing, and frontal hypometabolism on FDG-PET were all compatible with a behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia (FTD). However, the initial clinical course with rapid deterioration within days to weeks was highly unusual for neurodegenerative pathology like FTD; and the trailmaking tests A/B and verbal fluency (in the CERAD) would be adversely affected by the patient’s prevailing conscious state. Therefore, the patient’s conscious state might have influenced the comparability of the serial neuropsychological assessments. However, the cooperation was comparable at the three times of investigation. Alternatively, immunological encephalopathy seemed to be plausible regarding the rapid onset, increased antithyroid antibodies, EEG slowing, white matter lesions, and secondary non-specific FDG-PET alterations. Furthermore, an idiopathic depressive stupor could not be completely ruled out; however, the combination of slowed EEG and frontal FDG-PET hypometabolism is atypical for this differential diagnosis.
For optimal antidepressant treatment, lithium therapy was started in September 2016 (450–675 mg/d, serum levels: 0.39–0.69 mmol/l, reference: 0.4–0.8 mmol/l). There was only a questionable minor response to this treatment attempt over a period of 7 weeks. In parallel, we discussed options for immunosuppressive treatment strategies. Although high-dose steroid therapy aggravated symptoms, we started off-label treatment with plasmapheresis (five sessions at the beginning of November 2016) 7 weeks after the initiation of lithium as a last-resort therapeutic attempt. At this time point, the patient’s hypothyroidism was adequately substituted with 0.075 mg/d l-thyroxine.
A few days after the initiation of plasmapheresis, all the patient’s symptoms improved significantly. Although her oral fluency was still reduced, normal communication was again possible. Her mood improved, her cognitive deficits were reduced, the orbicularis oris reflex disappeared, and the Luria’s three-step test normalized. However, her energy level improved only slightly. This patient was discharged from our clinic in December 2016 (6 weeks after undergoing plasmapheresis) and lived with her husband as before. Her energy levels and micturition disorder gradually improved; however, while her oral fluency and planning skills were enhanced, she still showed slight impairment 6 months after plasmapheresis. The improvement was neuropsychologically documented . One month after plasmapheresis, the patient improved in almost all the initially impaired categories of the CERAD testing battery ; however, the BADS only improved slightly and remained significantly below average (sum score only increased from 6 to 8). Nearly 6 months after undergoing plasmapheresis, the CERAD and BADS (sum score of 8 points) findings were still stable. However, the verbal fluency was slightly reduced. Treatment with lithium (675 mg/d) and l-thyroxine (0.075 mg/d) continued unchanged. The follow-up FDG-PET showed normalization in July 2017 (i.e., the frontal hypometabolism was no longer detectable; Figure ).