A previously healthy 56-year-old man developed gradual left- side hemiparesis, more accentuated in the lower limb (July 2016). A brain computerized tomography (CT)-scan and complementary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a solitary metastatic lesion (Met 1) in the right central sulcus (11.95 cc) with extensive perilesional edema [ and ]. The investigative tumor screening, including a CT- scan of the thorax and abdomen, revealed a suspect primary tumor in the left kidney as well as multiple, disseminated metastatic lesions in the lungs, liver, peri-aortic abdominal nodes, and left adrenal gland. A thrombotic mass positioned within the boundaries of the left renal vein was also reported. The subsequent biopsy revealed a clear cell renal cancer, Fuhrman Grade 2, as the primary. Due to the underlying extension of metastatic activity, nephrectomy was not indicated. Because of his relatively young age and previous healthy condition, the patient was accepted for upfront RRR- treatment of Met 1, structured on three separate fractions (GKRS 1–3) over a 7-day period [ and ]. This strategy aimed to sustain the patient’s performance status by avoiding further neurological deterioration while providing a window to start first-line targeted therapy (sunitinib). The rationale behind RRR can be found elsewhere in the literature.[-,]
Follow-up MRI at 1, 3, and 6 months confirmed subsequent tumor volume reduction of Met 1 with ensuing significant improvement of the patient’s motor function . Notably, a discrete, nonsymptomatic adverse radiation effect (ARE) around Met 1 was reported at 3 months, however, this subsequently resolved at 6 and 10 months. Despite the positive evolution of Met 1, the corresponding follow-up MRI at 10 months demonstrated a new, large metastatic lesion (17.3 cc) with extensive perilesional edema within the confinements of the left frontotemporal region, threatening the area of Broca and the insular region (Met 2). A parasagittal micrometastasis in the posterior boundaries of the left temporal lobe was also reported (Met 3). Despite further thoracic disease progression on anti-PD1 treatment (nivolumab), the patient’s clinical condition remained stable (Karnofsky Performance Scale [KPS] 90, recursive partitioning analysis [RPA] Class II); it was, therefore, decided to treat Met 2 with RRR and Met 3 with SF-GKRS [ and ] before switching systemic treatment to axitinib.
Met 2 decreased in volume by 15% between GKRS 1 and GKRS 3. Follow-up MRI at 14 months after RRR-treatment of Met 1 (=2 months after RRR-treatment of Met 2) showed further tumor volume reduction of Met 2 while Met 1 and Met 3 remained unchanged [-]. However, edema increment around Met 2 was also reported, suggesting an additional focal (yet asymptomatic) ARE. Due to further radiological evidence of extracranial disease progression (CT-scan thorax and abdomen, October 2017), low- tolerance to axitinib and the patient’s own choice, further systemic therapy was altogether disrupted 14 months post- RRR of Met 1. Last follow-up MRI (20 months after RRR of Met 1) showed almost complete ablation of all GKRS-treated lesions and a reduction in perifocal edema surrounding Met 2, without major corticosteroid intervention [- and -]. Despite remaining free from motor-sensory deficits, epileptic seizures (Engel score of 1) or cognitive impairment, the patient promptly deteriorated at this stage due to extracranial disease progression (KPS 50, RPA 3). The patient succumbed to his disease 21 months post-RRR-treatment of Met 1.