A 4-year-old female was hospitalized in the Republican Center of Pediatric Surgery (Minsk, Belarus) in 2017 with the signs of chronic GI bleeding, iron deficiency anemia, episodes of melena, and a rapid deterioration in her general condition.
During the first year of observation in our clinic, the child underwent seven procedures of blood transfusions due to low hemoglobin levels before the first sclerotherapy was performed.
The patient’s birth (per via naturalis) had resulted from the mother’s first pregnancy, which was also full-term. Her birth weight was 3760 g and length was 51 cm. The patient’s mother noticed a roundish dark blue, soft-elastic formation on the skin of the child’s thigh at 8 d after the birth. A few months later, new formations appeared on the skin of the child’s head (at the border of the forehead and parietal ridge) and lumbar, perianal and plantar areas.
Anamnesis vitae yielded report of venous malformations involving the gluteo-femoral region, which had been partly excised at the age of 3 mo. Several complaints of melena were also disclosed. In addition, the parents reported that, at the age of 2 years, the child had developed periodic lethargy, drowsiness, and pallor of the skin; clinical assessment at that time yielded the first detection of a significant decrease in hemoglobin levels. Thus, iron supplements were prescribed. Several other episodes of a critical decrease in hemoglobin reportedly occurred over the next few years, all of which required a blood transfusion.
The patient has no family history of BRBNS.
The patient’s skin showed an overall paleness and several vascular skin lesions were found in the lumbar region, the inner part of the left thigh, the lower leg, the forearm , and on the sole of the right foot. The formations were of various sizes but all had a soft, elastic-like consistency and showed a cyanotic coloration.
The patient’s blood parameters were low, with hemoglobin of 95 g/L (normal range: 110-140 g/L), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration of 32.8 (normal range: 31.9-35.6 g/dL), erythrocytes of 4.4 × 1012/L (normal range: 3.9-5.3 × 1012/L), and hematocrit of 29% (normal range: 34%-40%).
Ultrasound showed vascular malformations in the left lobe of the liver, pancreas, bladder, and left ovary. Magnetic resonance imaging of the soft tissues of the lower extremities showed vascular malformations in the upper third of the left thigh. Although gastroscopy and colonoscopy were unsuccessful in detecting the source of GI bleeding, capsule enteroscopy revealed multiple (-10) vascular formations in the wall of the small intestine . All formations appeared round in shape and bluish-purple in color; the largest reached 2 cm in diameter.