A 47-year-old male patient presented with a red eye, scleral nodule, and increased intraocular pressure (IOP) in the left eye for 3 weeks after an eye injury from sawdust. At a regional hospital, he was treated as nodular scleritis and secondary ocular hypertension for 1 week with topical prednisolone acetate 1% every 2 h, nepafenac four times daily, timolol maleate 0.5% and brimonidine tartrate 0.1% twice daily, oral prednisolone 15 mg/day, and oral acetazolamide 250 mg twice daily. When the lesion did not improve, the patient was referred to a tertiary hospital. His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/6 and 6/12 in OD and OS, respectively. Slit-lamp examination revealed a painless, slow-growing nodular lesion at the inferonasal area with marked injection of conjunctiva and mucopurulent discharge . There was a small infiltration of the adjacent peripheral cornea; otherwise, the anterior chamber, the lens, and fundus were unremarkable with an IOP of 20 mm Hg. The patient was diagnosed as infectious scleritis with scleral abscess and was admitted to hospital. Both topical and oral steroids were discontinued and a surgical drainage was performed. Yellow pus from the abscess was sent for microbial study including a potassium hydroxide wet mount, Calcofluor white staining, Gram staining, and bacterial and fungal cultures. The smears showed no organism and the culture did not grow any organism. The patient was initially treated as infectious scleritis with fortified cefazolin (33 mg/mL) and fortified gentamycin (14 mg/mL) every 2 h and oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily along with previous anti-glaucoma medications. Eight days after treatment, the sclera nodule resolved, and the cornea was clear with controlled IOP, so the patient was discharged and instructed to follow up at the previous regional hospital. Two weeks later, his vision got worse, so he went to the regional hospital. At that time, increased corneal haze and anterior chamber reaction with plasmoid aqueous and vitreous haze in the left eye were noticed. The patient received fortified cefazolin and fortified gentamycin hourly to the left eye as well as systemic therapy with intravenous vancomycin 500 mg/day and ceftazidime 1 g/day, before referral to a tertiary hospital.
At the second referral, BCVA were 6/6 and hand motion in OD and OS, respectively. Slit-lamp examination revealed markedly injected conjunctiva, diffused chemosis with mild proptosis, mucopurulent discharge, diffused corneal edema with neovascularization involving an area of previous infiltration, and marked anterior chamber reaction with plasmoid aqueous in the left eye . Since orbital cellulitis could not be ruled out, a computerized tomography scan of the orbit was performed, with the results showing localized preseptal swelling and scleral thickening of the left eye . B-scan ultrasonography showed diffuse scleral thickening and exudative retinal detachment . The results of previous microbial workup demonstrated Basidiobolus species . The patient was treated with ketoconazole 2% eye drops hourly, subconjunctival injection of fluconazole 1 mg every other day, oral itraconazole 200 mg daily, oral trimethoprim 400 mg, and sulfamethoxazole 80 mg 2 tablets twice daily. In addition, diabetes mellitus was identified during his general workup, thus antidiabetic drugs were given. Five days after treatment, his left eye developed more proptosis and limitation of extraocular movement, increased chemosis as well as diffused corneal stromal and subepithelial infiltration . Corneal confocal microscopy was done and showed multiple round to oval-shaped lesions which looked like fungal zygospores in the corneal stroma . The patient then underwent exploratory surgical intervention. Multiple scleral abscesses were found. Pus from the abscess was sent for microbial study showing fungal hyphae and zygospores . The fungal culture also demonstrated Basidiobolus sp. and the nucleotide sequence indicated B. ranarum . Oral itraconazole was increased to 400 mg daily. Eight days after treatment, the lesions seemed to respond to treatments as the proptosis, chemosis, and limitation of extraocular motions decreased, but generalized stromal and subepithelial infiltrations were still seen in the left eye. Nevertheless, the patient rejected further treatment and wanted to be treated as an outpatient. Two weeks after discharge, BCVA of his left eye was still hand motion despite an improvement of other signs including proptosis, chemosis, limitation of extraocular motions, and corneal infiltrations. Since then, the patient was lost to follow-up.