An 84-year-old male patient presented to our emergency department with bilateral hip joint pain and limited mobility due to high energy injury (a severe car accident). He suffered from trauma to the hips, chest, and lumbosacral region while riding an electric tricycle that collided with a truck. Physical examination in the emergency room indicated shortening and external rotation deformities in both lower limbs, tenderness in both hip joints (+), and vertical percussed pain of the lower limbs (+). Neurological and vascular examinations of the lower limbs were normal. Radiologic tests confirmed multiple injuries including bilateral intertrochanteric fractures, pelvic fracture, subarachnoid hemorrhage, multiple rib fractures and lung contusion. The bilateral intertrochanteric fractures were obviously displaced . Laboratory tests showed a hemoglobin level of 66 g/L, D-dimer of 5719 ug/L (normal 0-500), total bilirubin of 32.6 umol/L (normal 0–26), direct bilirubin of 12.5 umol/L (normal 0–8), and indirect bilirubin of 20.1 umol/L (normal 0–18). Despite no history of prior comorbidities, the patient was admitted to the emergency intensive care unit (ICU)due to his advanced age and poor general condition. The patient received blood transfusions and fluid resuscitation and other symptomatic supportive treatments in the ICU. The vital signs gradually stabilized, but he still complained of pain in his lower limbs (VAS 8). After 6 days, he was transferred to the orthopedic department. A multidisciplinary team (MDT) consultation was convened, involving experts from department of ICU, vascular surgery, cardiology, neurosurgery, hepatobiliary surgery, thoracic surgery, and anesthesiology. The decision was made to perform surgery after administering packed red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma to correct anemia and coagulation abnormalities. Intermuscular vein thromboses were discovered in both lower limbs. However, due to contraindications for anticoagulation therapy because of subarachnoid hemorrhage, an inferior vena cava filter was placed to prevent pulmonary embolism. Symptomatic treatment was provided for obstructive jaundice. The patient’s hemodynamics were stabilized preoperatively, with a hemoglobin level of 96 g/L and nearly normal bilirubin levels. Lactate levels decreased from 1.10 to 0.70mmol/L, and the pH value dropped from 7.454 to 7.382 .
After 9 days of hospitalization and once the patient’s condition had stabilized, he was scheduled for surgery. The patient underwent a single spinal anesthesia session for bilateral femoral intertrochanteric fracture closed reduction and internal fixation with proximal femoral nail anti-rotation (PFNA). The surgery was smooth , lasting 2.5 h with a blood loss of 150 ml and no intraoperative transfusion. Postoperative vital signs remained stable, and the patient’s hemoglobin level was 91 g/L on the day of surgery.
Postoperatively, the patient was under cardiac monitoring with normal blood pressure and heart rate. He experienced significant pain relief(VAS 8 to4)and was able to sit up at the bedside. On the third day after surgery, X-ray examination showed satisfactory placement of the internal implants . The patient began partial weight-bearing ambulation with the assistance of a walker. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the patient was discharged one month after the surgery.
Immediately following the patient’s recovery from anesthesia, a conservative rehabilitation plan was initiated. The rehabilitation program commenced with isometric contractions of the quadriceps muscles and ankle pump exercises to promote circulation and muscle strength. On the 3rd day post-surgery, the patient was encouraged to stand and begin partial weight-bearing ambulation with the assistance of a walker. During the first two weeks post-operatively, the focus remained on bed-based and bedside muscle strengthening exercises, gradually progressing as the patient’s condition allowed. By the 4th week, at the time of discharge, the patient was able to move independently within the ward with the aid of a walker, including performing personal tasks such as using the restroom. Pre-discharge X-rays showed signs of fracture healing. The rehabilitation plan was progressively intensified, and by 3 months post-surgery, the patient had advanced to full weight-bearing indoor activities. At the six-month follow-up, bilateral femoral intertrochanteric fractures had healed , and the patient was able to walk and perform activities outdoors.