The patient was a 43-year-old female with end-stage liver disease secondary to HCV hepatitis. Her weight was 60 kg and her body mass index was 24.3 kg/m2. Her blood type was O Rh (+). Preoperative assessment reveals the Child-Pugh score was grade C as 13 pts and the model for end-stage liver disease score was high as 19. Radiological evaluation revealed partial PV thrombosis in the main trunk. She underwent partial SAE 8 years ago and umbilical hernia repair. Her donor was her 41-year-old brother who weighted 79 kg and body mass index was 26.7 kg/m2. His blood type was B Rh (+). Preoperative 3-dimensional volumetry revealed that the extended left with caudate lobe graft volume was 555 mL, which was 49.2% of the recipient standard liver volume (SLV). The donor and recipient have incompatible blood types, so the recipient was subjected to preoperative rituximab protocol.
The patient underwent LDLT using extended left with caudate lobe graft. The actual graft weighted 467 g (402 g after UW reperfusion) of which GV/SLV was 35.7% and GRWR was 0.67%. It had middle and left hepatic veins, left hepatic artery, left PV, and left hepatic duct. Upon laparotomy, there was 10,500 mL of ascites as well as perihepatic adhesions and periumbilical adhesions. On laparotomy, portal venous pressure (PVP) monitoring was 22 mmHg. The splenic artery was dorsal to the pancreas and difficult to be approached, and finally, the upper pole branch of the splenic artery was identified and ligated at the level of the distal pancreas, by which only the upper pole of the spleen turned pale. Splenectomy could not be performed due to severe peri-splenic adhesions to avoid the ruined bleedings. After PV thrombectomy was done, adequate PV inflow was not confirmed until left gastric vessel ligation was performed. After graft reperfusion, PVP was 20 mmHg but PV flow was relatively low, 520 mL/min. At this time, we choose not to ligate the other branches of the splenic artery nor the lienorenal shunt until postoperative assessment of the graft function and the PV flow for possible postoperative modulation and boost of the portal flow accordingly. The point is that safe angiographic procedures for portal flow modulation are accessible postoperatively, such as splenic artery embolization for portal decompression and balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration (BRTO) for boosting portal flow.
After LDLT, routine abdominal ultrasound screening revealed that portal flow was 60 cm/s on POD 1, then it kept as high as 30 cm/s along the 1st week . Ascites volume was initially below 1000 mL/day till 6th POD, however, increased markedly thereafter. Serum bilirubin levels showed a stepwise gradual increase that reaches 19.4 mg/dL on POD 9 . Platelet counts were lowest (42 × 103/μL) by POD 8 and INR levels kept below 1.5 along the whole clinical course. Considering this relatively insufficient graft volume along with the clinical and laboratory parameters suggestive of SFSS, then we decided to do splenic artery embolization (SAE) for portal decompression. The patient underwent arterial splenic angiography on POD 10 via percutaneous trans-femoral Seldinger’s technique. After angiographic assessment, partial SAE occluding the main branch of the splenic artery was achieved by trans-catheter coil embolization . Dynamic computed tomography comparing the spleen pre- and postembolization are also shown .
After SAE, PV flow significantly decreased to keep within 20 cm/s by US study . Additionally, serum total bilirubin levels gradually declined and ascites amounts decreased below 400 mL , and then, the abdominal drain was removed on POD 21. Platelet counts showed a stepwise increase thereafter. The patient was discharged on POD 28 in good condition without any infectious complications.