A 72-year-old Japanese male was transferred to our hospital with mildly impaired consciousness and gait disturbance. He was healthy until the morning of that day, but his wife found him injured in front of his house upon returning home. He had a subcutaneous hematoma in his occipital region, and seemed to have slipped by accident. In our initial evaluation, his Glasgow Coma Scale score was 13 (E3V4M6). He was unable to raise his legs or stand. A neurological examination revealed pure motor paralysis of the legs. There were no sensory disturbances. Manual muscle testing revealed scores of 5/5 for the upper limbs. However, these scores were 0/5 for the bilateral iliopsoas, tibialis anterior and tibialis posterior, 3/5 for both adductors and hamstrings, and 1/5 for both quadriceps femoris. Deep tendon jerks in both the lower and upper limbs were slightly diminished and without laterality. No significantly abnormal laboratory findings, including hypokalemia or an inflammation response, were noted in a general blood exam. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain revealed a subarachnoid hemorrhage, subdural hematoma, and contusions in his basal frontal lobes and superior frontoparietal lobes [Figure and ]. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his spine revealed cervical spinal canal stenosis and lumbar spondylolisthesis; however, these lesions could not account for the pure motor paralysis of both legs . Further brain MRI investigations were performed. Axial T2*-weighted MRI revealed contusions in both basal frontal lobes and bilateral parasagittal regions . Axial, coronal, and sagittal fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI images clearly demonstrated white matter lesions in the bilateral precentral gyri [Figures and ]. He exhibited pure motor paralysis of both legs without sensory disturbances, such as paraesthesia, and the lesions of the bilateral precentral gyri accounted for this symptom. We concluded that the cerebral contusions caused the paraplegia because his pure motor paralysis occurred rapidly, and he had a subcutaneous hematoma in his occipital region. He was treated conservatively. The deep tendon reflexes of lower extremities increased during hospitalization. He received rehabilitation, but apathy and executive dysfunction slowed improvements in his gait. At 2 weeks after hospitalization, he was able to raise his knees. Coronal and axial FLAIR MRI image at that time revealed areas of high intensity in bilateral precentral gyri that were broader than those observed on the initial MRI [Figures and ]. As rehabilitation continued, his consciousness improved modestly, and the paraplegia also gradually improved. At 7 weeks after hospitalization, manual muscle testing of his lower limbs revealed improvements to almost 4/5 in both legs. He received gait training and was able to walk approximately 20 m with a walker. At this time, the total size of the lesion on FLAIR MRI was significantly reduced [Figures and ]. He was discharged to a subacute rehabilitation hospital 8 weeks after hospitalization.