A 61-year-old man with mild obesity, treated for T2DM with empagliflozin 10 mg/d, metformin 2000 mg/d and recently 12 units/day of long-acting insulin, underwent elective hip replacement surgery. Pre-operative assessment was unremarkable, with a low estimated risk of anesthesia (ASA 2). No oral antidiabetic agents were administered the evening before surgery. The surgery performed on day 1 (D1) was uneventful, as was the stay in the HDU. The administration of empagliflozin, metformin and insulin in chronic doses was resumed on D2. The patient was transferred to a ward on D3. On D4, the patient felt unwell and vomited once, but his condition improved after administration of metoclopramide. The attending physician revealed no remarkable findings. Blood gas analysis was not performed. On D5, the patient still felt unwell but without any specific complaints such as chest pain or dyspnea. Glycemia was below 10 mmol/l. In the evening, the patient vomited again. One hour later he suddenly collapsed due to cardiac arrest by ventricular fibrillation. CPR was started immediately, with ROSC after 35 min. Post-arrest ECG and echocardiography suggested acute myocardial infarction. Immediate coronary angiography revealed several significant chronic coronary artery stenoses but no acute culprit lesion, consistent with only minimal troponin T elevations over the following days. The left ventricle ejection fraction was 30–35% and there were no echocardiography findings suggestive of pulmonary embolism. On admission to the ICU, the patient was anuric and required norepinephrine. He died on D8 due to severe post-hypoxic brain injury.
On admission to the ICU one hour after CPR, a severe mixed metabolic acidosis was present with pH of 6.85 and base excess of -29 mmol/l . Lactate was only moderately elevated (5.8 mmol/l). An elevated beta-hydroxybutyrate concentration of 3.2 mmol/l. Corresponded to a mild ketoacidosis . Together with lactate and acetoacetate, whose concentration is about three times lower than that of beta-hydroxybutyrate, the total organic acid concentration was about 10 mmol/l. The anion gap was 18.1 mmol/l, i.e. 9.6 mmol/l higher than expected . Thus, the increase in the anion gap can be explained entirely by organic acids, with no other component. Subtracting this increase in anion gap still leaves a base excess of almost − 20 mmol/l, which must be explained by a non-anion gap hyperchloremic acidosis (admission Cl− was 117 mmol/l, see Table ). Overall, we found a mixed metabolic acidosis - lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis and hyperchloremic acidosis. We consider the lactic acidosis to be a consequence of cardiac arrest, but the other components of the acidosis, with base excess of -23 mmol/L after subtraction of the lactate, must have been present before CPR. We found no etiological explanation for the acidosis other than the SGLT2i-associated ketoacidosis. We hypothesize that SGLT2i gradually induced severe acidosis within 5 days of surgery, which triggered a malignant arrhythmia in the context of previously undiagnosed coronary artery disease. Here, we briefly review the pathogenesis of SGLT2i-associated acidosis and discuss some specific points of the presented case.