In November 2006, a 36 years old male presented with severe plaque type psoriasis, to our hospital clinic. He has had psoriasis for the last 13 years; first it was localized to the scalp and periodically spread to other small areas of his body so he could control his disease with topical therapy. However, for the last six years the disease spread and covered the majority of his integument. He denied prior history of psoriatic arthritis. He had a positive family history of psoriasis, which affected his father, sister and paternal grandmother, but they all had a milder disease. His past treatments included various topical agents and several years ago he had a course of UVB with significant improvement, however he could not resume phototherapy because he lost his health insurance. Otherwise his past medical history was unremarkable. He had no known drug allergies and did not smoke. His current medications included over the counter iron pills. He denied any other systemic medications.
Examination revealed severely erythematous scaly, excoriated thick plaques involving approximately 80% of his body surface area, and pitting of his nails. The rest of his physical examination was unremarkable. After completion of the screening tests which were within normal limits except from mild normocytic anemia (HGB = 12.0 gr/d) and elevated platelets count (470 × 103/mc, normal range 180-400 × 103/mc) and receiving informed consent he was treated with efalizumab (Raptiva) 0.7 mg/kg SC once weekly and subsequently 1 mg/kg as per label. Under treatment his skin condition has gradually improved. However, after 3 months of treatment he had started to complain of arthralgia first involving his right ankle and latter on extending to 2 fingers in both hands and eventually to his left ankle. Treatment with Ibouprofen 600 mg twice daily did not relieve his pain. X-ray analysis confirmed the diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis therefore treatment with Efalizumab was interrupted after 9 months. In addition during the 9 months of efalizumab therapy his platelets count rose substantially . Then, etanercept (Enbrel) 50 mg twice weekly was started. After an initial flare of his skin condition, which was expected after cessation of efalizumab, a significant improvement of both his skin and joints ensued. Interestingly during the sixteen months of etanercept treatment his platelets count returned to normal. But unfortunately due to health insurance coverage problems he had to stop etanercept and consequently his skin conditioned dramatically deteriorated and resembled his baseline condition when he first reported to our clinic. Therefore cyclosporine (Neoral) 200 mg twice daily was introduced for approximately 2 months till he received his insurance approval for adalimumab (Humira) and again his skin and arthritis gradually improved. His platelets count rose while being off etanercept and even when he was treated with cyclosporine and his skin condition started to improve his platelets counts remained persistently high and only after adalimumab was started they returned to normal values.