A 54-year-old female patient developed chest tightness and shortness of breath following activity 2 years ago and occasionally coughed, with yellow, sticky sputum that was difficult to expel. The patient did not demonstrate any fever or receive systemic treatment prior to hospitalization. Despite subsequent recurrence of the same symptoms, the patient did not receive any systematic treatment. Half a month prior to admission, the symptoms recurred, with no obvious trigger. Right chest pain occurred upon performing light activity but could be gradually relieved with rest. Chest CT in the local hospital showed the lower lobe of the right lung was occupied, and the upper lobe of the left lung had nodular high-density opacity. After considering the upper and middle lobes and left pneumonia of the right lung, the patient received symptomatic anti-infective drugs. She reported that her symptoms did not significantly improve; thus, she was treated at the Second Hospital of Jilin University for further diagnosis and treatment. Physical examination showed coarse breath sounds in both lungs, weak breath sounds in the right lower lung, and a small number of crackles at the base of the right lung. Laboratory tests demonstrated the following results: white blood cell count, 2.5 × 109/L; neutrophil count, 1.61 × 109/L; hemoglobin level, 91 g/L; and β2-microglobulin count, 6.15 mg/L. Blood gas analysis without oxygen revealed the following results: pH, 7.45; PCO2, 37 mm Hg; PO2, 53 mm Hg; SaO2, 89%; immunoglobulin G levels, 19.8 g/L; immunoglobulin A levels, 52.5 g/L; complement C3 levels, 53.5 mg/dL; complement C4 levels, 14.3 mg/dL; SS A antibody (WB) status, positive (+++); 52 kDa protein antibody (WB) antibody status, positive (+++); and ribosomal P protein antibody (WB) status, weakly positive (+–). Antinuclear antibody (ANA) screening (IIF) revealed a ratio of 1:320 and an ANA fluorescence model nuclear particle type. Lip gland (lower lip) biopsy revealed multifocal lymphocytes around the mucus gland of the lip gland, with each foci being >50 lymphocytes. Ultrasound-guided right lung mass aspiration biopsy was performed, and the pathology revealed diffuse proliferation of plasmoid cells. The cells had a plasma cell phenotype and light chain restricted expression, which combined with immunohistochemical staining results to support non-Hodgkin’s B-cell lymphoma and plasma cell differentiation, leading us to suspect MALT lymphoma. Immunohistochemistry results were as follows: CD10 part (+), CD79a (+), Bcl-2 (+), CD3, CD5, CD20, CD56, Bcl-6, and cyclin D1 (–), Kappa (light chain restrictive expression), and Lambdn (light chain restrictive expression) .
Subsequent positron-emission tomography CT showed that the soft tissue density mass in the lower lobe of the right lung was flaky and had a slight high-density shadow of approximately 90 × 75 × 120 mm in size. The maximum standardized uptake value was 13.2, and the multiple flaky and slight high-density opacities in both lungs were consistent with lymphoma accompanied by intrapulmonary invasion. Accordingly, the tumor stage was considered to be stage IVB according to the Ann Arbor classification of lymphoma. After a clear diagnosis was reached, the patient received 3 cycles of CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone) treatment starting October 2021. After combining the patient’s blood M protein, IGM-Kappa type persisted, globulin levels were >40 g/L, and a second pathology biopsy still showed obvious plasma cell differentiation. Accordingly, the R-CHOP regimen was administered for 4 cycles. Repeat examination after 6 cycles of chemotherapy showed that the SPD of intrapulmonary lesions was reduced by ≥50% . The patient was considered to have undergone partial remission based on the evaluation criteria of the treatment effect on Lugano lymphoma.
Ethical approval for this study was provided by the Ethics Committee of the Second Hospital of Jilin University, China, on May 18, 2023.