A 46-year-old female with a history of classical HL nodular sclerosis subtype complained of a right cervical lymph node enlargement after 3 cycles of first-line chemotherapy ABVD (adriamycin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine) three months ago. There were no fever, night sweats, and weight loss. She had no other pre-existing illness. On physical examinations, we found an enlargement of multiple right anterior cervical lymph nodes. No tenderness and no signs of inflammation.

The surgeon performed an excisional biopsy to confirm the refractory of the disease. The cervical lymph node biopsy specimen (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining (H&E)) showed lymph nodes with nodular growth pattern surrounded by collagen bands. There were Hodgkin Reed-Sternberg cells, lacunar cells, small lymphocytes, and other inflammatory cells as background. The immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed positive for CD 30, CD 15, and MUM1, dim positive for PAX. The morphological features and IHC result confirmed the classical HL nodular sclerosis subtype; therefore, we established the diagnosis of refractory nodular sclerosis HL.

We performed 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET) scan for staging and revealed lymph nodes involvement of right inferior jugular, right posterior cervical, right supraclavicular, right superior paratracheal, aorta para-arcus, aortopulmonary window, upper lobe of the left lung, peritoneum, and mesenterial with diffuse metabolic activity of all bone marrow. These findings are suggested as an extranodal extension. We did not find metastatic lung disease. Clinical staging was restaged with Clinical Stage (CS) IV according to the Ann-Arbor staging system.

We offered salvage treatment with conventional chemotherapy with DHAP followed by HDT and ASCT; however, the patient hesitated since she was worried about the toxicities which could make her more susceptible to getting COVID-19 infection in the era of the COVID-19 pandemic. After discussion and explanation to the patient and the family about the efficacy and side-effect profile of BV, finally, the patient chose BV for second-line treatment to control the tumor. We administered BV monotherapy 1.8 mg/m2 every 3 weeks for up to 16 cycles. The patient tolerated BV well for eight cycles without any significant toxicities and side effects. We stopped the administration of BV because the patient had already reached remission after 8 cycles, and she was not willing to continue the chemotherapy until 16 cycles. The evaluation of the PET scan after the end of cycle-8 showed complete remission. We then suggested the patient to control every 3 months to observe the remission status with HDT and ASCT as an option to salvage if the cHL further relapsed.