A 20-year-old Greek man presented to our hospital in late May of 2010 because of high fever (up to 40°C, unresponsive to anti-inflammatory drugs), appetite loss, nausea and vomiting, persistent headache and a feeling of significant malaise for 5 days. He was diagnosed at a provincial hospital with an atypical infection and had received azithromycin for 3 days, without any improvement.
He had not travelled recently either within the country or abroad. He denied intravenous drug use, new sexual partners or tattoos. He had no animal exposure. He did not use tobacco products or alcohol and had not taken any medication. He was previously healthy. According to his medical history, he reported allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis for his first 5 years of life, chickenpox at the age of 5 years, a streptococcal pneumonia at the age of 6 years, several episodes of tonsillitis until the age of 12 years and a tonsillar abscess at the age of 11 years. He reported no drug allergies. No contacts with similar symptoms were identified. He had no antecedents of Asian origin. The family history was non-contributory and no family members had rheumatic diseases.
On admission, his temperature was 38.3°C, blood pressure at 80/50mmHg, pulse was measured at 100 beats per minute and blood oxygen saturation at 92%. A physical examination revealed bilateral conjunctival chemosis, strawberry lips and tongue, dry mucus membranes, a mild skin rash of his trunk, erythema of his thenar and opisthenar regions of both palms, an oedema of palms and soles and tachycardia with S3 and S4 gallop. Results of examinations of his lungs, abdomen, neurological and musculoskeletal systems were normal.
Laboratory findings revealed leucocytosis (13.2×103 per cubic millimetre) with neutrophilia (91%) and left shift with segmented neutrophils, anaemia (haematocrit 33%) and normal platelets upon admission, which were later elevated . Acute phase reactants were elevated: erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 127mm 1st hour; CRP, 30mg/dL and fibrinogen 761 seconds. Serum creatinine levels and serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase rates were normal, serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase at 80IU/L, alkaline phosphatase at 147IU/L, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase at 67IU/L, lactate dehydrogenase at 263IU/L, creatine kinase at 254IU/L, bilirubin was normal, albumin at 3.1g/dL and sodium at 132mmol/L. Urine analysis was normal. Results of blood and urine bacterial cultures and serological tests for bacteria and viruses were negative. Alpha 2 and gamma immunoglobulin levels were elevated. All blood tests for autoimmune diseases were negative. Immunophenotype examination revealed reduced cardinal number of CD3+CD8+ T lymphocytes. The results of a chest X-ray, an electrocardiogram and a transthoracic echocardiogram were normal.
The patient did not respond to broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment. Desquamation of his fingers and toes began on the seventh day since the disease onset. Autoimmune diseases and juvenile idiopathic arthritis were excluded, as he did not fulfil diagnostic criteria for any of these diseases. Drug hypersensitivity reactions could explain his clinical appearance; however, he was previously healthy and there was no need for him to take medication. Immediately after the suspicion of KD (on the 10th day after the onset of symptoms), he was given IVIG at 2000mg/kg once and aspirin at 50mg/kg orally for the first 3 days, and at 100mg per day for another 3 months. His treatment was based on the diagnostic criteria developed for KD in children because there had been no validated criteria for adult cases of KD. Antibiotic treatment was discontinued at this time.
Immunoglobulin and aspirin had a striking result, since the patient was afebrile and in better condition on the very next day after the initiation of treatment. During the following days, all clinico-laboratory findings gradually improved and only a reactive thrombocytosis remained. In total, he remained hospitalised for 10 days. A computed tomography coronary angiography performed 1 month later showed no coronary aneurysms. Today, about 5 years later, our patient remains healthy.