A 33-year-old Caucasian female was subjected to elective LC for symptomatic uncomplicated GSD. A conventional antegrade cholecystectomy was performed, with no adverse events noted intraoperatively. The postoperative period, however, was protracted with persistent albeit mild-to-moderate abdominal pain and low-grade fever up to 38.3 °C. There was no secretion from the drain positioned in the gall bladder bed. On the 3rd postoperative day, the patient’s complaints resolved partially, and it was decided to discharge her for outpatient observation. Upon removal of the drainage tube, however, spontaneous evacuation of substantial amount of bilious fluid occurred. At this point, bile leakage from the cystic duct was suspected and the patient was referred to our institution for further evaluation.
At admission, the patient’s general condition was preserved: blood pressure 110/60 mmHg, pulse rate 90/min, no fever. There was mild pain on palpation. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) was performed, which showed non-dilated bile ducts, fluid collection measuring 4/5 cm in the gall bladder bed, a small amount of fluid in the ileocecal region and above the urine bladder. Blood work established: leucocytes—13.3 × 109 (3.5–10.5 × 109/L), Hemoglobin (Hb)—152.0 g/L (120–140 g/L), thrombocytes—492 × 109 (150–450 × 109/L), Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)—22 mm/h (<15 mm/h), C-reactive protein (CRP)—17.5 mg/L (<5 mg/L), total bilirubin—59.12 µmol/L (7–22.2 µmol/L), conjugated bilirubin—33.2 µmol/L (1.2–7.2 µmol/L), alanine aminotransferase (ASAT)—82 U/L (<40 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (ALAT)—160 U/L (<40 U/L), gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT)—183.0 U/L (<52 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (AP)—325.0 U/L (<300 U/L). Urgent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was scheduled the same day.
ERCP was performed under intravenous anesthesia using a combination of fentanyl, midazolam, and propofol. Antibiotic treatment (ceftriaxone 2.0 g i.v.) was initiated. The patient was placed in a supine position. A therapeutic duodenoscope Olympus TJF-160VR (Olympus, Hamburg, Germany) was introduced and placed at the second portion of the duodenum “en face” with the major duodenal papilla. Deep biliary cannulation was achieved using the standard guidewire technique (sphincterotome—TrueTomeTM; Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) and 0.035-inch guidewire (JagwireTM straight type, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA). Cholangiography was obtained which showed non-dilated common bile duct with complete obstruction at the level of common hepatic duct (CHD) caused by a clip. Despite all efforts, advancement of the guidewire above the stenosis was impossible. It was concluded that the CHD was misidentified as the cystic duct (CD) and transection of the CHD above the clip was suspected (Strasberg type E4 BDI). Based on the ERCP, imaging, and clinical findings, biliary peritonitis following persistent bile leak was anticipated, so the patient was immediately transferred to the Surgical Department for further evaluation.
Upon laparotomy, biliary peritonitis was established. Inspection of the liver hilum revealed massive injury (probably thermal) of the CHD involving the biliary confluence (confirmed Strasberg type E4 BDI). The clip was found at the distal end of the CHD. Taking into consideration the severe inflammation in this region, immediate repair of the defect and biliary reconstruction was deemed to be hazardous. Instead, two percutaneous biliary catheters (10 fr) were inserted in the left and right hepatic duct to ensure drainage, lavage of the peritoneal cavity was performed, and finally, three abdominal drainage tubes were positioned in the small pelvic area and at the subhepatic space. Since second revision of the abdominal cavity was anticipated, laparostomy was constructed and the patient was transferred to an Intensive Care Unit for supportive care. Re-exploration of the abdominal cavity was performed four days later and found resolved biliary peritonitis with adequate function of the biliary drainage tubes. The patient’s condition improved substantially and she was discharged 3 days later. Readmission was planned in 4 weeks for further assessment and subsequent biliary reconstructive surgery.
Surgical intervention, however, was delayed by a COVID-19 infection, which was generally mild in nature and treated symptomatically in outpatient settings. Unfortunately, about a week prior to the planned surgery, displacement and spontaneous extraction of the positioned biliary drains occurred. Initially, spontaneous evacuation of bilious fluid through the already maturated external BF was noted. A few days later, though, bile flow seized and the patient noticed darkening of the urine, jaundice, and low-grade fever—37.6 °C. She was immediately admitted to the Department of surgery, where her lab tests showed elevation bilirubin to 82.5 µmol/L, ALAT—64 U/L, GGT—159 U/L, AP—358 U/L, CRP—242.9 mg/L, leucocyte—13.3 × 109/L. Computer tomography (CT) was performed showing dilated intrahepatic bile ducts. Benign strictures of right and left HD were suspected and she was scheduled for surgery. Surprisingly, in the course of hospital admission, jaundice resolved and the patient even noticed normal coloration of the stools, which were persistently pale since the LC. A lab test also showed substantial improvement—bilirubin—33.2 µmol/L, ALAT—34 U/L, GGT—88 U/L, AP—228 U/L, CRP—15.6 mg/L, leucocyte—10.1 × 109/L. At this point, the patient was again referred to Gastroenterology Department for evaluation.
ERCP was performed in line with the described protocol. Upon transpapillary cannulation, no dynamic in the fluoroscopic finding was noted—non-dilated CBD, with proximal obstruction caused by a clip at the level of CHD. Careful withdrawal of the duodenoscope, however, revealed a fistulous opening at the level of bulbus duodeni with a flow of bile. Bilio-digestive fistula was naturally suspected. The fistulous opening was cannulated using a sphincterotome and a 0.025-inch straight guidewire . A short stricture was noted about 10 mm proximal to the fistulous opening, which was initially hard to negotiate through, but eventually, deep biliary cannulation was achieved. Fluoroscopy showed then a biliodigestive fistula formed between duodenum and the left hepatic duct (LHD), with a high-grade stenosis at the distal end of the duct. Further opacification of the biliary tree revealed an anatomical variation of the bile ducts with the right posterior duct draining into the left hepatic duct (Type 3A according to the intrahepatic duct anatomy classification; see ) . Considering this fact as well as the lack of clinical signs of cholangitis, it was decided that stenting of the left hepatic duct would ensure adequate biliary drainage and might preclude the need for surgery. The stricture was dilated to 8 mm using a biliary balloon dilation catheter (Hurricane Rx, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) and two straight plastic stents were inserted (Endoflex, Hamburg, Germany)—7 fr/6 cm in the 2nd segment branch and 10 fr/6 cm 3rd segment branch . There were no adverse events (AE) defined according to the European Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) and American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ASGE) guidelines [,]. The patient was discharged 3 days later, with readmission for reevaluation planned six months later.
At six months, the patient was readmitted and ERCP performed electively. Fluoroscopy revealed significant, though incomplete resolution of the stricture at the level of LHD. Further balloon dilation to 10 mm was performed, with subsequent insertion of 3 straight plastic stents—10 fr/6 cm in the 2nd segment branch, 10 fr/6 cm and 8.5 fr/6 cm in the 3rd segment branch. No ERCP-related adverse events were noted.
The patient remained symptom-free for the next 12 months. At one year, elective ERCP was performed. Complete resolution of the stricture was found, with one of the stents proximally migrated in the HD (discussed as an AE in ASGE but not ESGE guidelines). All biliary prostheses were removed with a snare, with the migrated stent being extracted using a standard upper endoscope, which was easily introduced through the fistula.
After one year of follow-up, the woman remains symptom free. Regular blood tests and abdominal US show no signs of biliary obstruction.