A 17-year-old male was referred to our hospital with progressive headache and nausea. Neurological examination showed papilledema, and MRI [Figure –] revealed hydrocephalus and a bilateral multicystic lesion in the midbrain and thalamus that caused aqueduct stenosis. The signal intensity of the lesion on T1- and T2-weighted images was identical to that of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). There was no enhancement with contrast media, no evidence of perifocal edema on FLAIR, and no evidence of calcification on computed tomography (CT). He underwent neuroendoscopic surgery for obstructive hydrocephalus caused by the lesion. A cyst with a transparent membrane continuous with the ependyma was responsible for the blockade of the aqueduct. Two stomas were made on the cyst wall by electrocoagulation, and the cyst shrunk. Third ventriculostomy was then performed. Biopsy of the cyst membrane was initially attempted by grasping it with forceps, but this was discontinued because of hemorrhage. Considering the imaging and surgical findings, the multicystic lesion was considered to be PVS dilation. Postoperative MRI revealed a marked improvement in hydrocephalus, but no change was observed in the size or number of the multicystic lesion. Headache and nausea improved. After discharge, the patient stopped visiting our hospital based on his own judgment.
Fourteen years later, at age 31, the patient was readmitted to our hospital with progressive double vision and nausea. Neurological examination revealed anisocoria (right pupil: 3 mm, left pupil: 5 mm), and the light reflex was dull in both pupils. Left eye exotropia in the primary position was present. When the patient tilted his head to the right, double vision worsened, while titling to the left resolved the double vision (Bielshowsky sign positive). Eye movement during tracking of moving objects was normal. These findings indicated left oculomotor and right trochlear nerve palsies. MRI [Figure and ] revealed that a multicystic lesion in the midbrain and thalamus had increased in number and size compared with the initial examination at age 17, but hydrocephalus was not present. Radiological appearance was not typical of a tumor, and inflammatory or infectious disease was unlikely in view of the clinical course. Progression of giant tumefactive PVSs was considered the differential diagnosis.
We speculated that compression of the midbrain was the most probable cause of symptoms and performed neuroendoscopic surgery. Two frontal precoronal burr holes were drilled. Through the left burr hole, we inserted the rigid endoscope with an operating sheath (Karl Storz Inc., Germany) and a neuronavigational guidance probe (Medtronic Inc., USA) into the third ventricle. Through the right burr hole, we inserted the flexible endoscope VEF-IV (Olympus, INC. Japan) with EMF System Pal-1 (Japan Medical Dynamic Marketing Inc., Japan) into the third ventricle. Thin-walled cysts were observed in the third ventricle . We fenestrated the cyst walls from rostral to caudal along the midline under the guidance of the navigation system. The interior of the cysts appeared to be traversed by small arteries that were surrounded by enlarged PVSs . Specimens of the cyst membrane were retrieved for biopsy.
After surgery, the symptoms and neurological disorder improved. Postsurgical MRI [Figure and ] revealed a slight reduction in the size of the multicystic lesion. Histopathological staining for glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) [Figure –] demonstrated extensive gliosis in the cyst wall. Epithelial cells on the outer aspects appeared to be ependymal cells compressed by the cystic lesion. Based on MRI, surgical, and histological findings, we diagnosed the patient with a multicystic lesion, which was caused by giant tumefactive PVSs. MRI performed at 6 months after surgery showed a slight reduction in the number and average size of the cysts, and the patient remained free of symptoms.