A 67-year-old man was referred for uncontrolled increased IOP in his left eye despite maximal tolerated medical therapy. He had previously been diagnosed with left secondary glaucoma related to idiopathic uveitis, which was diagnosed based on negative results in all systemic work-ups including serologic, radiologic test. His previous ocular history included laser iridotomy (LI) and trabeculectomy, which were performed three years prior to SLT procedure, as well as phacoemulsification with in-the-bag posterior chamber lens implantation which performed two years ago. His past medical history was unremarkable. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in his right eye and 6/20 in his left eye. IOP measured by Goldmann applanation tonometry was 15 mmHg in his right eye and 28 mmHg in his left eye, with the latter being treated with a fixed combination of dorzolamide and timolol (Cosopt, MSD, Switzerland) twice daily, brimonidine 0.2% (Alphagan, Allergan, USA) twice daily and latanoprost 0.005% (Xalatan, Pfizer, Belgium) once nightly. Slit lamp examination showed deep anterior chambers in both eyes, as well as showing a shallow bleb, a patent LI hole at the 11 o’clock position of the iris, and an iridectomy site at the 12 o’clock position of the iris in the left eye. Gonioscopic examination of the left eye revealed peripheral anterior synechiae around the iridectomy site at the 12 o’clock position and hyperpigmented tissue within the trabecular meshwork in all quadrants . The patient was prescribed oral acetazolamide (Acetazol tab. 250 mg, Hanlim Pharm., Korea) twice daily for 1 week, reducing the IOP in his left eye to 17 mmHg as measured by Goldmann tonometry. Owing to drowsiness, however, the oral drug had to be discontinued. One week after discontinuing oral acetazolamide, the IOP returned to 30 mmHg. Therefore, it was decided to perform SLT while maintaining twice daily dosing of oral acetazolamide. SLT, rather than additional glaucoma surgery, was selected to reduce IOP because of following findings suggesting advanced glaucoma in the left eye , (1) a pale disc on fundus examination, (2) diffuse retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) loss on optical coherence tomography (OCT), and (3) severe field constriction on Humphrey visual field test .
Proparacaine topical anesthetic solution was applied to the left eye, and hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (Hycell solution 2%, Samil Pharm Co., Ltd., Korea) was used with the gonioscopy lens. SLT was performed with 107 shots treating 360° of the trabecular meshwork with 1.1 mJ, which falls within the typical power range of 0.4–1.4 mJ . Thirty minutes after the treatment, the IOP in the left eye was 17 mmHg. The patient was instructed to apply fluorometholone acetate 0.1% (Flarex, Novartis Pharm., Switzerland) drops four times per day for 3 days and to return in a week for follow-up.
One week after the procedure, the IOP in the left eye was 7 mmHg and there were no other symptoms other than foreign body sensation in the eye. Significant anterior chamber shallowing and inflammation were also not observed. Considering that the IOP decreased sufficiently, oral acetazolamide was discontinued and the patient followed-up 2 weeks later. At that visit, the patient reported ocular pain in the left eye when touched. The best corrected visual acuity and IOP of the left eye were 3/20 and 4 mmHg, respectively. Slit lamp examination showed a deep anterior chamber without evidence of marked inflammation. Fundus examination and B-scan ultrasonography revealed hypotonic maculopathy and choroidal detachment in the left eye .
All anti-glaucomatous drugs were discontinued and the patient was started on oral prednisolone acetate (Solondo tab, Yuhanmedica, Korea) 30 mg per day. One week later, the IOP in the left eye was 4 mmHg, and the choroidal detachment did not improve. The patient was therefore started on additional atropine 1% (Isopto atropine, Alcon, USA) twice daily and prednisolone acetate suspension (Pred Forte 1%, Allergan, USA) four times daily. The IOP in his left eye was 7 mmHg 3 days later and 23 mmHg 10 days later, and the choroidal detachment had improved . One week after discontinuation of oral prednisolone acetate, atropine eye drops, and prednisolone acetate suspension, the IOP in his left eye was stable at 8 mmHg. Three months after SLT, the IOP in that eye was well maintained at 10 mmHg, with the patient being treated with only one anti-glaucomatous drug, brimonidine.