On February 20, 2021, a 40-year-old man presented to the emergency department with a fever and headache with no clear infectious focus. His personal history included no known drug allergies, no toxic habits, and no cardiovascular risk factors, with a history of a bacterial meningitis in childhood without sequelae and a protein S deficiency that was not being treated at that time. During the first contact in the emergency department, he was diagnosed with a urinary tract infection and was treated with cefuroxima. Two days later, he was brought back to the emergency department with a confusional state and tonic-clonic seizures, and despite treatment with midazolam, he had recurrent tonic-clonic seizures, which required sedation and orotracheal intubation in the intensive care unit due to refractory status epilepticus. As a recent event, 21 days before the beginning of the clinic, the first dose of vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 was described.

The physical examination, once sedated and intubated, showed a tendency to cervical hyperextension, with ocular deviation upwards and to the right, frequent clonic and synchronous myoclonic reactions in all four limbs, clonoid hyperreflexia in all four limbs with bilateral positive Hoffman reflexes and bilateral flexor cutaneous-plantar reflexes. There were no meningeal signs, and the rest of the neurological examination was affected by the sedation and intubation of the patient. In the initial complementary tests, which included a complete blood count, polymerase chain reaction for SARS-CoV-2, serology of the most common neurotrophic viruses, analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (biochemistry, serology, polymerase chain reaction multiplex, cytology and autoimmunity), abdominal ultrasound, head computed tomography without contrast and head magnetic resonance with contrast, only a discrete thickening and oedema in the FLAIR and DWI sequences in both frontal cortices, with a right predominance, was observed. The rest of the tests showed findings within the normal range, except for an increase in D dimers, creatine kinase and leukocytosis with neutrophilia.

The patient was diagnosed with refractory status epilepticus with possible frontal focal origin, with no history of epilepsy. To cover the possible infectious etiology, aciclovir, ampicillin and ceftriaxone were started empirically, without a favorable clinical response being described. During his stay in the intensive care unit, a neuroimaging study was performed with computed tomography and computed angiotomography to rule out venous thrombosis of the sinuses, which showed no pathological findings. However, in a new cranial magnetic resonance, performed 18 days after admission, a diffuse and bilateral alteration of the hemispheric cortex and the right thalamic pulvinar was observed. After treatment with immunomodulators, and 6 days after the previous magnetic resonance, a new magnetic resonance control was performed with a notable improvement in terms of the lesions found in the initial magnetic resonance.

Regarding the electrophysiological study of our patient, multifocal seizures, generalized state pattern and suppression-seizures were found in the successive electroencephalograms performed on day 16 and 18 after admission, depending on the anaesthesia and the therapeutic window.

Regarding the analytical and radiological study of the case, we note that, in the analytical profiles, the autoimmunity (antinuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies and anti-neuronal antibodies), the polymerase chain reaction for SARS-CoV-2 in the nasopharyngeal exudate, the serology, the microbiology, the tumour markers, the computed tomography of the body, the transthoracic echocardiography and the testicular ultrasound were all negative. In the control lumbar puncture at 72 hours, a discrete mononuclear pleocytosis (27 cells; 95%, mononuclear) was observed without glucose consumption and with minimal hyperproteinorraquia. The anti-DPPX, anti-NMDA, anti-CASPR2, anti-LGI1, anti-GABA and anti-AMPA antibodies in the cerebrospinal fluid were negative.

Our patient remained in the intensive care unit for 86 days suffering multiple systemic complications, including pulmonary thromboembolism, basilic vein venous thrombosis, hyponatraemia and hypothyroidism with negative autoimmunity, and several nosocomial infections resolved during admission. In the face of refractoriness to treatment, he was diagnosed with cryptogenic NOSRSE. Sequentially, or in combination, up to seven antiepileptic drugs (benzodiazepines, valproic acid, carbamazepine, lacosamide, levetiracetam, phenobarbital, phenytoin, perampanel and topiramate) were administered, a succession or combination of anaesthetic drugs in parenteral infusion (pentothal, propofol, midazolam and/or ketamine), a ketogenic diet and immunotherapy (plasmaferesis and rituximab), and he progressed favourably, with remission of both clinical and electrical crises on day 77 after admission. After 93 days of admission he was discharged with partial reduction of antiepileptic drugs (levetiracetam, topiramate, lacosamide, perampanel and clobazam) and without severe cognitive defects, although maintaining moderate flaccid tetraparesis as a neurological deficit secondary to polyneuropathy of the critical patient.
