A 75-year-old female patient presented with sudden-onset flaccid paraparesis for 1 day. The patient had a history of diabetes and hypertension. Neurological examination showed grade 2–3 motor weakness of both legs, decreased deep tendon reflex, loss of anal tone, and numbness below the T4 dermatome. There was no fever, cardiopulmonary symptoms, pain of extremities, or palpable lymph nodes. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an intramedullary mass lesion on T2-T4 with cord swelling and edema from C7 to T6. The lesion was iso-intense on T2-weighted images (WI) and iso- to slightly low-intense on T1-WI with heterogeneous enhancement . No additional lesions were found on the brain and whole-spine MRI. Whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) confirmed the single lesion on T2-4 with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 3.14 and no systemic lesion . Leg weakness deteriorated to G1 prior to surgery.
Under the laminectomy of T2-T4 and opening the dura, enlarged thoracic cord with a normal superficial appearance was noted. Midline myelotomy allowed the identification of a white-gray-colored and soft-natured mass lesion with an ill-defined boundary . The mass lesion was located at the central portion with a slight deviation on the right inside the cord. Gross total removal was achieved under intraoperative neuro-monitoring with no signal change. The patient showed no change in neurologic function after surgery. Histological examination revealed diffuse infiltration of foamy (lipid-laden) histiocytes with uniform nuclei and abundant cytoplasm . On immunohistochemical staining, foamy histiocytes showed diffuse and strong expression of CD163 and CD68 (histiocytic marker) , and there were negative for CD1a, S100, and BRAFV600E mutation . No systemic lesions were noted on the preoperative radiological examinations; therefore, we confirmed this case as variant ECD with isolated intramedullary involvement. There was no recurrence or new development of mass lesions on MRI and whole-body FDG-PET/CT at 12-month follow-up . The patient became self-standing and aid-walkable with recovery of anal tone and sensory impairments. Unfortunately, sudden paraplegia occurred again at 18-month follow-up, which was confirmed that it was developed by unknown originated thoracic cord infarction. There was no evidence related with recurrence or new lesion of ECD on spine MRI and whole-body FDG-PET/CT .