A medically and surgically free 6-year-old boy, with a weight of 22 kg and height of 122 cm, was brought to the ED of our hospital by his teacher with severe shortness of breath. The patient was witnessed ingesting popcorn when he suddenly started to develop cough and shortness of breath.
In the ED, the patient was agitated, drowsy, and semi-conscious. There was no obvious upper airway obstruction, but auscultation revealed absent air entry in the left lung with subcutaneous emphysema in the right side of the neck. His oxygen saturation was acceptable on oxygen supplementation.
Shortly after, patient became severely distressed and was intubated using midazolam, ketamine and succinylcholine. Chest x-ray was done after intubation and showed Endotracheal Tube (ETT) in good position, hyperlucent left hemithorax, flatting of ipsilateral hemidiaphragm, mediastinal shift to the right, and a radiopaque areain the left main bronchus . Auscultation after intubation showed minimal flow in the left lung (improved compared to initial presentation) with some episodes of desaturation.
Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery were contacted for urgent Direct Laryngoscopy and Bronchoscopy (DLB). After the patient was stabilized, he was taken to the operating room for DLB and foreign body removal with consent of the possible complications of bleeding, infection, inability to remove the foreign body, pneumothorax and/or teeth injury.
In the operating room, patient was intubated on bag mask ventilation. Air entry was diminished bilaterally with scattered wheezing in both sides. There was difficulty in bag mask ventilation with obvious expansion in the left side of the chest. The patient was connected to standard monitors. Initial end tidal CO2 was 104 mm Hg, arterial blood gas showed pH of 6.87, PaCO2 181 mm Hg and PaO2 of 231 mm Hg.
General anesthesia was maintained with propofol infusion of 250 mcg/kg/min, and dexmedetomidine 1 mcg/kg/hr. One dose of dexamethasone 0.5 mg/kg was given to help in relieving the possible airway edema.
The patient was given succinylcholine during intubation in the ED followed by a dose of rocuronium, so the option of spontaneous ventilation was lost. The patient was maintaining his oxygen saturation (SaO2) on 100% O2 flow.
The decision was made to proceed with flexible fiberoptic scope through the ETT to delineate the anatomy.
First look was an unusual view of the foreign body which was seen saddling in the carina. The patient was extubated during flexible fiberoptic scope, so we proceeded with rigid bronchoscopy after irrigation with 2% lidocaine.
While maintaining ventilation through the side port of the rigid bronchoscope, a foreign body was seen stuck in the trachea at the level of the carina, and a large right accessory tracheal bronchus was noted above the level of the foreign body . The foreign body was successfully retrieved as one piece under vision using fiberoptic forceps . A second look at the airway was done to exclude any other injuries and revealed a clear airway with no remaining foreign body and confirmed the presence of a right tracheal bronchus .
After successful foreign body removal, another ETT was inserted and irrigation was done using normal saline. Airway entry improved, and arterial blood gas showed a pH of 6.95, PaCO2 of 141, and PaO2 of 40.3. Portable chest x-ray confirmed the ETT position and the absence of pneumothorax . The patient was shifted from the operating room to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) fully sedated and intubated. The patient was monitored in PICU and was extubated the same day.
The patient was playful, tolerating orally, with no signs of respiratory distress and maintaining saturation on room air. He returned to his usual level of activity and was given dexamethasone 10 mg every 6 h (total of 4 doses). He was discharged home the following day in a good and stable condition with no need for further follow up.