A 37-year-old woman presented at the emergency department (ED) with exertional dyspnoea New York Class Association (NYHA) functional classes II and III, syncope, and new onset of T-wave inversions in the ECG . She presented in a clinically stable condition with a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, a pulse of 90/min, and an oxygen saturation of 96%. The clinical examination was unremarkable. Her only significant medical history was Crohn’s disease, which had been well controlled with adalimumab for 3 years. Computed tomography (CT) ruled out a pulmonary embolism and parenchymal lung disease . The transthoracic echocardiographic (TTE) findings were consistent with a cor pulmonale without signs of an intracardiac shunt or a left ventricular (LV) pathology (see , ). Right heart catheterization proved a precapillary PH with a negative vasoreactivity testing (mPAP 33 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance 4.8 WU, pulmonary arterial wedge pressure 7 mmHg, and central venous pressure 4 mmHg). Perfusion–ventilation scintigraphy displays small peripheral perfusion defects .
The presence of peripheral perfusion defects in scintigraphy was initially interpreted as possible chronic thromboembolic PH, and anticoagulation with heparin was started. However, the findings were later interpreted as in context of PH Group 1. Therefore, a PH specific therapy with macitentan and tadalafil was initiated under the continuation of heparin. The short-term course was then complicated by a heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) that was confirmed by a positive antibody test (HIT antibodies: IgG 6.96 U/mL) with otherwise normal coagulation parameters. Shortly thereafter, an episode of haematemesis occurred, and gastroscopy revealed a gastric adenocarcinoma. An escape chemotherapy regimen was launched before completion of tumour staging. Staging CT revealed subpleural nodular ground glass opacities with ‘feeding vessel sign’ compatible with PH but no metastatic spread of gastric cancer . Consequently, oncologic treatment was changed to a neoadjuvant chemotherapy and subsequent gastrectomy. The patient’s symptoms improved shortly after the first administration of chemotherapy and resolved completely within 2 months. Retrospectively, we considered a pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy (PTTM) the most probable cause of PH. Follow-up after successful oncologic treatment and cumulative 10 months of specific PH medication showed an excellent clinical response; hence, specific PH therapy was ceased (see , ; ). A subsequently performed RHC confirmed complete remission of PH at rest (mPAP 17 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance 1.6 WU, pulmonary arterial wedge pressure 9 mmHg, and central venous pressure 5 mmHg).