A 39-year-old healthy woman with normal menstrual periods presented to the emergency department because of postoperative cardiac arrest after a hysteroscopic myomectomy with general anesthesia. Preoperative blood tests revealed no anomalies. According to the local health facility, she had been irrigated with 8000 mL of 5% dextrose water with monopolar electrosurgery and subsequently underwent 35 min of cardiopulmonary resuscitation with medication including sodium bicarbonate 266 mmol (16 ampules) and other inotropic agents. On admission, her body weight was 74 kg (compared to presurgery body weight 62 kg); body mass index of 26.2; equal and dilated pupils; Glasgow coma scale of E1VTM1; low body temperature (32.9 °C), rapid heart rate (117 bpm), hypotension (74/47 mmHg), desaturation with SpO2 of 86% and less than 100% FiO2 support after intubation, and she was placed on ventilator support with a lung-protective strategy. Her laboratory tests revealed iso-osmotic hyponatremia, severe metabolic acidosis with hypercapnia and hypoxemia, hypoalbuminemia, and hemolysis with disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. The patient received a significant amount of sodium bicarbonate, so the acidosis was most likely much more severe at presentation and the acidosis may have been due to lactic acidosis. .
The patient was immediately resuscitated with 300 mL of intravenous 3% sodium chloride within 4 h for acute hyponatremia. Because of altered consciousness, mannitol and furosemide were administered for suspected brain edema. Inotropic agents and vasopressors were administered for profound shock status. Initial chest X-ray and chest CT were compatible with acute pulmonary edema . Echocardiogram revealed severe hypokinesia of the left ventricular apex with ejection fraction of 35%.Although initial troponin level was 1.944 ng/mL, subsequently, the levels increased to 18.46 and 20.73 ng/mL. After resuscitation, serum sodium level increased from 125 mmol/L to 139 mmol/L 3 h after admission and was 141 mmol/L 7 h after admission; however, the patient remained comatose. Brain CT 1 day after admission revealed no evidence of focal swelling. Subsequently, she was treated with CVVH to remove accumulated fluid from acute pulmonary edema and anuric acute kidney injury, which occurred despite the use of diuretics. Because of acute respiratory distress syndrome with severe hypercapnia, hypoxemia, and poor motion of the heart wall, the patient received venous–arterial ECMO. Further follow-up laboratory examinations revealed unremarkable thyroid function and adrenal function . As follow-up echocardiography revealed improved left ventricular diastolic and systolic function with ejection fraction of 57%, the patient was successfully weaned off ECMO on the day 9; she regained consciousness on day 10 and was successfully extubated on the day 13 of admission . She was relocated to the ward on postoperative day 25 and was released from the hospital on postoperative day 28 without any detectable sequelae.