The patient, cmh000720, is currently a 6-year-old male who was referred for whole exome sequencing at 4 years of age. The patient was conceived via artificial insemination and was born at an estimated 38 weeks gestation via C-section to a 32-year-old G3P2 mother and distantly related 27-year-old father (5th cousins once removed). The pregnancy was complicated by gestational diabetes that was well managed with diet. Decreased fetal movements were noted throughout pregnancy, however the results from ultrasound exams and maternal serum AFP testing were normal. At birth the patient was noted to have a week cry, hypotonia, joint hypermobility, and an undescended testicle. Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min respectively; weight was 3.1 kg (30th%ile) and length 50.8 cm (68th%ile). He was discharged home at 2 days of life. Newborn screening was reported to be normal. At a routine pediatric follow up appointment at two weeks of age the patient was hospitalized for additional evaluation due to concerns of his persistent low tone and cardiac murmur. At that time he was noted to have both a left hip dislocation and right hip subluxation, with bilateral acetabular dysplasia. Use of a Pavlik harness failed correct the hip dislocation due to profound ligamentous laxity. Echocardiogram revealed a PFO and biscupid aortic valve. The patient had inconsistent TSH levels and thus was treated with levothyroxine. An MRI was suggestive of an arachnoid cyst, but was otherwise unremarkable. At 2.5 months of age an EEG revealed abnormal sharp waves, and CSF glucose levels were found to be 38. Due to a concern for a GLUT1 deficiency, a ketogenic diet was trialed but discontinued after the patient became lethargic on the diet and repeat testing was normal. The patient has had no documented clinical seizure activity.
In addition to his hip dysplasia, cmh000720 was also noted to have significant kyphoscoliosis and osteopenia by 4 months of age. He has had multiple fractures associated with little to no trauma including his left tibia (12 months), right femur (19 months), right tibia (20 months), left femur (2.5 years), right femur shaft (3.75 years), distal right femur (3.8 years), and left femur (4.2 years). Pamidronate infusions were trialed but an increase in fractures was noted. He has significant osteoporosis; bone density by dexa of the left forearm at 4 years of age was measured as Z score of -5.8. Spinal fusion rods were placed at 3 years of age and removed at 5 years of age. He is currently in a hard brace. Stabilization rods were also placed in both femurs .
The patient had developmental delay of gross motor milestones; currently he is able to walk with a walker and bear weight but cannot walk independently. Cognitively he is normal; he was able to say single words at 12 months and currently only has problems with articulation. At 6 years of age, in addition to the aforementioned symptoms, the patient is followed for mild aortic root and ascending aorta dilation, restrictive lung disease requiring C-PAP/BiPAP due to scoliosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bilateral hyperopia, astigmatism, amblyopia, and mild left ptosis, and hypoglycemia with illness. His weight 24.76 kg (85th%ile) and length 111 cm (13th%ile) are within normal limits, although he still receives supplemental nutrition overnight through a G-tube that was placed at 20 months of age. He is macrocephalic with an OFC of 54.8 cm (>98th%ile). He is only mildly dysmorphic with downslanting palpebral fissures, bluish/grey sclera, a high arched palate, short neck, arachnodactyly, and hyperextensible skin with no striae . His bone age is estimated at 4 years 6 months (>2 SD below expected for chronological age). He completed kindergarten with an IEP that includes occupational, speech and physical therapies.
The family history is notable for an older brother who was found to have a biscuspid aortic valve, after recommended screening. He has a healthy younger sister. Echocardiograms of both parents and younger sister were normal. Both parents are tall, and reportedly healthy.