A 59-year-old man was admitted to Coronary Care Unit because of suspected ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction. The patient was complaining of typical coronary chest pain during the last twelve hours. He had a history of dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, smoking habit and a transient ischemic attack without any sensitive or motor squele one year ago. On admission, his blood pressure was 100/60 and heart rate was 110 beats per minute. Cardiac examination revealed jugular vein distension, and no significant heart murmurs. The ECG showed significant Q waves in II, III and aVf leads with mild ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, aVf and V4R. The chest radiograph revealed no cardiomegaly and clear lung fields. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed showing akinetic inferoseptal, inferior, and inferolateral segments with estimated left ventricular ejection fraction of 45%, right ventricle showed a global hipokinesia with severe systolic dysfunction and inferior vena cava plethora. The patient was initially treated with aspirin, low-molecular-weight heparin, dobutamine and saline infusions, and was scheduled for early catheterization. Coronary angiography showed total occlusion of right coronary artery proximal segment and two additional 70% stenoses in the first diagonal and obtuse marginal branches. Percutaneous revascularization was dismissed after a failed attempt of right coronary artery opening, then, the patient was treated using conservative medical therapy (aspirin 100 mg/day, clopidogrel 75 mg/day, simvastatin 20 mg/day and enalapril 10 mg/day), anticoagulation was maintained for 72 hours, and beta blocker therapy was not started because Mobitz I atrioventricular block phases were detected in continuous ECG monitoring. The later clinical outcome in the Coronary Care Unit was favourable, and the patient was discharged six days after to cardiology hospitalization unit. Nine days after hospital admission, the patient complained about sudden chest pain and rest dyspnea, his blood pressure was 80/40 and cardiac examination revealed a new harsh, holosystolic murmur along the left sternal border. Transthoracic echocardiography was immediately performed showing complex ventricular septal defect with a dissection tract that originated on left side of the basal inferoseptal akinetic segments, extended beyond the septum dissecting the right ventricular wall, and subsequently re-entered into the right ventricle chamber . No significant right ventricle outflow tract obstruction was present. The patient was scheduled for immediate surgical intervention, and hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass with myocardial protection was established in the following two hours. The septal rupture was approached through the infarct, and prosthetic material (Gore-Tex® patch) was used to reconstruct the septum, additionally, two bypasses using vein grafts were done in first diagonal and posterior descending arteries. Postoperative evolution was favourable with rapid resolution of cardiogenic shock situation. One month later transesophageal echocardiography was performed showing neither right ventricle dissecting tract or residual shunt. Left ventricular ejection fraction was 55%, and right ventricular systolic function was only mildly depressed. At six-month follow-up the patient remains stable and without any cardiac symptoms.