A 15-year-old male (height, 159 cm; weight, 43 kg) presented to the emergency department with sudden severe central chest pain radiating to the left shoulder. His blood pressure was 83/56 mmHg, pulse 84 beats/minute, and body temperature 36.1°C. His cardiovascular physical examination was unremarkable, and no evidence of connective tissue disorder and vasculitis was apparent.
He and his family history were unremarkable for cardiovascular disease, vasculitis, and connective tissue diseases including Marfan syndrome. He had undergone video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) for bilateral spontaneous pneumothorax 3 months before and for left pneumothorax 2 months before at the former hospital.
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with ST-segment elevation in leads I, II, III, aVF, and V2 to V6 . Laboratory investigations showed an elevated white blood cell count at 25.0 × 109/L (normal value: 3.3–8.6 × 109/L) and a normal level of C-reactive protein at 0.1 mg/L (normal value: 0.0–1.4 mg/L). Creatine kinase (CK), CKMB, and troponin I were within normal limits at 75 U/L (normal value: 59–248 U/L), 17 U/L (normal value: 0–20 U/L), 0.01 ng/mL (normal value: 0.00–0.09 ng/mL), respectively. Chest X-ray revealed a slightly enlarged cardiac silhouette . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed significant pericardial effusion of which Hounsfield unit was approximately 50 HU, suggesting that it might be high protein fluid or bloody. There was no evidence of pulmonary embolism or aortic dissection. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a large pericardial effusion with normal left ventricular size and function with an ejection fraction of 68% (Videos 1 and 2).
Based on the clinical history and the ECG findings, our working diagnosis was pericarditis of unknown origin. The differential diagnosis included infectious pericarditis (viral or tubercular) and non-infectious pericarditis (autoimmune or autoinflammatory diseases, pericardial injury syndromes, and malignancies).
We managed him with a conservative strategy, including treatment with ibuprofen. On the third day after admission, echocardiogram showed decreasing pericardial effusion and ECG showed improvement of ST elevation. Laboratory investigations for bacteria, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and collagen vascular diseases were negative. His course was carefully monitored because he was young and had near-fatal event. On the morning of the day 12, we confirmed that the pericardial effusion had decreased. On hospital day 13, he experienced sudden severe chest pain after vomiting, became diaphoretic, and developed cardiogenic shock. An echocardiogram revealed the pericardial effusion to have increased to > 30 mm with tamponade physiology. He underwent emergent pericardiocentesis and drainage of 300 mL of blood (haemoglobin of the fluid was 12.8 g/dL). Bacterial cultures and cytology were negative. A full body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positive emission tomography scan for detecting malignancies revealed no significant FDG uptake. Coronary angiography showed a 2 mm saccular-shaped pseudoaneurysm in the posterolateral (PL) branch of right coronary artery (RCA) (Video 3). We recognized that rupture of the coronary pseudoaneurysm caused the acute haemopericardium. Based on his past medical history, we speculated that the coronary pseudoaneurysm was caused by trauma associated with prior procedures for pneumothoraces.
We treated the coronary pseudoaneurysm by percutaneous management with coil embolization. The procedure was performed via the right femoral artery approach. Using Runthrough NS floppy (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) guidewire with Heartrail II JR3.5 catheter (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), the guidewire and Excelsior SL-10 (Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA) microcatheter were successfully inserted to the PL branch of RCA (, ). One detachable coil; 2 mm × 8 mm Trufill DCS Orbit® (Codman Neurovascular, Raynham, MA, USA) was delivered through a microcatheter (, ). A final angiogram showed obliteration of blood flow to the pseudoaneurysm (, ).
The patient experienced chest pain for 1 day after the procedure, although post-procedural echocardiogram did not show any abnormality (, and ). He had no symptoms on the second post-procedural day. Post-procedural electrocrdiogram showed inverted T waves in leads III, aVF . He was discharged 12 days after the procedure.