A 4-year-old male was brought to the emergency department with a 2-week history of headache, lethargy and vomiting. CT and MRI brain revealed a 4.5-cm fourth ventricular lesion with associated obstructive hydrocephalus . Preoperative bloodwork showed no abnormalities, with normal liver function, platelet count and coagulation profile.
A preoperative dose of 20 mg/kg of 5-ALA (Gliolan) was administered on the morning of surgery (weight 19 kg). The patient underwent insertion of a right frontal external ventricular drain, followed by suboccipital craniotomy, C1 laminectomy and complete resection of the lesion. The tumour fluoresced avidly intraoperatively. There was moderate intraoperative blood volume loss (400 mL); 2 units of red cells and a pool of Octaplex were transfused during the procedure. The patient was positioned prone for a total of 6 h. Immediate postoperative imaging revealed complete radiological resection with no new abnormalities seen. Histological examination of the resected specimen confirmed an anaplastic ependymoma (WHO grade III).
The patient was successfully extubated after postoperative MRI on the day of surgery. He remained in the paediatric intensive care unit for monitoring.
Laboratory results on postoperative day 1 revealed a platelet count of 5 × 103/mL with a significant transaminitis (AST 3027 iU/L; ALT 2367 iU/L). The patient was haemodynamically stable and neurologically intact with GCS 15/15.
Despite the liver injury, there was no evidence of acute hepatic failure with PT only modestly elevated (16 s) and no evidence of encephalopathy. Despite treatment with platelets, plasma and red cell transfusions as well as tranexamic acid, vitamin K and fibrinogen, the acute thrombocytopaenia persisted and the patient’s haemoglobin level dropped progressively from 13.5 to 8 g/dL over 36 h. Liver biochemistry results had also worsened with AST peaking at 7198 iU/L and ALT at 4496 iU/L.
On postoperative day 2, the patient’s external ventricular drain became blocked with blood clots, and he became drowsy. The right pupil became dilated and non-reactive. CT brain showed a new spontaneous right frontal intraparenchymal haemorrhage with intraventricular extension as well as acute subdural haematoma . The patient was brought to theatre for emergency craniectomy and evacuation of the haemorrhage. Intraoperative bleeding was difficult to control, and the massive transfusion protocol was enacted. Eventually, once haemostasis was achieved, the patient was brought back to PICU for ongoing management. The transaminitis improved over the following days and the thrombocytopaenia also resolved.
Autologous cranioplasty was performed 1 month later. The patient then received adjuvant proton-beam therapy and chemotherapy. Three months later at outpatient follow-up, the patient was noted to be neurologically intact aside from a very subtle weakness of his left hand. Blood results were all within normal range. He was attending school full-time once again and had made an almost complete clinical recovery.