Clinical finding
A 28-year-old male presented with right preauricular, painless swelling for 9 months. The swelling was gradually increasing in size. On examination, superficial swelling was found, which measured 4.8 cm × 4.0 cm in size, firm in consistency, mobile, smooth surface, regular border, and nontender. There was no sign of facial nerve deficit. He did not have any family history of cancer or history of radiation exposure.

Management
The patient was advised for head-and-neck ultrasound and FNAC of the preauricular swelling. USG showed a heterogeneous, hypoechoic mass with well-defined border on the right side of the superficial lobe of the parotid gland. These radiological findings suggest the diagnosis of a benign tumor in the parotid gland.

A FNAC was performed in the preauricular or parotid swelling. According to the Milan system for reporting salivary gland cytology, the FNAC of the parotid gland was categorized as IV – neoplasm. After that, a superficial parotidectomy with facial nerve preservation was performed under general anesthesia. Then, the parotidectomy specimen was sent to the pathology department for histopathological examination.

Histopathology
A parotidectomy specimen was received grossly as a multiple nodular mass measuring 6.2 cm × 4.3 cm × 2.0 cm. It cuts firm. The cut surface showed multiple small nodular solid yellowish-to-whitish areas. Microscopic examination of hematoxylin and eosin stained section showed malignant tumor islands that composed of an admixture of different types of malignant tumor cells, including malignant acinar cells, clear/vacuolated cells, intercalated duct-like cells, and nonspecific glandular cells. These tumor cells are arranged in solid and microcystic patterns that infiltrate into the sclerotic stroma. Malignant acinar cells are large polygonal cells with abundant basophilic granular cytoplasm and eccentrically placed small hyperchromatic nuclei. Intercalated duct-like cells are cuboidal cells with amphophilic cytoplasm with centrally placed dark nuclei. Nonspecific glandular cells have vesicular nuclei with eosinophilic cytoplasm. Sheets of malignant tumor cells are also traversed by very delicate blood vessels. There is no evidence of necrosis. The morphological diagnosis was hence, as the differential diagnosis of ACC and secretory carcinoma (SC). After that, we performed a special stain PAS-D, which showed abundant PAS-positive diastase-resistant cytoplasmic granules in the malignant acinar cells. On further IHC, DOG-1 was positive with cytoplasmic expression in tumor cells, while mammaglobin was not expressed in tumor cells. This special stain and IHC almost confirmed the diagnosis of ACC in the parotid gland. Currently, the patient has remained disease-free with no signs of recurrence.
