A 19-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to our emergency department with a critical ischemia of his right ring finger due to a crushing injury. His finger had been caught between a car and a car-jack while he was working as a mechanic. The first physical examination of the ring finger revealed an open wound of 3 cm on the dorsal side of the middle phalanx. Edges of the wound reached the ulnar and radial digital neurovascular bundle. The patient reported decreased sensibility of the end phalanx including painful range of motion (ROM) but without loss of function of all tendons. We found a restricted finger blood flow detected by nail bed compression in comparison with the uninjured fingers. An X-ray showed an undislocated transverse fracture of the middle phalanx . The patient was immediately transferred to the operating room (OR) where the wound was examined. Severe damage of the surrounding soft tissue was seen. Microscopic examination revealed no defect of the crushed vessels, the radial digital nerve was intact, but an epineural lesion was apparent for the ulnar digital nerve. A minimal osteosynthesis with two Kirschner-wires (K-wires) was performed. X-ray imaging showed an anatomical retention and fixation of the fracture . The dorsal wound of the ring finger was cut out and sutured. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the fourth day without any sign of wound healing disturbance. The ring finger was immobilized with a finger splint including the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIP) and distal interphalangeal joint (DIP).
The patient was seen five months after initial treatment in our Out-Patient Clinic and reported painful moving of the right ring finger. The examination showed an instability of the middle phalanx with a passive lateral movement. Twenty degrees ulnar deviation of the ring finger with decreased ROM of the PIP joint (E/F 0-0-60˚) was apparent. In addition, the ring finger tended to cross over and overlap the adjacent finger when making a fist. The patient reported that ulna deviation of the ring finger started when K-wires had been removed by an office-based orthopedic surgeon two months after the initial surgery.
Since that time the finger was fixed again with a splint. He also complained about tingling, coolness and numbness of the injured finger. Since the X-ray showed a nonunion we started treatment with a LIPUS device (Fa. Melmak GmbH, Munich, Germany) three times daily for 20 minutes including the following parameter configuration:
Average intensity I = 30 mW/cm² (SATA), ultrasound frequency F = 1.5 MHz, signal impulse duration 200 microseconds, repetition rate 1 kHz, effective radiating area 3.88 cm2, temporal average power 117 mW.
The ring finger was immobilized with a fitted personalized thermoplastic splint for six weeks. Six weeks after LIPUS treatment the patient reported to be without pain when moving his ring finger and clinical examination revealed a slight persistent ulna deviation of five degrees. The clinical examination showed a stable middle phalanx compared to the result six weeks previously. After four weeks of physiotherapy the ROM of the PIP joint was E/F 0-0-85° and the fist closure was full , except for the pre-existent limited ROM of the DIP-Joint (E/F 0-0-15˚). An X-ray confirmed fracture healing and calcification of the soft callus was clearly evident .