A 40-year-old man was taken to the local hospital by his office supervisor by foot due to concerns over moving a foreign object impaling his chest (A). As soon as the emergency physician noted that an ice pick was penetrating the man’s left chest, we established an intravenous line while preventing the object from moving from its original position, and an ambulance took the patient to our emergency department.
On examination, the patient’s general condition was not critical (Glasgow Coma Scale score 15, respiratory rate 24 breaths/min, blood pressure 123/79 mmHg, heart rate 76 beats/min, oxygen saturation 100% on 2 L nasal cannula, and body temperature 37.2 °C). The patient would not reveal the actual cause of the injury. An interview with his family disclosed no history of depressive disorder, pharmacological treatment, substance use, or alcohol abuse, but the patient had a history of several pneumothorax injuries, one 10 years prior and two a year prior to this episode. In all episodes, he had been hospitalized for several days for chest drainage and discharged without any complications. Considering his condition, we strongly suspected a self-inflicted injury. However, our patient denied any suicidal ideation, depressive mood, or hopelessness. His family members described him as a quiet and gentle person who did not behave impulsively.
Cardiovascular auscultation was unremarkable without murmurs or gallops. Chest X ray demonstrated a clear lung field without pneumothorax or hemothorax (B). Emergency echocardiography disclosed a small amount of pericardial effusion without cardiac tamponade. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed linear metallic density in the pulmonary trunk and a small amount of pericardial fluid (A–D). Pneumothorax or bulla was not seen on chest CT. Based on the diagnosis of penetrating cardiac injury, we transferred the patient to the operating theater after cardiac surgery consultation.
We placed the patient in the supine position. After performing a full median sternotomy, the pericardium was opened. There was a small amount of pericardial effusion that seemed to be mixed with blood. The ice pick had been stuck in the main pulmonary artery (MPA) through the pericardium without any injury to the left lung or internal thoracic artery. Heparin was given and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was commenced with ascending aortic and bicaval cannulation. The patient was cooled down to 32 ° Celsius. After aortic cross clamping, the cardioplegia was infused into the aortic root to obtain cardiac arrest. A longitudinal incision was made in the MPA, and we carefully removed the foreign body, which was lodged through the MPA from the anterior to posterior wall near the annulus of the pulmonary valve without injury to the left main coronary trunk. The holes made by the ice pick were closed using 5-0 polypropylene suture. The MPA was closed using 4-0 polypropylene over and over running suture. After rewarming and deairing, the aortic clamp was removed. The patient’s sinus rhythm came back spontaneously. CPB weaning was smooth, and protamine was given. The chest was closed in a normal fashion. Postoperative recovery was uneventful.
A police investigation showed no criminal events associated with the injury. Although the patient denied stabbing himself with the ice pick, we strongly suspected the penetrating cardiac injury was self-inflicted and consulted the psychiatric department on day 7 to closely monitor the patient during hospitalization. During the psychiatric counseling sessions after the surgery, the patient continued to stubbornly deny a suicide attempt. At 16 days POD, the patient was discharged to home without psychiatric follow-up.