A 52-year-old Hispanic woman from Kern county, southern California, with a past medical history of gastroesophageal reflux disease, osteopenia, complex regional pain syndrome of the right upper extremity status post-carpal tunnel release surgery, lumbar spondylosis at L5-S1, and iron deficiency anemia, presented to her primary care physician for the evaluation of tender erythematous nodules on her thighs that had been present for approximately 1 month. Based on the clinical appearance and the geographical region of presentation, the patient was suspected of having erythema nodosum secondary to valley fever (coccidioidomycosis). The patient was prescribed fluconazole 200 mg daily, pending results from serological testing for coccidioidal immunoglobin M (IgM) and immunoglobin G (IgG). However, there was no improvement when the patient returned for a follow-up visit after 30 days of treatment. Additionally, the coccidioidal IgM and IgG tests were negative. Thus, treatment with fluconazole was discontinued and the patient was referred to a pulmonologist, who ordered tests to rule out sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, and thrombosis.

The following results were obtained: angiotensin 1-converting enzyme levels (<5 U/L) (reference range: 9–67 U/L); QuantiFERON tuberculosis gold (interferon-gamma release assay [negative]); activated partial thromboplastin time (27 s); prothrombin time (9.6 s); international normalized ratio (0.9); and von Willebrand factor antigen (121 IU/dL). Based on these results, sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, and thrombosis were ruled out and no definitive diagnosis was made. The patient was then referred to a dermatologist, who suspected a diagnosis of LET based on clinical presentation. A punch biopsy of the skin lesion measuring 0.4 × 0.4 × 0.5 cm was taken from the right lateral thigh.

The histopathology report on the punch biopsy was as follows: “superficial and deep perivascular and interstitial mononuclear inflammatory cell infiltrate with increased dermal mucin deposition. Periodic acid-Schiff staining was negative for fungal organisms; colloidal iron (mucin stain) showed increased dermal mucin deposition. There was no evidence of vasculitis or malignancy.” The histopathologist commented that these findings would be compatible with connective tissue disease/LET or an interstitial variant of granuloma annulare in an appropriate clinical setting. To arrive at a definitive diagnosis, the histopathologist advised to correlate clinical findings with serologic studies and to perform a direct immunofluorescence study to rule out morphea versus LET. Direct immunofluorescence study of a biopsy of the lesion, measuring 0.3 × 0.3 × 0.6 cm which was taken from the right lateral thigh, showed no specific immune deposits. Due to the high index of suspicion of LET, and its association with other autoimmune conditions, especially systemic lupus erythematosus, the patient was subsequently referred to a rheumatologist.

The rheumatologist’s physical examination demonstrated a left thigh nodule, and the right thigh exhibited warmth, erythema, and tenderness to palpation. A full screening for autoimmune diseases was done, which included the following diagnostic studies: complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, c-antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody, p-antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody, anti-nuclear antibody, proteinase-3 antibody, beta-2-glycoprotein IgG/IgM/IgA, cardiolipin IgG/IgM/IgA, anti-Ro antibodies and anti-La antibodies, anti-Smith antibody, ribonucleoprotein antibody, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, complement C3 and complement C4, dilute Russell’s viper venom time, thyroid peroxidase antibody, double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid antibody enzyme immunoassay, cyclic citrulline peptide antibody IgG, rheumatoid factor, and thyroid-stimulating hormone. Remarkably, all diagnostic studies were within normal limits, except the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, which was elevated at 39 (reference range: <25 mm/h). Thus, based on clinical, laboratory, and histopathological findings, LET was diagnosed, and other autoimmune conditions were ruled out. The patient was treated with hydroxychloroquine 200 mg daily and she showed significant improvement within 2 weeks of the follow-up visit.