A 70-year-old male patient with no remarkable medical history presented to our emergency department with chest pain of 10 days’ duration. His initial vital signs showed sinus tachycardia (100 to 110 b.p.m.), a blood pressure of 134/85 mmHg, and a body temperature of 36.7°C. No heart murmur, no crackle and no rub detected by physical examination during first day of admission. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm with ST-segment elevation and PR-segment depression on multiple leads . A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed normal left ventricular function and pericardial effusion without vegetations. The amount of pericardial effusion was large (>500 mL). Nevertheless, no compression of the right side of the heart due to pericardial effusion was observed . Laboratory data showed elevated inflammation markers [white blood cell count 13 600/μL; neutrophils 87% (upper limit of normal ≤9000/μL); C-reactive protein, 16.1 mg/dL (normal range ≤0.3 mg/dL)], and normal cardiac enzyme levels [creatine kinase 40 U/L (upper limit of normal ≤150 U/L); high-sensitivity troponin T 0.007 ng/mL (normal range ≤0.014 ng/mL)]. Chest X-ray showed mild cardiomegaly. The patient’s symptoms and the TTE and ECG findings led to a diagnosis of viral acute pericarditis, and colchicine and loxoprofen were initiated. His fever worsened on Day 7, and a blood culture was performed. Pericardiocentesis was performed on Day 8, draining 800 cc of bloody fluid, which on analysis showed 15 000 white blood cells (62% polymorphonuclear cells, 38% mononuclear cells), total protein 6.1 g/dL, lactate dehydrogenase 998 U/L, and glucose 20 mg/dL. Cytology, histology (cell block), and a mycobacterial culture showed no evidence of malignant pericardial effusion and tuberculous pericarditis. On Day 11, the blood and pericardial fluid cultures were positive for P. micra, and purulent pericarditis was diagnosed. A dental examination revealed decayed teeth, and intravenous antibiotic therapy (ampicillin-sulbactam 3 g every 6 h) and dental treatment were initiated. Although pericardial drainage was performed, the spiking fever persisted. Chest computed tomography (CT) performed on Day 14 showed an abscess cavity in the pericardial space around the right atrium (RA) and a trabecular shadow suggesting vegetation in the RA . Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) on the following day revealed vegetation with severe mobility (19.2 mm × 9.2 mm) in the RA near the abscess cavity ( and Videos and ). No vegetations were observed at the tricuspid valve or in the left side of the heart. Emergency surgery was performed via a median sternotomy. The surgical findings demonstrated frank pus in the abscess cavity and on the RA surface. After a pericardiotomy was performed and the abscess cavity communicating with the RA was removed, minor bleeding from the RA was observed. The surface of the RA was dented, very fragile, and easily penetrated. A cardiopulmonary bypass was therefore established, and large vegetation was observed in the RA . The vegetation, infected RA wall, and trabeculae carneae were removed, and the tricuspid valve and right ventricle were inspected carefully but showed no vegetations. The culture of the pus in the abscess cavity detected P. micra. Post-operatively, the patient improved clinically and was given intravenous ampicillin-sulbactam 3 g every 6 h for 4 weeks. Coronary CT angiography performed due to transient changes in ST-segment on the ECG monitor during the surgery showed no stenotic lesions. During follow-up, chest CT and TTE showed no recurrence of the abscess cavity or vegetations at 4 months post-operatively (Video ), and the patient experienced no recurrence of infection or signs of constrictive pericarditis at 6 months post-operatively.