A 57-year-old man with a previous history of hypertension and stroke was referred to our hospital with transient episodes of dizziness, diplopia, and left-side numbness for 2 weeks. Each episode lasted for 5 to 30 min without unconsciousness and then completely relieved. After the onset of these symptoms, the patient was first admitted to a local hospital where he received optimal medical therapy including dual antiplatelet agents (aspirin 100 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day) and risk factor modifications. However, the patient still experienced another two episodes of TIAs under optimal medical treatment. His radiological examination in the local hospital suggested multifocal intracranial and extracranial atherosclerosis (data not shown). The patient was, therefore, transferred to our hospital for further management. After admission, the patient underwent a series of diagnostic evaluations. Neurological examination showed no permanent neurological disability with a National Institute of Health Stroke Scale score of 0. Laboratory tests including blood routine examination, hepatorenal function, lipid profile, homocysteine level, glycosylated hemoglobin level, and coagulation function were all normal. Multimodal computed tomography (CT) was also performed, and non-contrast CT demonstrated a hypodensity lesion in the left thalamus . CT angiography (CTA) showed proximal non-tapered occlusion and distal severe stenosis of the left VA , and that the right VA did not converge with the left VA into the basilar artery . Based on these findings, the diagnosis of TIA due to VA occlusion was made. Since the patient had recurrent neurological symptoms despite optimal medical management, endovascular recanalization of the left VA was recommended.
The procedure was performed under local anesthesia. After the femoral artery puncture, an 8F artery sheath was inserted, and the patient was intra-arterially heparinized to achieve an activated clotting time of more than 250 s. An 8F guiding catheter (Cordis, Florida, USA) and a 5F diagnostic catheter (Cordis, Florida, USA) were delivered to the left subclavian artery proximal to the VA ostium under the guidance of a 0.035-in loach guidewire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). After retracting the loach guidewire, an initial digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed via the diagnostic catheter, which demonstrated non-tapered occlusion of the V1 segment and severe stenosis (approximately 80%) of the V4 segment of the left VA. In the beginning, multiple attempts were performed with the coaxial assembly of a PT 0.014-in micro guidewire (Boston Scientific, Boston, USA) and an Excelsior SL-10 microcatheter (Stryker, Michigan, USA) to facilitate navigation across the occluded segment but failed . At the moment, robust deep cervical collateral to the distal V3 segment of the left VA and a tapered stump of the distal part of the occluded segment were noted . Therefore, the exchange of a Synchro 0.014-in micro guidewire (Stryker, Michigan, USA) was performed to reach the distal V3 segment through the left deep cervical artery, which then reversely traversed the occluded segment to the left subclavian artery successfully (, ). A Neuro RX 2.75 × 15 mm balloon (Sinomed, Tianjin, China) was subsequently advanced to the VA ostium along the micro guidewire to dilate the occluded segment . After balloon dilation, the occluded segment was successfully recanalized but remained in severe stenosis . We retracted the balloon and advanced a 5F intermediate catheter (Tonbridge, Zhuhai, China) with a Transend 0.014-in micro guidewire inside (Stryker, Michigan, USA), which passed the recanalized segment and was placed in the left VA and posterior cerebral artery. DSA revealed severe stenosis of the V4 segment and antegrade filling of the basilar artery and both posterior cerebral arteries . Under the guidance of an angiogram, a NOVA 4.0 × 15 mm balloon-expandable stent (Sinomed, Tianjin, China) was implemented in the stenotic segment (, ). To prevent restenosis of the V1-V2 segment, a RX 4.0 × 18 mm balloon-expandable stent (Abbott, California, USA) and a Bridge 4.0 × 18 mm rapamycin drug-eluting stent (Microport, Shanghai, China) were consecutively implanted in the recanalized segment . Finally, the 8F guiding catheter, intermediate catheter, and micro guidewire were carefully retracted.
After the procedure, the patient underwent a repeated CTA examination, which indicated successful recanalization of the left VA . Dual antiplatelet therapy and risk factor control strategies were continued in this patient. During the follow-up of 3 months, the patient reported no neurological symptoms. summarizes the timeline of the present case.