A 33-year-old man developed diarrhoea 1 day after eating fried pork with chili and fever the next day, with a body temperature of 40 °C. The results of blood and faecal cultures were positive for Salmonella Dublin. Influenza A virus, influenza B virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, respiratory syncytial virus, Haemophilus influenzae, varicella-zoster virus, Legionella, Campylobacter and SARS-CoV-2 tests were all negative. The patient developed drowsiness after 3 days, with gradual weakening of the limbs, dysarthria, binocular abduction paralysis, and ataxia. His brain MRI scan was normal. After 5 days, the patient could not raise his limbs. These symptoms were accompanied by liver function damage and myocardial damage. After 7 days, the patient still had weakness of the limbs and dysarthria. However, as other indicators improved, he was transferred from the Intensive Care Unit ward to the Neurology ward. Physical examination of the nervous system mainly showed flaccid paralysis of the limbs, disappearance of the bilateral tendon reflex, inability to speak, ataxia (bilateral limb paralysis limited the ability to assess gait), and positive bilateral Babinski signs. At that time, lumbar puncture results for intracranial pressure, CSF protein, and CSF cell number were normal, and the CSF was cultured for 3 days with no bacterial growth. On re-examination, the brain MRI and cervical MRI were normal. As BBE was suspected clinically, IVIg therapy (0.4 g/kg) was given for 5 days, but the patient’s symptoms did not improve significantly. Twenty days after admission, lumbar puncture examination showed that the protein content had increased by 0.86 g/L (the normal range is 0.08–0.43 g/L); the cell number was normal (the number of nucleated cells was 6, normal range 0–8; the red blood cell count was 0), CSF and serum anti-GQ1b antibody was negative, and CSF anti-MOG, anti-AQP4, and anti-MBP antibodies were all negative. The results of electrophysiological examination were normal (14 days and 60 days after onset). Considering no obvious improvement, at 21 days, he was given IVIg again at the same dose for 5 days. The patient’s symptoms gradually improved, and he was able to start walking on his own. His limb collateral movement was significantly better than before, his eye movement was normal, and his voice was low. The patient’s speech could be heard clearly, and he was given speech rehabilitation training. After 3 months, the patient could walk 10 m without assistance but was unable to run (the grade of the GBS disability scale was 2) . His speech also returned to normal.