A 66-year-old man was admitted to the clinic of a primary care doctor complaining of a sudden deterioration in right hypochondoralgia persisting for 2 weeks. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a right adrenal hemorrhage and an abnormal tumor in the upper lobe of his left lung. He was subsequently referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
His past medical history and family history were unremarkable. He was a current smoker with a history of 46 pack-years. An enhanced CT scan showed a massive shadow in the left lung S1 + 2 progressing to S6 beyond the lung lobe, with a maximum diameter of about 42 mm , and a right adrenal hematoma with no active bleeding . The laboratory data revealed a slight elevation in carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, 5.6 ng/mL) and neuron-specific enolase (NSE, 18.52 ng/mL). The patient had mild anemia (hemoglobin, 10.3 g/dL).
A diagnosis of the pulmonary lesion using a bronchoscopic trans-bronchial lung biopsy showed no evidence of malignancy; therefore, a CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy was performed. The pathological examination showed a non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that was suspected to be a pleomorphic carcinoma. The adrenal lesion was diagnosed as a nonfunctional tumor based on endocrine examinations and adrenal medulla scintigraphy (123I-MIBG). 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed the accumulation of FDG not only in the left lung nodule (SUVmax, 17.0) but also in the right adrenal one (SUVmax, 4.1) . Together, these results suggested a diagnosis of NSCLC and adrenal metastasis, and the clinical stage was classified as cT2bN0M1b, stage IV (TNM classification 7th edition).
Because there was a risk of rebleeding from adrenal metastasis, we performed a right adrenalectomy. We considered that a complete resection of the primary lung cancer would be possible since the adrenal metastasis was an oligometastasis. A pathological analysis of the lung tumor demonstrated areas of atypical cells with eosinophilic cytoplasms as well as sarcomatous component, with extensive necrosis . Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/3, CAM5.2, CK7, and p63 (partial) but negative for 34βE12, CK20, TTF-1, calretinin, and D2-40. The adrenal tumor was similar in pathologic and immunohistochemical analyses . Thus, the final diagnosis was pleomorphic carcinoma of the lung with an adrenal metastasis, pT2bN0M1b, stage IV (TNM classification 7th edition).
The patient received chemotherapy as stage IV NSCLC (60 mg/m2 of cisplatin on day 1 and 40 mg/m2 of TS-1 twice a day on days 1 to 14, repeated every 4 weeks). After two courses, he decided to quit the intravenous chemotherapy because of adverse events, general malaise, and anorexia. We suggested to receive oral chemotherapy, but he refused to take TS-1 because he feared adverse events. Consequently, he began taking UFT (600 mg/day) and continued this treatment for 2 years. He has survived without any recurrences for 6 years since the surgery.