An 84-year-old man presented to the emergency room with gross haematochezia for several days and shortness of breath for 1 month. His medical history was significant for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) on warfarin, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus and chronic kidney disease.


Investigations

Bloodwork was obtained, and his haemoglobin level was 86 g/L, mean corpuscular volume was 92.1 fL international normalised ratio was 3.4, serum creatinine was 1.5 mg/dL, albumin was 2.7 g/dL and liver function tests were normal. His vital signs were within normal limits.

He was transfused one unit of blood, warfarin was held and he received 10 mg of intramuscular vitamin K. CT showed circumferential thickening of the ascending colon. Colonoscopy confirmed a circumferential, friable mass in the ascending colon. Biopsies demonstrated poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, and mismatch repair testing showed loss of expression of MLH1 and PMS2. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen was normal at <0.5 ng/mL. Lower extremity duplex demonstrated no acute DVT, and anticoagulation was discontinued. Haemoglobin was 87 g/L at discharge and he had no further haematochezia or melena.

The patient was referred to surgical oncology clinic, where he reported dyspnea with minimal exertion and appeared short of breath. Electrocardiogram demonstrated T-wave inversion in the lateral leads, and echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 41% with akinesis of the basal anterolateral and mid-anterior walls. He was evaluated by cardiology and was initiated on diuretics. The diagnostic and therapeutic treatment of choice was coronary angiogram with percutaneous coronary intervention, but this intervention was contraindicated in the presence of active gastrointestinal bleeding since placement of a stent would require dual antiplatelet therapy which could exacerbate bleeding.


Treatment

The patient was discussed at a high-risk anaesthesia multidisciplinary conference. All attendees agreed that the patient’s poor cardiac status was risk prohibitive for an upfront colectomy and he was referred to radiation oncology for treatment of bleeding prior to coronary intervention. Because the patient was not a candidate for chemotherapy, he received a palliative dose of 30 Gy of external beam radiation in 10 fractions without complication.

The patient had no further haematochezia and his symptoms improved with diuresis. He underwent coronary angiogram which showed two-vessel disease with an occluded proximal left anterior descending artery which was treated with a bare metal stent. He received dual antiplatelet therapy for 4 weeks, and then continued aspirin alone.

The patient was re-evaluated in surgical oncology clinic and appeared to be an appropriate surgical candidate after these interventions. Repeat staging CT showed no evidence of metastatic disease and improvement in colonic thickening. After discussion with the patient and his family, and consultation with the anaesthesia and cardiology teams, resection was recommended due to the potential risk for bleeding and obstruction if the tumour was left in situ. Six months after initial diagnosis, the patient underwent robotic-assisted right hemicolectomy with an intracorporeal ileocolic anastomosis. He had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on postoperative day 3. Final pathology demonstrated complete pathologic response with no residual tumour, and no tumour in 18 lymph nodes harvested.

The patient did not require adjuvant chemotherapy.


Outcome and follow-up

The patient is alive and doing well from a cardiac standpoint with no evidence of disease recurrence at 12 months after surgery and 18 months after initial cancer diagnosis.