A 48-year-old man noticed a swelling around his left wrist two and a half years ago. The swelling gradually increased in size over 6 months. Radiograph of the wrist showed a lytic lesion in the distal radius having typical soap bubble appearance. He was diagnosed to have a giant cell tumor of the distal radius. His chest radiograph at the time was normal. He underwent left distal radius curettage and bone cement placement 2 years back. The Histopathological examination of excised tissue showed mononuclear stromal cells, macrophages, and multiple multinuclear giant cells, thereby confirming the diagnosis of GCT. The patient then had a recurrence of the swelling after 6 months of the surgery. Radiographs and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) suggested recurrence of tumor. His chest radiograph at this time also was normal. He underwent left radius resection, fibular grafting, and wrist arthrodesis one and a half years ago . Resected tissue on histopathological examination showed features consistent with GCT. He developed wound necrosis and so underwent abdominal flap cover and flap division surgeries within 3 months of the surgery. Patient now presented to us with complaints of multiple swelling in the region of his left wrist for the past 6 months. Patient did not complain of pain in the region. He did not have any history of loss of appetite/ loss of weight. He did not notice swellings anywhere else in the body.
On examination, there were multiple bony swellings over the left distal forearm and wrist region, involving the volar and dorsal aspect, radial and ulnar sides, with the largest swelling being of the size 4 cm × 3.5 cm . The swellings were hard in consistency and non-tender. The abdominal flap over the distal forearm and wrist was found to be healthy. Healed surgical scars from previous surgeries were also present over the dorsal aspect. The fingers were sensate and capillary refill in the fingers was satisfactory. However grip strength (Left - 12 kg, right - 34 kg) and pinch strength (left - 4.5 kg, Right - 7.5 kg) were decreased on the left side. The Quick DASH score was 57.75. There was no lymphadenopathy and systemic examination was found to be normal.
All routine blood investigations were found to be within normal limits. Radiographs revealed a lytic lesion in the fibular strut graft, causing ballooning of the medial cortex and breach of the lateral cortex. The lesion had destructed most of the fibular strut graft including the distal portion which was fixed to the carpal bones by a k-wire. The instability at the wrist joint, had caused the plate to break. Swellings were also visible within the soft tissue of the distal forearm, involving volar and dorsal aspects of the forearm. Patient was diagnosed to have a recurrence for GCT for the second time. It was classified as Grade 3 (aggressive) as per Campanacci classification system and Enneking classification system owing to the cortical breach and soft tissue extension. Further work up was done, chest radiograph and Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the thorax revealed multiple canon ball lesion in bilateral lungs, suggesting a metastasis of GCT. The patient however did not have any respiratory complaints. We obtained the opinion of an oncologist, who advised metastasectomy. We then performed an excision of the tumor, removal of plate and k-wire, and applied a wrist spanning external fixator . The resected tissue on Histopathological examination again revealed mononuclear stromal cells, macrophages and multiple multinuclear giant cells, thereby confirming a recurrence of the GCT. The patient was not willing for metastasectomy. The patient followed up with us for a period of 18 months following the surgery. We found no clinical, radiological evidence of recurrence. The metastatic lesions in the lungs were not found to have increased in number or size, while the patient remained asymptomatic.