A 24-year-old virgin Persian woman presented with a labial mass that had emerged 12 years earlier and grown gradually in size, but caused no pain or discomfort until recently. Her medical history revealed no evidence of any underlying disease or mental disorder. She had a Bachelor’s degree and was unemployed. Menarche occurred at the age of 11 years, and the patient’s menstrual cycle was regular. She had no family history of breast or gynecological cancer. A pedunculated mass measuring 75 × 44 mm was observed in the upper left labium and looked exactly like a penis. Its texture was relatively soft, the skin temperature normal, and the lesion had clear boundaries with no ulceration . There was no connection between progressive growth of the lesion and the patient’s menstrual cycle. The lesion was asymptomatic during menstruation. The patient sought no medical advice until she experienced discomfort in the genital area and had difficulty standing up and sitting down. At admission, her vital signs were blood pressure 115/75 mmHg, pulse rate 73 beats per minute, temperature 36.8 °C, and O2 at 99%. Chest examination was normal and she was well oriented. Breast and abdominal examinations were normal. Axillary and supraclavicular lymph nodes could not be palpated. The patient reported no pain on palpation and had no enlarged lymph nodes in the groin.
Ultrasonography of the lesion revealed a hyperechoic mass with clearly defined margins, internal echoes, and fibroglandular tissue measuring 70 × 40 mm in size. On pelvic ultrasound, there was no abnormality in the uterus and the ovaries. Blood, urine, and serology tests were normal.
We decided to perform a resection of the mass, which was then completely removed under local anesthesia and sedation . The tissue was sent for pathological examination. No postoperative complications were encountered. The patient was discharged from the hospital after a few days.
The pathological investigation revealed a benign lesion. It was an accessory breast composed of female breast tissue, with a proliferative and dilated ductus lined with two layers of endothelial and myoepithelial cells in fibrotic stroma, and invaded by mononuclear inflammatory cells . She was reviewed in the gynecology outpatient clinic at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 10 months post-surgery. Examinations confirmed full recovery with no evidence of recurrence.