A 27-year-old woman with no relevant medical history presented to the emergency department with 15 days of lower limb oedema and a history of oliguria. She reported a weight gain of approximately 5 kg in the past 15 days. On physical examination, she presented hypertensive crisis with bilateral oedema, jugular engorgement, basal crepitations in both pulmonary bases, and stage II oedema with pitting in all four limbs. The admission test showed metabolic acidosis with elevated anion gap, leukocytosis, neutrophilia, normocytic/normchromic anaemia without transfusion criteria, severe hyperkalaemia, KDIGO 3 acute renal injury, and hyperkalaemia electrocardiographic changes. Given the initial approach of hypertensive emergency with a compromised kidney versus a nephritic syndrome, medical management was initiated and, due to refractoriness, haemodialysis was decided in the nephrology department. Further studies with renal ultrasound showed chronic parenchymal process with signs of exacerbation. The patient also had an increase in calcium and phosphorus profile with increased PTH, autoimmune profile with only one positive P-ANCA result (1/160), and negative infectious profile. Clinical evolution showed persistent signs of overload and progressive deterioration of renal function, and glomerulonephritis was considered rapidly progressive. Treatment started with intravenous corticosteroid pulses for 3 days, plasmapheresis (7 sessions) and continuation of renal replacement therapy. Renal biopsy showed glomerulonephritis with increasing and extracapillary proliferation mediated by P-ANCA, and immune complex mediated glomerulonephritis with membranoproliferative pattern superimposed, which is consistent with full-house disease. Due to satisfactory clinical evolution after the first dose of cyclophosphamide, she was discharged for continuation of immunosuppressive treatment and renal replacement therapy with haemodialysis.

Five days after leaving the hospital, the patient was readmitted with a cough with purulent expectoration associated with fever, asthenia and adynamia. The physical examination showed crepitations in both pulmonary bases and stage I edema in the lower limbs. The patient suffered progressive deterioration of the respiratory pattern, had anemia requiring transfusion, findings in the imaging examinations with areas of glass-like opacity and multilobular infiltrates. Antibiotic coverage (cefepime) was initiated and a bronchial brush was performed that detected macroscopic alveolar hemorrhage. The patient presented progressive deterioration of the ventilatory pattern, with the need for orotracheal intubation and transfer to the intensive care unit. After presenting a poor clinical evolution, the patient died.

Microbiological screening studies (blood culture, urine culture, bronchoalveolar lavage culture) were negative. The family did not authorize an autopsy.
