A 55-year-old Caucasian obese woman (body mass index = 35) was admitted to Surgical Department of our institution for acute abdominal pain. Her past medical history was negative for previous gastrointestinal disease or surgery. She was on medical therapy for hypertension, type II diabetes, and minor depression. Glasgow coma scale was 15. She referred an increasing acute abdominal pain risen 5 hours ago after a fish-based dinner. She has showed an acute diffuse peritonitis. White blood cell count was 32.000 U/μL, with neutrophilia (90%); other blood tests were in normal range. Body temperature was 39.2°C. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with 92 heart rate. Chest X-ray was normal. Abdominal X-ray showed free subdiaphragmatic air. CT scan confirmed the suspicion of small bowel perforation because of the finding of free fluid in the abdomen and an inhomogeneous mass in the small bowel. A nasogastric tube was placed, and it drained 50 mL of biliogastric material. Because of her status, she was immediately ran to the theater for exploratory laparotomy under general anesthesia and oral intubation. Although each clinical finding suggested a colonic or caecum perforation, during the systematic exploration of the bowel loops, surgeons found free intestinal fluid in the abdomen, fecal peritonitis, and (at 60–70 from ileocaecal valve) a 3 cm linear tear of the ileum which was caused by the curve edge of a shell mussel . The foreign body was completely extracted from the lumen through the hole , and the breach was sutured with simple double-strand stitches of polyglactin 3/0 parallel to the bowel tearing. Abdominal cavity washing was carried out with 2 liters of saline. Two drains were placed on suction for 24 hours. Antibiotic therapy (ciprofloxacin, meropenem, and metronidazole) and nil by mouth regimen were started. Patient was admitted in Intensive Care Unit for 12 hours, the weaning from the ventilator, and she was discharged at home in healthy status from the ward on the sixth postoperative day. At the 30-day follow-up, the patient was in good clinical condition, surgical wounds were completely sealed, blood tests were normal, and bowel function was recovered.