The patient was admitted for recurrent lower extremity edema for 9 mo, abdominal distension for 7 mo, and aggravation for half a month.
A 53-year-old rural Chinese woman visited Dafang County People’s Hospital. Symptoms began to appear nine months ago, during which edema and abdominal distension of both lower extremities recurred, and these gradually worsened during the previous two months. Our initial liver function examination showed elevated alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total bilirubin (TBIL), direct bilirubin (DBIL); decreased albumin/globulin (ALB/GLO) ratio . Examination of blood cells indicated decreased white blood cells (WBCs), red blood cells (RBCs), hemoglobin (HB), and platelets (PLTs) . Examination of coagulation function indicated an increased international normalized ratio (INR), prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), and decreased fibrinogen (FIB) . An upper abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed liver cirrhosis . Examination of thyroid function showed an elevated level of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and a decreased level of free triiodothyronine (FT3) . We therefore initially considered a diagnosis of “decompensated stage of cirrhosis and subclinical hypothyroidism”.
She tested negative for hepatitis viruses and negative for autoimmune hepatitis, and the cause of cirrhosis was unknown. She was subsequently hospitalized twice for abdominal distension with yellow staining of the sclera, but these symptoms resolved after administration of a liver protectant and a diuretic to reduce swelling. After discharge, she still reported repeated abdominal distension and discomfort, which gradually became worse from 2020 Oct 1. Since the initial presentation, her liver function indexes have fluctuated. The thyroid function tests indicated a decreasing level of triiodothyronine (T3) and an increasing level of TSH, indicating progression from subclinical hypothyroidism to clinical hypothyroidism.
She reported loss of vision 30 years ago, with no obvious cause, and had no history of long-term heavy drinking, taking a Chinese medicine, exposure to toxic substances, surgery, or trauma.
We designated the index patient as proband II-1, and analyzed her pedigree . She had five siblings (3 sisters, 2 brothers), all of whom had night blindness, and one sister (II-4) was completely blind. Her parents had no night blindness or impaired vision, but their marriage was consanguineous (first cousins).
We performed serum biochemical examinations of the father (I-1) and all siblings . The mother (I-2) was too old to travel to our institution for testing. The AST level was elevated in all 7 individuals, and fasting blood glucose was decreased in the father and 4 siblings. Two siblings had elevated levels of high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and one had a low level. The T3 Level was low in two siblings, and the TSH level was high in three siblings. Some of the siblings also had elevated levels of TBIL and apolipoprotein A-I (APOA1).
CT examinations showed that neither the father (I-1) nor the mother (I-2) had cirrhosis . Sibling II-2 had cirrhosis , but siblings II-3, II-5, and II-6 did not . Abdominal color ultrasound indicated that sibling II-4 had a fatty liver.
A physical examination indicated she had a BMI of 22.22. There was also evidence of chronic liver disease, visible spider nevi, and palmar erythema. She had no vision in either eye, and no K-F rings in the corneas. A cardiopulmonary examination showed no obvious abnormalities. Her abdomen was slightly distensible and was positive for shifting dullness. There was moderate pitting edema in both lower limbs.
2020 Oct 14: Blood lipid analysis indicated an HDL of 1.42 mmol/L. Hepatitis A virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus related tests were all negative.
2021 Jan 17: All antibody tests for autoimmune liver diseases were negative.
2021 Jul 16: Examination of ascites indicated the Rivalta test was negative, the WBC count was 50 × 106/L, total protein (TP) was 5.50 g/L, adenosine deaminase (ADA) was 3.4 U/L, glucose (GLU) was 8.71 mmol/L, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 48.8 U/L.
2020 Oct 15: Color Doppler ultrasonography of the thyroid showed bilateral thyroid cysts.
2020 Oct 23: A plain CT scan of the upper abdomen with enhancement showed cirrhotic ascites with splenomegaly .
We suggested more extensive examination of a liver biopsy to clarify the cause of cirrhosis, but this was not possible because the patient did not consent. The index patient was one of 6 siblings; II-2 was similar (night blindness complicated with cirrhosis and hypothyroidism), II-5 was completely blind in both eyes, and the other three had obvious night blindness. We considered the possibility of GLD, and suggested molecular genetic analysis. After receiving informed consent, we collected peripheral blood samples for whole-exome sequencing . The results indicated the presence of the deletion/insertion mutation C.802-8_810delinsGC (homozygous) in the cytochrome P450 4V2 (CYP4V2) gene and the transcoding mutation C.413dupA (heterozygous) in the dual oxidase activator 2 (DUOXA2) gene. The same CYP4V2 mutation was present in I-1, I-2, II-2, II-3, II-5, II-6, II-3, and II-5 also had the DUOXA2 mutation. Patient II-4 did not receive genetic testing because he lived in Tianjin.