A 62-year-old Caucasian man with diabetes presented with low back pain that he had been experiencing for four months.
An MRI of his pelvis, including his right sacroiliac joint and pelvic floor muscles, revealed osteomyelitis of the pubic symphysis and extensive pelvic osteomyelitis.
Pus obtained from his right sacroiliac joint, as well as several pieces of his sacrum, grew P. aeruginosa.
As is usually done in severe infection with Pseudomonas, our patient was given double antibiotic therapy for almost two months. His treatment consisted of two types of antibiotics to which the pathogen was susceptible (seven weeks of intravenous ciprofloxacin and piperacillin and/or tazobactam).
At present, available data are limited to extensive, life-threatening infections such as in the case of our patient. The literature, however, consists of cases supporting the long-term administration of ciprofloxacin monotherapy in bone infections caused by Pseudomonas after an initial period of combination therapy . Because of the high probability of infection recurrence, our patient continued with high-dose oral ciprofloxacin (1 gram twice a day) for 20 months. Repeat MRIs confirmed a marked improvement of his inflammation, which subsequently led us to stop his antibiotic therapy.
The quantitative stool cultures of our patient were studied after 20 months of treatment with oral ciprofloxacin. After incubation at 37°C under aerobic and anaerobic conditions for two to five days, qualitative and quantitative analyses of the cultures were performed. The cultures yielded 3 × 106 CFU/mL of Escherichia coli, 107 CFU/mL of Enterococcus faecium, 2 × 104 CFU/mL Staphylococcus epidermidis, 6 × 104 CFU/mL of Corynebacterium group A, 2 × 103 CFU/mL of Bacillus stearothermophilus, 1010 CFU/mL of Bacteroides uniformis, 2 × 109 CFU/mL of Prevotella oralis, 5 × 108 CFU/mL of Prevotella loescheii and 3 × 104 CFU/mL of Candida albicans.
Susceptibilities of aerobes and anaerobes to antibiotics were performed for five randomly selected colonies of all bacterial isolates using the disk diffusion method recommended by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) . As expected, E. coli was resistant to ciprofloxacin and the rest of the fluoroquinolones tested. The population of E. faecium, meanwhile, was resistant to the fluoroquinolones but sensitive to vancomycin. Repeat stool cultures were taken one month after the discontinuation of our patient's antibiotics treatment, and the same method was performed. There was a marked increase in the Enterobacteriaceae population with E. coli at up to 5 × 108 CFU/mL. The Gram-negative flora was enriched with Klebsiella pneumoniae (5 × 106 CFU/mL) and Enterobacter cloacae (6 × 107 CFU/mL). The susceptibility of E. coli to fluoroquinolones was restored, while K. pneumoniae and E. cloacae were also found to be fully susceptible to fluoroquinolones. A small population of enterococci (E. faecalis 1.5 × 106 CFU/mL and E. avium 2 × 106 CFU/mL) was reported as being intermediately sensitive to the fluoroquinolones but fully sensitive to vancomycin. The yeast population decreased from 3 × 104 CFU/mL to 8 × 103 CFU/mL, while the anaerobic population remained basically unchanged.