A 60-year-old female patient was hospitalized for swelling and pain in the left lower extremity for 5 days. It was reported that, 5 days ago, the patient experienced swelling of thigh, which gradually spread to the lower leg, and increased local skin tension and temperature. The patient had no fever, shortness of breath, chest pain, cough, expectoration, hemoptysis, amaurosis, or syncope; no special relevant medical, family, psycho-social past histories, and no history of chronic lower limb symptoms, even during her previous pregnancy. Deep vein ultrasound of the lower extremity at local hospital reported thrombosis of left common femoral vein, superficial femoral vein, deep femoral vein, popliteal vein, anterior tibial vein, posterior tibial vein, and intermuscular vein for the first time. She had no history of surgery or catheterization. On physical examination, her heart rate was 88 bpm, and blood pressure was 130/74 mmHg. Examination of the left lower limb revealed swelling and edema with moderate tenderness and pain, while the right lower limb was normal. Blood tests revealed normal blood routine and normal liver and kidney functions. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) indicated compression of LCIV by RCIA, narrowed LCIV lumen, thrombi formed from the femoral vein to left external iliac vein, and collateral circulation formed between bilateral external iliac vein . She was diagnosed with DVT along with MTS.
The patient underwent IVC angiography, filter placement, left iliac vein plasty, and stent implantation under local anesthesia. The right femoral vein was punctured successfully with Seldinger technique and then placed into the catheter sheath. Contrast agent was passed smoothly through IVC without filling defect . The sheath of the filter was transported, and a Cordis Optease filter was placed in the IVC at second lumbar vertebrae , followed by puncturing of the left femoral vein. The catheter sheath was then inserted; angiography revealed severe stenosis of the left external iliac vein and the common iliac vein, and the pelvic collateral compensation was seen through contralateral reflux . A 14 mm - 60 mm balloon was inserted into the IVC through a narrow segment of left external iliac vein and common iliac vein . Then, an E-lunimexx 14 mm - 60 mm self-expanding stent was inserted . The stent was in good position, and the expansion remained satisfactory . The contrast medium was passed through smoothly, and the original stenosis was relieved. At the end of the operation, the sheath of the bilateral inguinal area was removed, and the wound was dressed with a bandage. The patient returned to the ward safely and tolerated well, and was discharged 5 days after the surgery. The patient was prescribed with oral rivaroxaban and aspirin. After 28 days of the surgery, she came back to the hospital for the removal of IVC filter. This procedure was successful. The DVTs were ablated after 4 months of anticoagulation therapy.