A 42-year-old man presented to Feiz Eye Hospital with sudden persistent painless loss of vision in April 2013. He had been diagnosed with GPA 10 months before. His presenting symptoms at that time were high fever and left eye redness along with nasal congestion, sinonasal obstruction, breathing difficulties, and joint pain. Laboratory tests revealed proteinuria. After physical examination, laboratory investigations, kidney biopsy, and imaging studies, GPA was diagnosed. The patient was hospitalized and treated with cyclophosphamide for 14 days. On discharge, he was prescribed high dose corticosteroid (prednisone: 100 mg daily) as a maintenance therapy.
The patient's symptoms improved until April 2013, when sudden severe visual loss in the left eye caused admission to the hospital. The patient described the sudden appearance of a black spot in his vision that spread all over his left visual field in 1 minute. He also had severe headache, redness of the left eye, and pain for three days.
In the ophthalmologic examination, visual acuity of the right eye was 10/10 and the left eye had only light perception. Relative afferent pupillary defect was positive in the left eye. Slit lamp examination was normal in the right eye but in the left eye there was a 4 mm round, fixed and painless mass in the upper eyelid . Conjunctiva was hyperemic, and an area of 2 mm necrotizing nodular scleritis in superonasal quadrant was noted . The cornea, iris, lens and vitreous cavity were normal. Intraocular pressure of the left eye was normal. Dilated funduscopic examination showed a white, swollen retina, particularly in the posterior pole, with a cherry-red spot. There was arterial attenuation and intravascular segmentation of the blood column in the posterior pole, but no emboli were noted [Figures and ].
The patient's description of painless, sudden loss of vision and appearance of the cherry-red spot on examination of the fundus indicated. Therefore, we gave him nasal O2, and performed ocular massage and paracentesis of the anterior chamber. The patient was hospitalized for 7 days and was treated with intravenous cyclophosphamide as per internal medicine consult. Aggressive lubrication of the ocular surface and frequent instillation of topical steroids and cycloplegics was prescribed. After several weeks, eyelid nodule and scleritis improved, but vision loss remained.