A pregnant female, 34 years old, fourth gestation primiparity with current pregnancy estimated at 25 weeks of amenorrhea (WA) + 5 days, diabetic for 1 year, initially on oral antidiabetic drugs and then insulin therapy, hypertensive for 2 years on alpha methyldopa with a history of 3 miscarriages secondary to hypertensive peaks.
During the 4th pregnancy, the patient was hospitalized at 20 WA in the endocrinology department for an etiological assessment of a hypertensive crisis at 180/110 mmHg associated with headaches, palpitations and hot flashes, without proteinuria or edema.
In front of these symptoms the diagnosis of a secretory neuroendocrine tumor is suspected, and a biological assessment including urinary and plasma catecholamines (metanephrine and normetanephrine) came back positive after eliminating other causes of secondary hypertension (nephropathy, renal artery stenosis or hyperaldosteronism), by renal evaluation, renal artery Doppler ultrasound and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system exploration.
Urinary dosages showed Metanephrines at 0.87 μmol/24 h (normal: 0.20–1), high Normetanephrine 24.14 μmol/24 h (normal: 0.4–2.10), While plasma dosages showed a Metanephrine level of 0.10 nmol/l (normal: < 0.33 nmol/l), a high level of Normetanephrine of 14.02 nmol (normal: <1.07 nmol/l). A thyroid workup was performed to rule out multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) returning normal: TSH 1.821 (normal: 0.340–5.330), anti-thyroperoxidase Ac < 0.8 IU/ml (normal <0.8).
Abdominal-pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showing an abdominal latero-aortic mass measuring 36 * 33 mm, corresponding to paraganglioma without any other obvious location .
For evaluation of maternal and fetal impact of the tumor:
Clinical examination including cardiovascular examination was normal. With an ECG that did not show rhythm or repolarization disorders or left ventricular hypertrophy.
A standard biological workup (blood cell count, platelet count, hemostasis, blood ionogram, blood sugar-HBA1c, renal and hepatic function) was unremarkable.
On the obstetrical level, the clinical examination and the obstetrical ultrasound showed a monofetal pregnancy with no uterine or fetal abnormalities.
After placing the patient on medical treatment and scheduling her for surgery, she was declared discharged with an ambulatory follow-up. At 25 weeks of amenorrhea; the patient was admitted to the operating room for laparoscopic removal of her paraganglioma.
In the operating room, considering the risk of perioperative morbidity related to severe per and postoperative hemodynamic instability (hypertensive crisis with sometimes rhythm disorder, coronary ischemia, left ventricular failure and hypotension secondary to a sudden release of catecholamines: to stress, painful stimulation due to intubation and incision, insufflation and manipulation of the tumor, abrupt and profound hypotension by sudden decrease of catecholamines at the fall of the part and venous clamping) and in front of the obligation to maintain a uterine perfusion and a good oxygenation of the fetus while avoiding maternal hypoxemia, the anesthetic management was as follows:Monitoring:
Hemodynamic: heart rate (HR), blood pressure (BP)
Respiratory: respiratory rate, pulse oxygenometry (SpO2), capnography.
ECG and ST segment monitoring.
Cardiac output monitoring by pulse wave contour analysis.Left jugular venous line (for central venous pressure monitoring and vasoactive drugs perfusion) A right femoral arterial line with invasive arterial pressure monitoring Heating of the patient to prevent hypothermia
After installation of the patient in left lateral decubitus proclive 30°, a pre-oxygenation was started, and an anesthetic induction was done by: 150mg Propofol 150μg Fentanyl, 50 mg Atracurium 50mg; intubation by tube No. 6.5 cm; maintenance of anesthesia was provided by: Propofol IVOC system with concentration of: 2ug/ml.
Maintenance of etCO2 32–35 mmHG with insufflation pressures not exceeding 12 mmHG (8–10 mmHG) and close monitoring of blood glucose due to the risk of blood glucose imbalance.
During tumor manipulation 3 episodes of arterial hypertension peaks were observed) (180/110–195/120-200/130 mmHg controlled by reinforcement of analgesia by reinjections of fentanyl 50 μg, deepening of anesthesia (Propofol concentrations 3.5 μg/ml), and administration of Nicardipine at 1–3 mg/h. Glycemia: varied between (0.98–1.21 g/l)
The tumor removal was followed by episodes of arterial hypotension (75 -45 mmHg), the conduct was to lighten the anesthesia, a volemic expansion with administration of norepinephrine at 2mg/h.
For paraganglioma extraction, the procedure lasted 2 hours [, ]., with an intraoperative diuresis of 500 ml and bleeding estimated at 80 cc.Norepinephrine infusion was gradually decreased and stopped just before extubation.
The patient was subsequently extubated with the following parameters BP: 140/75 mm hg HR: 90bpm, SaO2 100% and then sent to the intensive care unit for clinical and biological monitoring. Postoperative analgesia was started with paracetamol, nefopam and morphine. The antihypertensive treatment was resumed in front of the reappearance of hypertensive peaks.
An obstetrical evaluation with a foeto-placental ultrasound immediately and 6 hours after the operation returned normal with the presence of fetal heart activity .
2 days after the postoperative hospitalization in the intensive care unit, the patient was weaned from all drugs with good evolution and was transferred to the visceral surgery department for further management.
This cases report follows SCARE guidelines 2020 .