A 37-year-old woman presented to our hospital with complaints of blurred vision in the right eye for 10 months. She had no family history of hereditary ocular diseases and no previous history of eye surgery or ocular trauma. In addition, the patient had bilateral varus deformity of distal interphalangeal joints on the little fingers. Also, her sister was born with uterus didelphys.
The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was hand motion in the right eye and 20/33 in the left eye. The refraction was + 4.25/− 0.50 × 90 in the left eye. Horizontal corneal diameters were apparently enlarged in both eyes (the right eye 14 mm/ the left eye 13.88 mm). Applanation intraocular pressure (IOP) were normal in both eyes. Main measures of the present case are summarized in Table .
Anterior segment photography showed mild iridal atrophy of both eyes, which subsequently lead to insufficiently dilated pupils with diameters no more than 5 mm. White cataract was observed in the right eye . Inspection by anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) (Cornea/Anterior Segment OCT SS-1000, Tomey Corporation, Japan) indicated bilateral augmented anterior chambers with backward iridal concavity on horizontal orientation, although the backward concavity in the right eye was markedly reduced before the surgery because of the swelling cataractous lens; while on vertical orientation iris revealed rather flat . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) (MEDA MD-300 L) showed opacified lens with the apparently elongated suspensory ligaments in the right eye. Partially peripheral anterior synechiae and pectinate ligaments at anterior chamber angle were also observed in both eyes. Ciliary processes were small and scleral processes were not apparent under UBM inspection .
On the basis of the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with bilateral anterior megalophthalmos complicating white cataract in the right eye.
The operation was performed by an experienced surgeon (Y.L.). A 2.6 mm temporal clear corneal incision was made under topical anesthesia. Viscoelastic agent (DisCoVisc, Alcon, Fort Worth, TX, USA) was then instilled to maintain the anterior chamber with small pupil. Following a continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis of 5.5 mm in size, hydrodissection, chopping, nucleus rotation, and phacoemulsification (CENTURION Vision System, Alcon, Fort Worth, TX, USA) were then performed. A 1-piece foldable IOL (+ 20.5 D, Human Optics PC Acrylic IOL, MC X11 ASP) with four frame haptics to increase intracapsular stability, was inserted into the capsular bag. After aspiration of residual viscoelastic, the incision was hydrated with balanced salt solution and checked for water tightness. Gentle operation was emphasized intraoperatively considering zonular weakness and the deep anterior chamber as the infusion bottle height was set to 75 cm and the phacoemulsification was carried out in a slow-motion mode (vacuum: 300 mmHg; aspiration flow rate: 28 cc/min). Postoperatively, Cravit Eye Drops (Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, TX, USA), Pred Forte Eye Drops (Allergan Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Dublin, Ireland), and Diclofenac Sodium Eye Drops (Shenyang Xingqi Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Shenyang, China), all 3 times a day for 4 weeks, were given.
One month after the surgery, the uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) and BCVA of the right eye improved to 20/25 and 20/20. The actual postoperative refraction was + 1.50/− 0.50 × 115 in the right eye and the actual postoperative spherical equivalent (SE) was + 1.25 D. The IOP of the right eye was 18 mmHg. Postoperative inspection by AS-OCT indicated a low degree of IOL decentration and iridal backward concavity still remained on horizontal orientation with flat iris on vertical orientation . OPD-Scan III aberrometry (Nidek Co, Ltd, Gamagori, Japan) verified increased internal coma and tilt aberrations indicating slight dislocation of IOL after surgery . Three months after the surgery, the visual acuity and the refractive status of the operated eye were stable and the IOP remained within normal range (15.0 mmHg OD and 17.8 mmHg OS). The IOL also showed good centering and stability during the follow-up.
The postoperative refractive error equals to the actual postoperative SE (+ 1.25 D) minus the predicted refraction calculated by IOL power calculation formulas as following:
In this case, we originally used the SRK/T formula for IOL power calculation and the postoperative refractive error turned out to be + 1.44 D during the follow-up. To find the most accurate power calculation formula with lowest postoperative refractive error for the challenging anterior megalophthalmos cases, we further applied the Haigis and Holladay II formulas .
The postoperative refractive error decreased to a rather low value as − 0.05 D after using the Haigis formula. As to the Holladay II formula, the postoperative refractive error was + 0.63 D. Therefore, compared to the SRK/T and the Holladay II formulas, the Haigis formula may be a more suitable choice according to our case, with higher accuracy and lower postoperative refractive error concerning to the IOL calculation in anterior megalophthalmos.
For genetic analysis, we obtained the blood samples of the patient, her son and her parents for whole-exome sequencing based on family to identify any gene mutations directly related to anterior megalophthalmos. However, no known or newfound related gene mutations were found .