The patient was a 38-year-old non-smoking Japanese woman with no significant medical history. She was diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma of the right breast, and in August 2020, we performed partial right breast resection and axillary lymph node dissection. Her post-operative diagnosis was pT2N2aM0 pStage IIB, ER(+) PgR(+) HER2(−), and she was administered her first course of chemotherapy with (5-Fluorouracil 500 mg/m2), epirubicin hydrochloride (100 mg/m2), and cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2) (FEC) every 3 weeks in mid-September.
A day before receiving the second course of chemotherapy, she had a fever of 38.0 °C. The next morning, her fever had alleviated, and she visited our outpatient department. She had no cough at this point. Her blood test showed no abnormalities; therefore, we administered a second course of chemotherapy. As an antiemetic agent, she received 8 mg/day of dexamethasone on days 1–4 and an aprepitant on days 1–3. According to our hospital’s standardized treatment, on day 3, she received a shot of peg-filgrastim (3.6 mg).
On days 5 and 6 after the administration of chemotherapy, she had a fever ranging from 39–40 °C. On day 7, she tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
The next day, she was admitted to our hospital for treatment. Her main symptoms were cough and high temperature. Additional symptoms included fatigue and mild joint pain. She did not show any signs of hypoxemia. Laboratory tests revealed the following findings: white blood cell count, 1600/μL with 77.0% neutrophils, 17.0% lymphocytes, 3.0% monocytes, 1.0% eosinophils, 2.0% basophils; hemoglobin, 12.6 g/dL; platelet count, 140,000/μL; and C-reactive protein 3.62 mg/dL. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed ground-glass opacity in the peripheral lesions of both lungs . Chest X-ray indicated infiltrative shadows in the peripheral lesions of both lungs . She was diagnosed with COVID-19 with grade three leukopenia and grade two neutropenia. Antibiotic therapy (levofloxacin 500 mg every 24 h, taken orally) was administered after collecting blood cultures.
Antibiotic therapy was discontinued after a blood test showed normalization of her white blood cell count on day 5 after the diagnosis. Intermittent cough and high temperature persisted until day 8 after the diagnosis. After confirming that at least 72 h had passed, since her last episode of fever, she was discharged 12 days after the diagnosis (day 19 after the administration of chemotherapy Fig. ).
The patient visited our outpatient department 2 weeks after discharge for a chest X-ray and blood test follow-up. The blood test indicated the normalization of inflammatory markers, and the chest X-ray images showed benign organized pneumonia in the peripheral lesion of both lungs, matching the ground-glass opacities seen in the CT before .
In considering resumption of chemotherapy, we consulted a pulmonologist. Since no criteria exist, we were advised based on clinical experience, to defer resumption until at least 2 weeks had passed after discharge. Taking this into account, we decided to resume anti-cancer therapy after adequately informing the patient about the risks and benefits. FEC therapy every 3 weeks was resumed on day 25 after discharge (day 43 after the last administration of the chemotherapy). The patient was able to complete four courses of the initial chemotherapy without any major adverse events, and we were able to institute docetaxel (70 mg/m2) every 3 weeks as the second regimen of chemotherapy. Organized pneumonia was eclipsed in the follow-up chest X-ray image taken at the beginning of docetaxel therapy . She completed four courses of docetaxel without any major adverse events.