A 56-year-old man with no history of tobacco use or alcohol consumption presented with a three-month history of an enlarging left-sided neck mass and worsening headaches. A positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed an [18 F]fluorodeoxyglucose FDG-avid soft tissue density at the left tongue base measuring approximately 1.8 × 2 cm, a centrally hypodense hypermetabolic left level IIB nodal conglomerate measuring 3.6 × 4 cm, and multiple bilateral hypermetabolic cervical lymph nodes, without evidence of distant metastasis. Brain MRI was negative for brain metastasis.
The patient underwent a core biopsy of the left neck level II node which read as a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma consistent with small cell carcinoma.
Core biopsy of the left neck level II node revealed sheets of malignant cells with small to intermediate-sized nuclei, indistinct nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm consistent with SCC. The tumor exhibited areas of necrosis as well as abundant mitotic figures and apoptotic bodies. The neoplastic cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, synaptophysin, p16, and TTF-1 with a nuclear staining pattern; they were negative for cytokeratin 5/6, CAM 5.2, p63, chromogranin, CD56, and EBV (by in-situ hybridization) .
The tumor was positive for p16, but the combined morphologic and immunophenotypic features argued against conventional HPV-associated OPSqCC. Polymerase chain reaction demonstrated that the tumor was positive for HPV16, negative for HPV18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 59, 66, and 68.
The tumor was staged T1N2cM0 (stage IVA). A percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube (PEG) was placed before the beginning of treatment to meet his nutritional and hydration needs during treatment. He received four cycles of chemotherapy at 21 day-intervals. The chemotherapy regimen consisted of cisplatin 75 mg/m2 on day one and etoposide 80 mg/m2 on days one to three. On cycle two, day eight, he started radiotherapy to the oropharynx and involved neck nodes. He received a dose of 70 Gray (2 Gy/fraction) over a seven week-period. During the concomitant phase of chemo-radiation, the patient experienced grade IV mucositis, grade II nausea, and dehydration for which he received additional outpatient fluid and electrolyte replacement. Due to grade III neutropenia, the dose of cisplatin and etoposide was reduced by 25% during the last cycle of chemotherapy.
Three months after completion of therapy, a PET/CT showed complete resolution of the tumor and metastatic lymph nodes along with and no evidence of distant metastasis . He also had complete resolution of his mucositis and was able to resume a full oral diet resulting in removal of the PEG tube.