A 70-year-old man visited our emergency unit with chief complaints of epigastric pain and vomitus niger 2 h after the onset of symptoms. After consultation in our hospital, the patient had black vomit. His blood pressure was 168/109 mmHg, pulse was 73 bpm, and body temperature 36.7 °C. For abdominal findings, he had rebound tenderness, although tenderness was present in the epigastrium. With regard to significant medical history, he had Mallory–Weiss syndrome, high blood pressure, and hyperlipidemia detected 14 years ago, as well as removal of Helicobacter pylori 2 years prior. For relevant lifestyle history, the patient claims to drink five cups of coffee, consumes 360 cc of alcohol each day, and is currently a non-smoker (quit smoking 10 years ago). He is currently medicated with oral antihypertensive agents. Results of his blood tests revealed white blood cell count of 13,560/ml and C-reactive protein of 0.3 mg/dl.
Contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed empyema and fluid retention in the mediastinum . There were no abnormal findings such as fluid retention and pneumothorax in the thoracic cavity. Upper GI series (with Urografin) detected leakage of contrast media into the mediastinum from the lower intrathoracic esophagus on the left side . We repeated plain CT scans following the upper GI series and confirmed leakage of contrast media into the mediastinum from the site just above the cardia to the tracheal bifurcation. Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with spontaneous esophageal rupture and we decided to perform emergency surgery. Because the location of the perforation was suspected to be the left side of the lower esophagus, the patient’s vital sign was stable, and the area of perforation was localized to the mediastinum, laparoscopic transhiatal simple closure was chosen. We performed the procedure 11 h after the onset of symptoms.
The ports were inserted using the 5-hole approach. No abnormal findings were found in the abdominal cavity. It was found that contamination was mainly on the left side, and we initially searched for perforation placement from the left side of the esophagus. We removed a volume of tissue equivalent to three quarters of the circumference of the esophagus from the dorsal esophagus to the right dorsal esophagus. A perforation of 2 cm in diameter was observed at the site of the rostral portion at approximately 4 cm from the esophageal hiatus . No intrathoracic perforation was observed. Endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract was performed during surgery, and from the esophageal lumen, it was confirmed that this was the site of perforation. The perforation was closed with three stitches using 3–0 absorbable sutures . Before concluding surgery, the mediastinum was irrigated with saline and two drains were inserted into the subdiaphragm around hiatal space transperitoneally. The total operative time was 178 min, and the total volume of bleeding was 2 ml.
After surgery, the two drains were used for intermittent suction, and we continued treatment with proton pump inhibitor (30 mg, 2 times a day) and antibiotics (MEPM 1 g, 3 times a day). The patient started ambulation on the first postoperative day. His white cell count was normalized on postoperative day 4. The gastric tube was removed with fluoroscopic guidance. Antibiotics were discontinued on postoperative day 6. Oral intake of food was initiated on postoperative day 7, and after shifting meals to a solid diet, recovery was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 15 and continued proton pump inhibitor therapy as an outpatient. Healing cicatrization was found at the site of rupture by endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract . The patient was advised to improve his lifestyle. He showed no signs of recurrence two or more years after surgery.