A 63-old man presented to our Ophthalmology Unit of “SS. Annunziata” Hospital, Taranto, complaining of low visual acuity in both eyes and ocular discomfort for about two years.

His ophthalmic history was unremarkable. His uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) measured with Snellen charts was 20/100 in the right eye (RE) and 20/200 in the left eye (LE), while his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/50 in the RE and 20/100 in the LE. A history of amblyopia in his left eye was reported.

Slit-lamp examination revealed a horizontal gray-whitish band across the central cornea in both eyes, sparing the peripheral cornea and the limbus. No other pathological findings were observed.

He was diagnosed with CBK secondary to occupational exposure to mercury vapors, since he was a worker of steel industry.

Fundus examination was not possible. The anterior segment OCT (AS-OCT) showed a thickness corneal opacity of 150 um in both eyes.

This study adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Ophthalmology Unit of “SS. Annunziata” Hospital Review Board. The patient provided informed consent for all procedures and their possible complications were explained. The patient gave informed consent for the publication of any case details and accompanying images. The IRB of the Ophthalmology Unit of “SS. Annunziata” Hospital, Taranto gave the approval for the publication of this case report.

The tomographic maps (Precisio2®, iVIS Technologies, Taranto, Italy) showed in both eyes an irregular corneal morphology due to the presence of the opacity.

Our first attempt was performing EDTA chelation procedure which removed the superficial calcium plaques. Two months after the procedure, the UDVA had improved to 20/80 in RE and to 20/100 in the LE, but the cornea was not completely clear, with residual stromal haze. The EDTA chelation procedure had no effect on the deeper calcium deposits and the tomographic maps showed irregular corneal surface. For this reason, a combined treatment with PRK and PTK was scheduled in both eyes in order to recover visual acuity and minimize surgical invasiveness.The customized treatment was determined by taking into account the following parameters: spherical error, some biometric data including anterior chamber depth, axial length; corneal morphological irregularity index (CMI) measured by tomographer (Precisio2®, iVIS Technologies, Taranto, Italy); pupillometry (pMetrics®, iVIS Technologies, Taranto, Italy).

CMI, measured in μm, is a parameter which indicates the aberrations above the second order of the anterior and posterior corneal surface. It is strongly correlated to the quality of vision of the patient: the more the CMI, the worse the quality of vision.

The customized ablation is achieved using a ray tracing-based software. Ray tracing is based on the Snell law of refraction and allows the evaluation of the pathway of light rays after their passage through the eye from the anterior corneal surface to the retina. In this way, it is possible to know the exact refractive contribution of each surface and fully customize excimer laser ablation. This is achieved by not performing a full regularization of the anterior corneal surface; instead, a small amount of aberration on the anterior corneal surface is left to compensate for the posterior surface aberrations which are of opposite sign. In fact, the posterior corneal shape introduces posterior corneal morphological irregularities, which partially compensate for the anterior ones.

In this way, the ray tracing algorithm optimizes the quality of vision and at the same time minimizes the consumption of stromal tissue.

We decided to perform the surgery first on the right eye and then after 20 days on the left eye. The surgery was performed using topical anesthesia (oxybuprocaine eye drops, Benoxinato Cloridrato, Alfa Intes S.r.l). We decided to use a no-touch approach in order to have less postoperative pain and faster re-epithelialization. The surgery was executed with the iRes™ excimer laser, working with flying-spot of 650µm at 1000Hz (iVis Technologies S.r.l).

The customized ablation profile obtained had a refractive zone of 5.60 mm in RE and 5.50 mm in LE, and a connecting zone of 8.90 mm in RE and 9.60 mm in LE. The cumulative ablation stromal depth was 34 μm in both eyes.

Following surface ablation, PTK with a frequency of 10% was carried out with masking agents (1% hydroxymethylcellulose) to smooth the ablated surface, with a depth of 80 μm.

To avoid any kind of corneal haze, 0.02% Mitomycin C (MMC, 0.2 mg/mL, diluted in BSS®) was applied over the ablated area for 20 seconds. At the end of the procedure, a soft therapeutic contact lens was placed. The therapeutical postoperative regimen consisted in topical dexamethasone and amikacin eye drops given four times a day for a week. The patient was then put on 0.1% fluorometholone eye drops and artificial tears eye drops for 12 weeks, which were tapered gradually. The patient was examined the day following surgery, and additional follow-up visits were carried out at one week, two weeks, one, three, and six months, respectively.

At the 1-week follow-up visit the contact lens was removed, with a complete epithelial healing. On slit lamp examination the clarity of the ablated area was notably improved.

AS-OCT scans and topography were performed at 1 week, 1, 3 and 6 months after treatment.

At the 1-month follow-up the final uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) improved from 20/200 to 20/20 in right eye and to 20/63 in the left eye.

CMI decreased from 15 μm to 3 μm in RE and from 21 μm to 11 μm in LE, and minimum corneal thickness was reduced from 567 μm to 533 μm in RE, and from 574 μm to 540 μm in LE.

The improved visual acuity was maintained at 3-month follow-up and 6-month follow-up, with the patient fully satisfied. The corneal clarity remained during the 6 months follow-up.

The postoperative follow-up was uneventful. The ablation map and topographic changes of both eyes were reported.