A 62-year-old man presented to his local hospital after 1 month of mucous and bloody stool and 2 weeks of worsening abdominal pain. He had leukocytosis (1.4 × 104/μL), thrombocytopenia (6.4 × 104/μL), and elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN; 71 mg/dL) and serum creatinine (2.56 mg/dL) levels. The patient was admitted with a suspicion of sepsis secondary to intraabdominal infection, and broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy was initiated. However, his condition deteriorated, and after 7 days, he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) at Chiba University Hospital.
On admission to the ICU, the 165.3 cm tall patient weighing 99.3 kg was fully conscious (Glasgow Coma Scale E4V5M6), but he had a tendency to somnolence. His blood pressure was 154/103 mm Hg, heart rate 115/minutes, respiratory rate 30/minutes, body temperature 37.9 °C, and SpO2 96% on room air. The conjunctiva and skin were icteric. The chest was clear to auscultation. There was abdominal distention with mild hypogastric tenderness but no sign of peritoneal irritation. There was pitting edema in the upper and lower extremities. The white blood cell count was 1.2 × 104/μL, C-reactive protein level was 23.9 mg/dL, and procalcitonin level was 8.92 ng/mL, which were consistent with a diagnosis of bacterial infection. The platelet count had dropped to 3.8 × 104/μL, and the prothrombin time was 41% with a fibrin degradation product level of 53.1 μg/mL, indicative of coagulopathy. The lactate dehydrogenase level was 392 IU/L, aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase levels were 50 and 17 IU/L, respectively, and also total and direct bilirubin levels were 6.2 and 4.6 mg/dL, respectively; however, other indicators of hemolysis, including anemia and schistocytosis, were absent. The BUN had increased to 92 mg/dL and the creatinine level was stable at 2.09 mg/dL. The CH50 level was 40.6 U/mL (normal range: 30–50 U/mL), the C3 level was 85 mg/dL (normal range: 65–135 mg/dL), and the C4 level was 23 mg/dL (normal range: 13–35 mg/dL).
The patient's clinical course is summarized in the Fig. . Since a stool culture test on ICU admission identified Enterococcus species and Corynebacterium striatum, a diagnosis of severe sepsis derived from bacterial enteritis was established and wide-spectrum antimicrobial therapy was initiated. Continuous hemodiafiltration was initiated on ICU day 3 but oliguria progressed to anuria, thrombocytopenia persisted, and laboratory values did not improve. Blood, urine, and spinal fluid cultures taken on admission to the ICU were all negative, which eliminated the possibility of additional foci of infection. Two polyps (one each in the sigmoid colon and the rectum) were discovered on lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, which were diagnosed at histopathology as early-stage nonhemorrhagic adenocarcinoma. The polyps did not appear to be the cause of the bloody stool. Additional laboratory evaluations were negative for other hematological disorders or connective tissue diseases. On ICU day 9, schistocytosis (0.5%) was noted on the peripheral blood smear, and a diagnosis of TMA was established. The Hct level also had dropped to 23.5% on the same day and the declining trend continued, therefore red blood cell transfusion was performed days later when he complained dyspnea. Plasma exchange (PE) therapy was initiated on ICU day 11. The patient had only a slight remission of thrombocytopenia after a total of 8 PE sessions (2.1 × 104/μL before the 1st PE and 5.9 × 104/μL after the 8th PE), but there was no notable clinical improvement and the anuria persisted . The level of ADAMTS13 activity in a plasma sample collected from the patient prior to initiation of PE was 25.1%, and the sample was negative for ADAMTS13 inhibitor. These findings eliminated the possibility of TTP. Furthermore, the stool was negative for Shiga toxin-producing-strains of Escherichia coli, and the serum titer for anti-Shiga-toxin antibody was also negative, eliminating the possibility of HUS. Although we considered TMA secondary to colorectal cancer in the differential diagnosis, the endoscopic findings of intramucosal carcinoma and negativity for tumor markers eliminated this possibility. Careful consideration of other possible causes, previous history, and drug history failed to identify an extrinsic etiology of TMA in this patient, and we ultimately suspected aHUS as the cause. Accordingly, intravenous eculizumab treatment (900 mg, once a week) was initiated on ICU day 26. An increase in urine output was observed on the next day, and renal support was successfully discontinued on the same day. And also marked recovery of the platelet count was obtained in combination with the effectiveness of supportive therapy including PE. Biweekly eculizumab infusion was repeated 4 times and then discontinued.
After approval by the institutional review boards of Chiba University, the University of Tokyo, and National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, an anticomplement factor H (CFH) antibody assay and an analysis of complement factor H-related (CFHR) genes were performed using a blood sample collected from the patient prior to initiation of PE. Also written informed consent was obtained from the patient before the assays. The anti-CFH antibody level was 6.16 AU/mL, which indicated negativity for anti-CFH antibody. We performed the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis to screen the copy numbers of CFHR1/3 on chromosome 1q32 using a commercially available kit (MLPA kit P236-A2; MRC-Holland, The Netherlands),[ and found that CFHR1/3 did not show gene deletions. However, moderate hemolysis was induced in concomitant hemolytic assays using sheep red blood cells (RBCs), and analysis for mutations potentially associated with aHUS identified a nonsynonymous mutation (p.Ala311Val) in the gene encoding membrane cofactor protein (MCP). All screened genes are presented in the Table .
The patient was discharged from the ICU on day 37 and was discharged to home on day 58. He was followed up regularly as an outpatient and was receiving 40 mg/day of prednisolone. At approximately 1 year after discharge, the patient remained in stable condition without relapse or resumption of eculizumab therapy.