A 62-year-old man with a history of hypertension and dyslipidemia became aware of visual field impairment and right upper limb weakness. 5 months later, he underwent a check-up at the hospital ophthalmology clinic, where he was diagnosed with right homonymous hemianopsia. Computed tomography (CT) showed an intracranial mass lesion, for which he was referred to the neurosurgical department of the same hospital. At that time, he had symptoms of the right homonymous hemianopsia and weakness of the right upper limb (manual motor test: 4/5).
CT imaging revealed a multilobular heterogeneous density mass with a diameter of 38 mm × 33 mm × 23 mm, which compressed the ipsilateral basal ganglia. CT angiography showed unremarkable enhancement of the mass lesion. Head magnetic resonance (MR) T1-weighted imaging showed a heterogenous mixed intensity mass buried in the left basal ganglia, and compression of the optic nerve on the contralateral side. MR T2-weighted images showed findings suggestive of partial aneurysm wall hemorrhage, with no remarkable perifocal edema in the vicinity of the dome. Contrast-enhanced MR imaging (MRI) demonstrated poor contrast enhancement of the aneurysm wall which indicates little involvement of the vasa vasorum . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed small contrast depiction at the vicinity of the neck of the aneurysm with a diameter of 6.5 mm × 6.5 mm × 4.5 mm at the terminal part of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) . Perforators originating from the vicinity of the aneurysmal neck were depicted and the terminal part of the ICA. The patient was diagnosed as having a symptomatic, giant, partially thrombosed left ICA aneurysm compressing the visual pathway and the posterior limb of the internal capsule.
In such cases, the treatment strategy of direct surgical decompression of the aneurysm can be expected to immediately improve the symptoms caused by the mass effect. However, the procedure is associated with difficulty in securing the perforators in the vicinity of the aneurysm. Hence, we decided to perform stent-assisted “jam-packed” coil embolization with the purpose of interrupting the blood supply to the dome as soon as possible.
Aspirin (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg/day) were administered a week before the procedure. An 8-Fr long sheath was placed in the right femoral artery under general anesthesia with motor evoked potential (MEP) monitoring. Heparinization was performed to maintain the activated clotting time at over 300 s. An 8-Fr guide catheter and 6-Fr distal access catheter were introduced into the left ICA, along with microcatheters for stenting (Headway 21, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) and coil embolization (SL-10, Stryker, US). An LVIS stent (3.5 mm × 17 mm; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was deployed from the MCA proximal to the ICA with 25% shortening to enhance metal coverage ratio. using the push technique . Intra-aneurysmal flow stagnation was seen after stent deployment, and coil embolization was subsequently performed by tightly packing the aneurysm with hydrogel coils over 50% coil length (Hydrocoil, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). Complete obliteration of the aneurysm was confirmed after the procedure without a change in MEP. This stent-assisted jam-packed coil embolization technique, shortening of braided stent to enhance metal coverage ratio of the neck and tightly-packing coil embolization using hydrogel coils, can immediately block blood flow into the aneurysm.
Postoperative diffusion-weighted imaging showed no new ischemic lesions and no new neurological symptoms. In addition, his preexisting symptoms were alleviated and he was subsequently discharged. 3 months after the treatment, his symptoms had completely recovered and DSA showed complete obliteration of the aneurysm and stent endothelialization. MRI performed 13 months after the treatment demonstrated remarkable shrinkage of the aneurysm .