A 65-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital with dysphagia and was diagnosed with clinical T2N0M0 stage IIA [Union for International Cancer Control (UICC), 8th edition] esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. She was treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CRT). The chemoradiotherapy protocol was consistent with that of the Japan Clinical Oncology Group trial 9906; the patient received two cycles of intravenous cisplatin infusions with continuous 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) infusion and concurrent radiotherapy of 60 Gy (30 fractions of 2 Gy) . Two months after the entire course of CRT, esophagoscopy revealed a residual tumor and salvage esophagectomy was performed. Right thoracoscopic access for esophagectomy was achieved in the prone position, and hand-assisted laparoscopic technique was performed in the supine position. After the hiatus was dilated by manual blunt force through four fingerbreadths, gastric reconstruction was performed through the posterior mediastinal route and by cervical esophagogastric anastomosis. The gastric conduit was fixed to the hiatus with two non-absorbable sutures. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 21st postoperative day and diagnosed with pathological stage IB (T1bN0M0) squamous cell carcinoma. Three years after esophagectomy, two metastatic nodules in the lateral and posterior segments of the liver were detected on follow-up CT. As the postoperative performance status of the patient had worsened, she was then treated with only oral anticancer drugs (tegafur-gimeracil-oteracil potassium).
Six months later, the patient was readmitted for anorexia of a few weeks’ duration. On admission, heart rate and mean blood pressure were 98/min and 59 mmHg, respectively, suggesting a state of shock. Peripheral blood examination showed that the white blood cells were in the normal range; however, the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was elevated to 32.1 mg/dL. Arterial blood gas analysis on room air showed acidosis. Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels were elevated to 91 mg/dL and 4.99 mg/dL, respectively, suggesting renal dysfunction or severe dehydration . Non-contrast computed tomography revealed digestive tract prolapsing into the right side of the mediastinum, which was distended with air and fluid . The patient was diagnosed with postoperative hiatal hernia with incarcerated digestive tract, and emergency operative repair was performed with open surgery through the abdomen. The distal transverse colon was incarcerated through the left side of diaphragmatic hiatal defect into the right mediastinum around the back of the gastric conduit . When a part of the adhesion around the hiatus was exposed, digestive fluid was eluted from the mediastinum. It was difficult to expose the colon safely due to the strength of the adhesion in the mediastinum. In addition, the gastroepiploic artery, preserved as the feeding artery and located on the left side of the gastric conduit, made it difficult to pull the transverse colon and expose the adhesion in the mediastinum. Finally, after manual repositioning of the herniated content, the transverse colon, incarcerated into the mediastinum, was resected due to perforation and a transverse colostomy was performed. After reduction of the herniated bowels, the mediastinum and abdominal cavity were manually lavaged and the drainage tube was placed in the mediastinum via the hiatus. The right side of the pleural cavity was also lavaged through the widened hiatus, without thoracotomy, which would have been invasive for the patient. The dilated diaphragmatic hiatal defect was closed with sutures, and the gastric conduit was fixed to the crus with 2–0 non-absorbable sutures. The total operation time was 233 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 770 mL. Macroscopic analysis of the resected specimen revealed perforation in the edematous lesion of the colon without necrosis . Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and was on a ventilator. The patient was diagnosed with septic shock due to acute mediastinitis, and broad-spectrum antibiotics and vasopressor agents were administered. Continuous hemodiafiltration and polymyxin B hemoperfusion were administered for the first 3 days. The patient stayed in the ICU for 16 days, and oral intake was initiated on the 18th postoperative day. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 53rd postoperative day. The patient’s condition deteriorated following surgery, and she did not receive any further chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Only palliative care services were provided, and she is alive one and half years after surgery.