A 70-year-old man presented to Aleppo University Hospital in order to have a routine check-up for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) that was diagnosed when he was 31 years old.
Through investigations, we performed an echography of the abdomen and detected a tubular-shaped, moving, echogenic structure with anechoic central line located in the gallbladder; the thickness of gallbladder wall was 4 mm. We did not detect any calculi . These findings suggest gallbladder ascariasis.
As a history, he had controlled hypertension, a repaired hiatal hernia, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), hemorrhoids, and BPH. However, his general condition was good.
He was asymptomatic, but mentioned that two weeks ago he had experienced nausea, vomiting, hyperthermia, chills, and abdominal pain which started in the right hypochondrial region, radiated to the umbilical region, and lasted for 5 days. The patient did not report jaundice or a change in bowel habit. He dealt with these symptoms himself and took over-the-counter ciprofloxacin, metronidazole, augmentine, and paracetamol.
Multi-slice computerized tomography (MSCT) have not shown any worm or calculi .
His laboratory findings were all normal including aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), gamma glutamyl transferase (γGT), bilirubin, C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), amylase, and complete blood count (CBC). No eosinophilia existed. Ova and parasite (O&P) test was negative.
As the patient is an elderly and hypertensive and was so afraid from operation, conservative treatment was applied with albendazole 400 mg (single dose) and wide spectrum antibiotics, with observation on echography.
After one week, ecography revealed that the worm is still moving and so still alive; therefore, the patient was given a second dose of albendazole.
After 2 weeks, the worm has not appeared on echography, but we noticed an echogenic debris in the gallbladder .
So, the patient was advised to operate a cholecystectomy to avoid obstruction of bile or pancreatic ducts by the worm's debris, but he disapproved.
The patient returned back to hospital after 10 days; we checked his gallbladder with echography again. It was clear and we did not notice any debris, which means aspiration of the remains of the worm.
After 10 days, he presented to hospital complaining of nausea, vomiting, fever, jaundice, and right hypochondrial pain.
On echography, the common bile duct was not distended and no obstructing structure was noticed.
Laboratory tests revealed leuckocytosis (13800/mm3), with a left shift, as the neutrophils count was 12200/mm3. Eosinophils count was normal. We also found significant increase in CRP (20mg/l), mild elevation in ALT (115 U/L) and AST (90 U/L), and bilirubin was 4mg/dl.
A diagnosis of acute cholecystitis was made, and we perfomed cholecyctectomy for the patient.
There were many adhesions around the gallbladder.
Pathology report confirmed acute cholecystitis. We detected no macroscopic or microscopic remains of the worm in the gallbladder. Under microscope, we noticed a marked number of eosinophils in the bile of the gallbladder.
After three months, our patient is in a good health and has no complications.