An 86-year-old woman was brought to the emergency department after she was found unresponsive by her husband. She was known with insulin-dependent type II diabetes mellitus and an anaplastic oligodendroglioma with epileptic seizures, diagnosed 1 year ago, for which she was started on levetiracetam and recently received radiotherapy.
The first cardiac rhythm recorded by the ambulance personnel was third-degree AV block in absence of an escape rhythm. Transcutaneous pacing with an external defibrillator was started, which resulted in return of circulation with a systolic blood pressure of around 90 mmHg.
Upon arrival in the hospital, however, she was accidently disconnected from the external pacemaker, which went unnoticed until she was connected to the electrocardiogram (ECG) monitor. At that moment, the patient had complete heart block with no escape rhythm, an agonal breathing, and was peripherally cold. A second attempt of transcutaneous pacing was made, which at first had non-capture, but after increasing the output of the pacemaker, circulation was restored. A point-of-care arterial blood gas revealed a pH of 7.22, a pCO2 of 40 mmHg, a pO2 of 136 mmHg, a bicarbonate of 16.2 mmol/L, and a base excess of −12 mmol/L. The lactate level was 11.7 mmol/L.
It then became known from the medical record that the patient had previously signed a ‘do not resuscitate’ (DNR) order. However, her wishes concerning intubation and mechanical ventilation were not further specified. Yet, due to the high amperage of the transcutaneous pacing, she was in acute distress, demanding sedation and intubation if transcutaneous pacing was to be continued.
The dilemma regarding intubation and mechanical ventilation was discussed with the family. Her husband made clear that she would not have wanted to be kept alive by mechanical support if there was no chance for a meaningful recovery. Due to the combination of a malignant brain tumour and prolonged cerebral hypoxia caused by substantial delay in adequate pacing (out-of-hospital before ambulance arrival ∼10 min, in-hospital ∼5 min), we considered the chances of neurological recovery highly unlikely. Therefore, in agreement with the family, it was decided to stop the transcutaneous pacing, after which an agonal heart rhythm of <20 b.p.m. was seen. The family was then given some time alone with the patient during her (presumed) final moments.
However, when the patient was reassessed 20 min later, she was breathing spontaneously, had a faint pulse and had regained a junctional escape rhythm of 50 b.p.m. Considering the poor prognosis, we decided together with the family, to admit her to the ward for palliative sedation to limit physical distress.
In the next hour, intermittent sinus bradycardia and total AV block with a nodal escape rhythm were seen. However, 1 h later, heart rate slowed down, resulting in complete heart block and asystole, which lasted for ∼4 min . Again, an escape rhythm of around 40 b.p.m. reappeared.
Another 2 h later, the family informed the medical staff that the patient had regained consciousness, despite continuous sedation with infusion of midazolam of 1.5 mg/h. When we reassessed her, she opened her eyes spontaneously and could obey simple commands. She had a heart rate of 40 b.p.m., a blood pressure of 130/60 mmHg, a temperature of 36.7°C, and an oxygen saturation of 95% at room air. The ECG showed a third-degree AV block with a ventricular escape rhythm of 40/min with a left bundle branch block morphology . The midazolam infusion was stopped. One hour later, the patient was fully awake and had a maximal score on the Glasgow coma scale. In the following hours and days, no neurological sequalae of the prolonged cardiac arrest were seen. Furthermore, AV conduction recovered completely . Two days after the event, a permanent dual-chamber pacemaker was implanted and the patient was discharged home.