We obtained a verbal informed consent from the patient and a written informed consent from a family member of the patient for publication of this case.
An 83-year-old man was transported to our emergency department, with a tentative diagnosis of heat stroke. He had previously been fit and healthy, except for undergoing colorectomy for colorectal cancer 8 years ago. He also received a central venous port system, a BardPort Titanium implantable port with its and 8.0 Fr Groshong® silicone catheter (Bard Access Systems, Inc., Salt Lake, USA) which was inserted through the right internal jugular vein, for chemotherapy.
He was transferred to the intensive care unit, where surface cooling and intravenous hydration were performed to treat heat stroke. He made a rapid recovery, and he had become able to eat on the same day.
Next morning, he suddenly developed ventricular fibrillation. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed immediately, his trachea was intubated, and he was sedated with continuous infusion of propofol. He had not complained any chest pain before the occurrence of ventricular fibrillation, and the electrocardiography indicated neither arrythmias nor ST changes, before and after the occurrence of ventricular fibrillation. Analysis of arterial blood taken after resuscitation indicated no abnormalities in the blood gases and the blood electrolyte; troponin was not measured. A chest radiograph, which was taken after resuscitation , indicated a previously placed central venous catheter access port, without any obvious abnormalities.
Emergency coronary angiography, performed shortly after ventricular fibrillation, identified a 90% stenosis of the left anterior descending coronary artery. The cardiologists considered that this was not the direct cause of ventricular fibrillation, as the extent to which the blood flow in the coronary artery would not bring about ventricular fibrillation. The angiography instead identified a more likely cause: a foreign body in the coronary sinus.
Close re-examination of the chest radiograph taken after resuscitation showed a long catheter-like foreign body (approximately 20 cm) in the heart . Chest computed tomography also confirmed the presence of the foreign body . We diagnosed that a long catheter-like foreign body, likely to be a fragmented central venous catheter, was in the coronary sinus.
In the angiography suite, physicians attempted to remove the foreign body. However, the attempts were abandoned, as the pull of the catheter resulted in repeated ventricular fibrillation. The patient was successfully resuscitated. Surgical removal was planned the next day.
On the next day, the patient was transferred to an operating room, and routine monitors, such as a pulse oximeter, a blood pressure cuff, and electrocardiogram, were attached. We prepared an electric defibrillator, and cardiac surgeons were present in the room. The breathing system of an anesthesia machine was connected to the tracheal tube, and general anesthesia was induced with sevoflurane 1.5% and fentanyl 0.1 mg; neuromuscular blockade was achieved with rocuronium 50 mg. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane and oxygen in air.
The patient underwent sternotomy, and transesophageal echocardiography identified the fractured catheter in the coronary sinus . The right atrium was opened under cardiopulmonary bypass. Surgeons could remove the fractured catheter (approximately 20 cm in length) , but with great difficulty, by gently pulling the edge of the catheter with rotating movement. After the operation, the electrocardiogram indicated no arrhythmia or cardiac ischemia.
On the next day of the operation, his family requested strongly to treat the coronary stenosis, and thus, cardiac physicians placed a stent in the left anterior descending artery without complications. He was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 14, to a rehabilitation facility, and he went home at a later day.