A 4-year- and 8-month-old boy was brought to our hospital with fatigue, polyuria, and excessive drinking for one month. There was no recent history of fever, hair loss, facial erythema, oral ulcers, vomiting or diarrhea. There was no consanguineal marriage history, no family history of kidney disease and other genetic diseases. He was born spontaneously at 39 weeks, weighed 2.8 kg at birth, was 50 cm long, and had no history of asphyxia (Apgar score unknown). The family thought that he was shorter than other children of the same age and gender, but he was not lagging behind in motor, language and intellectual development. At the age of 1, he was 72 cm tall (−2SD∼−1SD) and weighed 8.5 kg (−2SD∼−1SD); he was 103 cm tall and weighed 12 kg at the time of consultation, and his physical examination height and weight were less than 2 standard deviations of the standard value, his intellectual development was normal, and he could talk and express needs normally. Blood pressure was normal, and there was no edema throughout the body except a ∼3 cm × 3 cm area of cafe au lait spoton the skin of the left lower limb. No other abnormalities were found on physical examinations. Urinary examination showed alkaline urine (urine pH >5.5), glycosuria and highly positive proteinuria, but no hematuria was detected by high-power microscopy. Blood gas analysis and biochemical tests indicated metabolic acidosis and electrolyte disorders, mainly manifested as hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, and hyperchloremia. The complication of Fanconi syndrome was considered. Further, we carried out humoral immunity test which revealed a decrease in complement C3 (0.38 g/L; the levels of C3 with the normal range was 0.70–2.06 g/L), and the complement C4 was normal (the normal range of C4 level was 0.11–0.61 g/L). Autoantibody ANA was positive, with the highest titer >1:3,200. Thyroid function was normal. Recent laboratory results were shown in . Urinary ultrasound indicated enhanced renal parenchymal echoes with unclear corticomedullary boundary, hydronephrosis in both kidneys, and no renal calcification or stones. The bone age was relatively below the standard, equivalent to 3.6-year-old or 10–25 percentiles. The contrast-enhanced voiding urosonography (VUS), CT urography (CTU), axial enhanced MRI of the sella turcica, conventional MRI of the lower limbs, and electromyography examination revealed no abnormalities. The whole-exome sequencing of the child did not found any suspected pathogenic gene mutations. After excluding diseases such as tuberculosis, hepatitis B, diabetes, genetic diseases and tumors, the patients were treated with sufficient oral methylprednisolone, captopril, potassium citrate, sodium citrate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, and sodium dihydrogen phosphate for 28 days, but there was no improvement in proteinuria. Then renal biopsy was performed, and hematoxylin-eosin and other specific staining revealed 1/4 glomerular glomerulosclerosis. The remaining glomeruli showed mesangial cell and stroma mild hyperplasia, with thickening of the basement membrane and a small amount of spike like structures. Subepithelial deposition of immune complexes was observed. The staining also revealed granular and vacuolar degeneration of renal tubular epithelial cells, occasional protein tubular type, focal renal tubular lumen dilation accompanied by segmental epithelial cell detachment, brush border detachment, a few renal tubular atrophy, renal interstitial edema, small focal lymphoid and monocyte infiltration. There was no obvious lesion on the small artery wall. Immunofluorescence showed that IgG was deposited (++) in fine particles along the capillary loop. The electromicroscopic examination of ultrastructures showed mild irregular thickening of the basement membrane with a thickness of about 300–700 nm, diffused fusion of the foot processes, deposition of a large amount of electronic dense materials in the subepithelial and basement membranes, vacuolization and degeneration of the epithelial cells of the renal tubules, and no special changes in the renal interstitium. The pathological diagnosis was stage II membranous nephropathy with acute tubulointerstitial lesions. Paraffin section fluorescence staining showed IgG1 subtype+, IgG4++, while negative in IgG2, IgG3, PLA2R, and THSD7A staining, consistent with stage II membranous nephropathy (–). Clinical diagnosis of lupus nephritis (nephrotic syndrome type, V-type) was made, with a SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI) score of 14. After receiving a sufficient oral dose of methylprednisolone (12 mg, bid) for 60 days with the subsequent dosage tapered, and sequential anti-inflammatory treatment with prednisone acetate (10 mg, qd), immune suppression with mycophenolate mofetil (0.166 g, bid), 5 times of plasma exchange, captopril, and dipyridamole, the patient was discharged. A follow-up after taking the above oral drugs for 11 months showed that the symptoms of fatigue, excessive drinking, and polyuria improved, the complement C3 returned to normal levels, but there were still persistent proteinuria (2 + to 3+) and glycosuria (2 + to 4+); no hematuria was detected under high-power microscopy; SLEDAI score was 12; autoantibody ANA was positive with a titer of 1:320; and eGFR was calculated to be >30 ml/min/1.73 m2 (The eGFR at initial presentation was 53.1 ml/min/1.73 m2). Then the treatment with belimumab monoclonal antibody was added. After 9 times of regular use of belimumab, the clinical symptoms of the patient achieved complete remission; blood electrolytes, complement C3 and C4 returned to normal levels; and ANA titer was maintained at a relatively low level (1:320); urinary protein fluctuated between+to ∼+; urinary glucose fluctuated between+to 3+, the UTP was 0.785 g/24 h (24 h urine output of 1,700 ml), and eGFR was calculated to be 32.8 ml/min/1.73 m2, recent laboratory results were shown in . The dose of prednisone was reduced to 7.5 mg, qd. The follow-up examination showed a body-weight increase to the 50th percentile of the same age and gender, a height of the 3th percentile, and a SLEDAI score decrease to 4.