In May 2017, a 51-year old female presented to our hospital with over 1 week of fatigue. She has medical history of donating both bone marrow and PBSCs 8 yrs ago for her brother with severe aplastic anemia (SAA). G-CSF was used to mobilize hematopoietic stem cells for PBSC collection. Complete blood count (CBC) showed lymphocytosis (Lymphocyte 10*10^9/L), moderate anemia (Hb 61 g/L) and thrombocytopenia (PLT 20*10^9/L). Peripheral blood smear demonstrated 30% of blast cells. Bone marrow biopsy showed lymphoblastic leukemia involving a markedly hypercellular marrow . Flow cytometry showed the blasts expressed CD10, CD19, CD22, CD38, HLA-DR, but not CD13, CD33, CD117, or cytoplasmic MPO. Chromosomal analysis showed a normal female karyotype. The diagnosis of B-ALL was made. VDP regimen (Vindesine, Daunorubicin, Prednisone) was started after her diagnosis and bone marrow aspirate 14 days later revealed complete remission (CR). Then 2 cycles of VDLP regimen (Vindesine, Daunorubicin, Prednisone, Pegaspargase) and 2 cycles of MA (Mitoxantrone, Cytosine arabinoside) + Pegaspargase (PEG-Asp) regimen were administered. During this period, the patient remained in remission and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) remained clear after intermittent four time lumbar punctures. Minimal residue disease (MRD) monitoring by flow cytometry after each cycle did not detect blast cells with abnormal phenotype. Considering she has no other HLA-identical siblings or unrelated donors from China Bone Marrow Bank at that time and her brother, who was perfectly stable, a special type of auto-HSCT using her brother’s PBSCs was performed in December 2017. Before the transplantation, whole exome sequencing (WES) was done for both the donor and recipient to rule out occult genetic abnormalities in the stem cells. Results showed that only the patient, not her brother, has genetic mutations including SF3B1 and BRAF mutation associated with hematological malignancies in her hematopoietic cells, not oral mucosal cells [–]. Myeloablative conditioning regimen (Melphalan 140 mg/m2 d-3/d-2/d-1, Cytarabine 1 g/m2 d-3/d-2, Cyclophosphamide 60 mg/Kg d-3/d-2) was used. A total of 2.34*10^6/kg CD34+ cells, 13.0*10^8/kg MNCs from peripheral blood were collected and transfused into the patient. Neutrophil engraftment occurred at day + 11 and platelet engraftment occurred at day + 14. VP regimen (Vindesine, Prednisone) and MTX + 6-MP regimen were used for maintenance therapy. Bone marrow aspirate and flow cytometry showed that the patient remained in complete remission 3 months after transplantation. In May 2018, the patient’s CBC showed leukocytosis and bone marrow aspirate indicated disease relapsed with 53.33% blast cells. Flow cytometry showed the blasts expressed CD10, CD19, HLA-DR and partially expressed CD11b. Genetic testing using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique found that SF3B1 and BRAF exome mutation was negative. Re-induction chemotherapy with VDP regimen was administered, the patient achieved CR. However, after another 2 cycles of high-dose MTX+ PEG-Asp regimen, disease relapsed. In November 2018, CD19 CAR-T therapy followed by HLA-identical unrelated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was applied and the patient remains in remission for 7 months till now.