A 63-year-old Caucasian male presented to our hospital with mild dyspnea that had been present for years, and a recurring pain exacerbation in his left thoracic wall. His previous history included intravenous drug abuse, continued smoking for more than 30 years, and untreated hepatitis C infection. When similar symptoms had occurred a few months previously, X-ray scans performed at another hospital showed suspicious masses at the left costal pleura. Therefore, pleural mesothelioma was considered. However, the patient was discharged and did not follow-up on this diagnosis before presenting to us.
After exclusion of myocardial ischemia, our X-ray scans showed the previously described lesions on the left costal pleura . A subsequent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed two additional masses in the anterior mediastinum adjacent to the right atrium, measuring 2 and 4 cm in diameter and recapitulated two lesions on the left costal wall measuring up to 5 cm in diameter . At this point, pleural mesothelioma, which had already been suspected elsewhere, was a plausible diagnosis.
However, multiple similar lesions were detected intraabdominally, whereas the spleen was missing . Specifically, two foci were found between the left diaphragm and the stomach (5.6 × 3.8 cm and 4.6 × 2.6 cm, Fig. b, c), between the liver and abdominal wall (4.1 × 1.7 cm, Fig. d), and in the small pelvic cavity next to the M. iliopsoas sinister (3 cm in diameter, Fig. e), among others. Curiously, the patient had to his knowledge never worked in an asbestos-polluted environment and the CT scans did not show any pleural effusions, which would typically be expected for mesothelioma . Furthermore, the presence of abdominal masses is a possible, but not a common condition in mesothelioma . Therefore, we considered a diagnostic biopsy to determine whether the lesions were metastases of a cancer of unknown origin.
However, we decided to first conduct an extensive interview with the patient that revealed an important, previously unknown part of his medical history: When asked for previous injuries, the patient remembered an incident in the early 1970s. At this time he had engaged in drug trafficking and got involved in an argument about a drug delivery that had not gone as planned. In the course of the argument, our patient suffered an abdominal gunshot wound with extensive injury. Unfortunately, there were no medical reports available from that time due to the patient very rarely visiting a doctor. However, the patient recalled that his spleen and diaphragm were severely damaged and needed surgical repair. Indeed, our CT scans showed that a splenectomy had been performed.
Instead of biopsy, we then utilized contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) of the pleural and abdominal masses. On CEUS, a bolus of ultrasound contrast medium containing gas microbubbles is rapidly injected intravenously, followed by another bolus of saline solution for immediate dispersion via systemic circulation. When ultrasound waves are then directed at microbubbles flowing through the organ of interest, the compressible gas cores oscillate and show an increased echogenicity compared with surrounding tissue. Compared with other tissues, splenic tissue has the property to sequester microbubbles from circulation, causing an avid and persistent late-phase enhancement of up to 7 minutes after application, whereas malignant masses are characterized by early wash-out and late-phase hypoenhancement . In our case, the application of sulfur hexafluoride microbubbles revealed circumscribed lesions that showed the characteristic pattern of splenic tissue, with persistent late-phase enhancement unlike malignant masses . Together with the very specific patient history and the medical imaging we performed, we were now convinced that we found the correct diagnosis and decided on a conservative approach without additional, invasive diagnostic measures. Follow-up examinations after 12 months showed no progress of the lesions, confirming the diagnosis of abdominal and thoracic splenosis based on detailed patient history and CEUS. Importantly, we were able to refrain from diagnostic biopsy, which otherwise might have led to serious complications considering the highly perfused splenotic tissue and the deranged coagulation due to hepatitis C-related liver dysfunction. Since splenosis is a benign condition, no specific treatment was necessary. Instead, treatment for hepatitis C and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was initiated to improve his prognosis and the patient received oral pain medication, which resolved his pleurisy.