A 16-year-old girl was diagnosed with TOF, secundum, and sinus venosus atrial septal defect (ASD) at birth. Additionally, she had Turner syndrome [46, X, del(X)(p11.2)] and a horseshoe kidney. She underwent total correction of TOF and ASD closure at the age of 14-months, including patch closure of the subarterial ventricular septal defect, direct closure of the ASD, resection of the infundibular muscle, and transannular patch extending to the main pulmonary artery. However, the diagnosis of PAPVR was missed. She was doing well at her annual outpatient clinic follow-up. At the age of 16, she developed dyspnea on exercise. Echocardiography demonstrated severe pulmonary regurgitation, mild tricuspid regurgitation, and D-shaped left ventricle (LV) with paradoxical septal motion along with RIV and sinus venous ASD. Computed tomography also confirmed RIV and PAPVR . The right upper pulmonary vein (RUPV) drained into the SVC and the right middle pulmonary vein (RMPV) showed dual drainage into the SVC and LA. Surgical repair of PAPVR, sinus venous ASD, and pulmonary regurgitation was planned.
Redo-median sternotomy and bicaval venous cannulation were performed. SVC cannulation was performed with a 20 Fr angle catheter at the utmost distal SVC above the anomalous PV and RIV. Under mild hypothermia cardiopulmonary bypass and after pharmacological cardiac arrest, the lateral wall of the SVC was incised from just above the junction of the anomalous RUPV to just below the junction of anomalous RMPV . Systemic and pulmonary venous blood pathways were separated by bovine pericardial patch. Consequently, dual pulmonary venous blood flow was created; RUPV and RMPV drained directly or through the intra-atrial tunnel and sinus venous ASD into the LA . Pulmonary valve replacement was performed with a 25 mm Trifecta aortic bioprosthesis valve (St. Jude Medical, Inc., USA). The duration of bypass and aortic cross-clamp was 125 and 96 min, respectively. After an uneventful postoperative course, patient was discharged on postoperative day 6. Postoperative echocardiography demonstrated improvement of D-shaped LV and laminar flow through the SVC and PVs. Postoperative computed tomography showed a well-reconstructed SVC and pulmonary venous pathway without stenosis .