A 69-year-old Tunisian female with no family history of auto-immune disease. She had a history of hypertension and was explored 4 years prior to admission for transient arthralgias and arthritis. At age 69, she experienced photosensitivity, malar rash and diffuse discoid lesions in her trunk and face for which she visited our hospital. She also reported weight loss of approximately 3 kg in the last three months. She had no history of drug abuse or significant alcohol consumption prior her admission. The physical examination showed synovitis of the wrists. Her general state of health was regular, eupneic. Cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were within the normal range. The patient had no previous laboratory tests. On admission, her initial laboratory tests were as follows: erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 45 mm/1st hour associated with hyper-γ-globulinemia 20 gr/l. Her leukogram showed lymphopenia 850/mm3, and platelets were normal. Creatinin and urinalysis are normal. The autoimmune profile confirmed a strong positivity of Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) with titre 1:400 and anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) at 115 UI/ml with normal serum complements. The patient was non-reactive for the following antibodies: anti-La; anti-cardiolipin; lupus anticoagulant; anti-SM; anti-RNP; anti-SCL-70; and anticentromere, rheumatoid factor and autoantibodies against citrullinated protein. Serology for VDRL was negative, hepatobiliary enzyme and lactate dehydrogenase levels were within normal range. Therefore, presence of 6 of 11 American College of Rheumatology criteria (photosensitivity + malar erythema + positive ANA and anti-dsDNA tests + hematologic abnormalities including lymphopenia + arthritis) allowed the diagnosis of SLE. The patient was treated with Chloroquine (200 mg/day). The patient showed improvement of her general state of health, and weight gain. No aggravation of SLE was observed. However one year later, she developed liver dysfunction. The patient was referred to gastroenterology unit. On physical exam, skin rash involving her face was observed. Abdominal examination revealed neither hepatosplenomegaly nor pruritus. Laboratory investigations revealed a normal complete blood count and urinalysis. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was at 60 mm/1st hour while C-reactive protein was within normal range. Concentrations of both serum cholesterol and triglyceride are normal. Blood creatinine clearance 80 mL/min and there was no proteinuria. Aspartate aminotransferase 92 IU/L (normal range: 8–38); alanine aminotransferase 87 IU/L (normal range: 4–44 IU/L) (2 times above the normal limit), total bilirubin 0.9 mg/dl; alkaline phosphatase 107 IU/L, gammaglutamyl transpeptidase 42 IU/L and lactate dehydrogenase 230 IU/L are at normal range. Antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) were positive (1:164), with positive anti-E2 fraction. The antinuclear antibody was positif as well as anti-dsDNA. Negative results were seen for anti-smooth muscle antibody and anti-centromere antibody. Serologic makers for hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses were negative. Abdominal echo showed no fatty change of the liver and no abnormality of the bile ducts. Biochemical liver tests and AMA results are compatible to PBC. However, liver biopsy is required to give information on the stage of PBC. Microscopic examination reveals a focal florid duct lesion characterized by a portal lymphocytic infiltrate and epitheloid cells that are centred on interlobular ducts with evidence of destruction . These lesions are associated with a lymphocytic cholangitis and a portal inflammation containing conspicuous plasma cells and numerous lymphocytes . No granuloma was found in lobule. These findings led to a diagnosis of stage I PBC according to Scheuer’s classification. Based on the hematology and liver-tissue results, as well, she was diagnosed with asymptomatic PBC. Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid (600 mg daily) was started. The transaminase levels normalized with one month. The patient has not complained liver dysfunction. She was followed up regularly with stable health.