In May 2019, a 27-year-old man visited our hospital complaining of a palpable periumbilical mass that had been presented for longer than 4 months. Enhanced computer tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed multiple masses in the pelvic and abdominal cavities that involved the intestine, liver, and ureter. Multiple lymph node metastases were also identified with moderate ascites . CT-guided biopsy suggested by multiple disciplinary team was performed and revealed DSRCT and immunohistochemistry test showed Des (+), CD56 (+), EMA (−), CK7 (−), SMA (−), S-100 (−), Ki-67/MIB-1(+, 20%), supporting the diagnosis of IADSRCT . As complete resection could not be obtained due to the extensive metastasis, systemic therapy was recommended by a multidisciplinary team (MDT).
Combined chemotherapy (vincristine 2 mg D1, epirubicin 100 mg D1, ifosfamide 2000 mg D1-5 and mesna 400 mg t.i.d D1-5, q3w) was started in July 2019. The patient also received anlotinib at an initial dosage of 12 mg, once daily, 2-week on/1-week off. After two active cycles, abdominal CT indicated a partial response (PR) (according to the RECIST version 1.1) as multiple masses were largely reduced . However, the patient suffered grade 3 treatment-related adverse events (TRAE) including hematochezia . Anlotinib was discontinued due to concerns relating to the safety profile. Meanwhile, patient received oral carbazochrome sodium sulfonate, loperamide hydrochloride, as well as Chinese medicine, Yunnan Baiyao. With these active managements, hematochezia stopped 3 days later and continuous fecal occult blood tests were negative .
Considering the regression and necrosis of the tumor, as well as the anti-VEGFR effect of anlotinib that may have led to hematochezia, the dose of anlotinib was adjusted to 8 mg, once daily, 2-week on/1-week off and re-started in the third cycle. After the dose adjustment, hematochezia disappeared and the combined treatment was well tolerated. A total of 6 cycles were administrated and a follow-up CT scan indicated continuous PR (according to the RECIST version 1.1) .
Aggressive surgery requiring colostomy and ureterostomy was recommended by the MDT which has a serious impact on quality of life (QOL). The young man refused surgical resection and received anlotinib as maintenance therapy. During maintenance therapy, the most common grade 3 TRAE (according to the CTCAE version 5) were proteinuria and hypertension, especially on the first 14-days of the continuous dose schedule. Notably, when anlotinib was discontinued for 7 days, the symptoms regressed. Based on this response, a 1-week on/1-week off regimen was adopted (8 mg, once daily). The dose reduction and active management of toxicities resulted in the maintenance therapy being well-tolerated. A follow-up abdominal CT in August 2020 indicated continuous PR (according to the RECIST version 1.1). Treatment with anlotinib was continued without grade 3 or 4 TRAE. However, the latest abdominal CT in June 2021 suggested progressive disease (PD) (according to the RECIST version 1.1). As the patient refused to restart chemotherapy, immunotherapy combined with anlotinib was recommended.