We present a case of a 55-year-old Caucasian man with a past medical history significant for Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) and Melanoma, diagnosed in 2006 and 2008 respectively, who presented to our Cancer Center complaining of a one-day history of persistent fevers and chills. The patient was visiting from out of state and was concerned about a potential infection. He had completed his 4th cycle of chlorambucil (40 mg per square meter, given orally every 28 days) for his CLL two weeks prior. The patient was status post surgical excision for a stage IIIA melanoma discovered in the left axilla with no further adjuvant treatment. He was scheduled to travel extensively over the course of the proceeding month and requested an additional course of antibiotics.
On review of systems, he noted progressive fatigue and anorexia. He had started a prescription for levofloxacin prior to the clinic visit. The patient had no known drug allergies. The patient denied any tobacco or alcohol use. He was employed in an office setting. There was no pertinent family history. The patient had a temperature of 38 degrees Celsius. Physical exam was remarkable for an enlarged spleen, approximately 3 finger-breadths below the costal margin. Laboratory parameters revealed a white blood cell count of 21,500 (normal 4500-11,000/mm3), a hemoglobin of 10.8 g/dl (normal 11-15 g/dl), and a platelet count of 170,000 (normal 150,000-400,000/mm3). His absolute neutrophil count (ANC) was 430 (normal 1,500 to 8,000/mm3). Further a quantitative immunoglobulin panel was consistent with hypogammaglobulinemia: IgG level was 309 L (normal 562-1585 mg/dl), IgM 9.0 L (normal 30-246 mg/dl), and IgA was 10 L (normal 72-372 mg/dl).
The patient was subsequently admitted to our hospital for evaluation and treatment of febrile neutropenia. We elected to administer 30 grams of IVIG (0.4 g/kg) as a means of enhancing his immunity in the context of recent exposure to chemotherapy and his hypogammaglobulinemia. The patient had previously tolerated multiple infusions of IVIG without any adverse reactions. We premedicated the patient with acetaminophen, hydrocortisone, and benadryl. Approximately 12 hours following the IVIG infusion, the patient began to complain of headaches, shortness of breath with accompanying chest pain, and weakness of his bilateral upper and lower extremities.
A complete cardiac and neurologic assessment was immediately initiated. The patient was found to have a myocardial infarction with a troponin elevation of 15.2 ng/ml and 13.3 ng/ml (normal 0.00-0.15 ng/ml) for the first two sets of his cardiac enzymes respectively, with a clearance of the enzymes by his third set. The EKG revealed ST-T wave changes consistent with myocardial ischemia in the inferior and anterolateral regions. An echocardiogram was consistent with a mural thrombus visualized in the left ventricular apex. There was mild global left ventricular hypokinesis, with inferior and inferolateral wall motion abnormalities consistent with myocardial infarction. In addition, an MRI of the brain delineated evolving cerebral infarcts seen within the left posterior MCA distribution , bilateral high parietal loops , and bilateral occipital lobes . There was no evidence of significant mass effect or hemorrhagic transformation.
Furthermore, the patient began to experience a change in his mental status. A Neurology consult was obtained and the assessment attributed his waxing and waning consciousness to the continued watershed infarcts that were present. Nevertheless an EEG study was performed which delineated periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges consistent with seizure like activity. The patient was subsequently placed on intravenous levetiracetam with no improvement in his mental status. Shortly thereafter he had increasing respiratory requirements, and the decision was made to forgo intubation at the request of the family secondary to the patient's pre-determined request to never be placed on a ventilator.