A 27-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a progressing right hypochondral pain and cholestasis of 2 months duration associated with vomitis, pruritus and weight loss. Her personal and medical history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed deep jaundice and scratch marks all over the body; there was a hard epigastric palpable mass with mild tenderness and no hepatomegaly.
Laboratory examination showed a serum bilirubin level of 88 mg/L (reference range 3-14 mg/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 147 U/L (reference range 0-46 U/L); alanine aminotransferase, 92 U/L (reference range 0-46 U/L); alkaline transferase, 488 U/L (reference range 64-300 U/L); and glutamyl transpeptidase 51 U/L (reference range 0-38 U/L). The hemoglobin, leukocytes and wafer values were normal.
Hydatid serology performed by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was positive.
Abdominal ultrasonography and CT scan revealed a 12 cm cystic tumor of the pancreatic head and body with a 10 mm wall thickness . The hepatic pedicule was compressed by this cyst resulting in a dilatation of the intraheapatic bile ducts and a segmental portal hypertension with 15 cm splenomegaly. No liver nodules, lymphadenopathy or ascites was observed.
Laparotomy was performed finding a big cystic mass causing an important inflammation with extensive adherence to the épiploon, the inferior hepatic side and seeming after dissection to be continoued with the pancreatic tail . After protecting the operative area by a scolicidal solution, the cyst was opened. It's content was a transparent fluid with germinative and hydatid membranes. After cyst content removal, a partial cystectomy was performed and no communication was found between the cyst and the pancreatic duct or the biliary duct. An omentoplasty was done and the cystic cavity was drained. The presence of scolex in the cystic fluid tested positive. The postoperative period was uneventful. The daily drained liquid contained no amylase and no lipase. It's quantity rised till 1200 ml to progressively decrease. The drain was removed and the patient discharged on the twentyth postoperative day. The patient was free of symptoms and followed up after 15 month without any other abdominal localizations. The spleen size decreased and the doppler showed no portal hypertension.