A 27-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with a right-sided nasal mass and associated progressively worsening lower right eyelid swelling over the course of several months. Medical history was insignificant. His social history was significant for a two pack-year smoking history with additional cocaine and marijuana use. Before his initial presentation, the patient had visited the ED multiple times for symptoms of intermittent epistaxis, sinus congestion, midface pressure, throbbing headaches, and ocular discharge. He had been treated with antibiotics and steroids without improvement. Due to periorbital inflammation, concern for increased intraocular pressure and decreased visual acuity at this ED encounter, the patient underwent a lateral canthotomy and cantholysis by ophthalmology, after which the patients’ eye symptoms improved quickly.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) at that time showed a 4.0 × 2.2 cm mass in the right nasal cavity, deviation of the nasal septum to the left, erosion of most of the ethmoidal air cells, and possible extension through the cribriform plate. There was near total opacification of the right frontal sinus, maxillary sinus, and ethmoid air cells with right preseptal soft-tissue edema . Given the patient’s gender, age, and imaging evidence at the time, there was a high suspicion for juvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma (JNA). The patient was admitted and elective interventional radiology (IR) embolization was scheduled. During his admission, the patient became febrile. Subsequently, embolization of the mass/maxillary artery was cancelled to avoid seeding of intravascular coils with bacteria, as the patient’s fever was felt to be secondary to bacteremia. Furthermore, the patient exhibited a declining serum sodium concentration from 133 mMol/L to 118 mMol/L, and syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) was suspected. He received salt tablets and several doses of demeclocycline with subsequent improvement.
For the treatment of the presumed JNA, otolaryngology performed a right medial maxillectomy, right nasal endoscopy with debridement, total ethmoidectomy, and removal of the intranasal mass. The patient recovered appropriately and was discharged on postoperative day 2. Unexpectedly, the pathology from the right maxilla revealed a high grade malignant neoplasm, most consistent immunophenotypically and histologically with high grade “mixed” ONB and carcinoma . The tumor was comprised nests of poorly differentiated cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, coarse chromatin, and minimal cytoplasm that was continuous with areas of typical neuroblastoma including neuropil formation. Foci of both squamous differentiation and nonenteric glandular differentiation were also noted. Lymphovascular and bone invasion were present. Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor showed positivity for the following markers, which differed slightly depending on the area of tumor that was stained: synaptophysin, CD56, chromogranin (rare/focal), S100 peripherally, Pan CK, CAM 5.2, CK7, p16, p63, CK 5/6, and p40 [, ]. After recognizing the nasal cavity mass as a malignancy, the tumor was staged as T4aN0Mx.
During postoperative follow-up, the patient reported improved right periorbital swelling and erythema, decreased serosanguinous drainage from right nares. No purulent nasal drainage was noted and he remained afebrile. Based on the results of pending magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography scans, the patient is expected to undergo further resection of residual tumor versus chemotherapy and radiation.