A patient, 35-year-old female, came to our clinic because of severe vertigo and paroxysmal headaches for about 2 years. She mostly suffered from vertigo at night with multiple vomiting spells and bilateral tinnitus, which would last the entire night. During the period of vertigo, she also had a headache at the right temporal site, which was present a kind of pulsatile pain and could last several hours; this caused nausea and the inability to fall asleep. Prior to the onset of the vertigo and headache, she also had a visual aura with wave sight that lasted 10 min. Approximately 10 of these attacks were trigged by loud noises or bright lights, accompanied with symptoms such as chest tightness, tachypnea, and blushing. The migraine attacks were mostly accompanied by vertigo, becoming more severe during vestibular episodes. Those symptoms continued to worsen over the next week from the initial onset. During this time, the patient suffered from vertigo for several hours daily, and also suffered from repeated vomiting, numbness on the right side of the face, and tinnitus in the ear. The attacks of vertigo had no connection to changing body position. The headache occurred on the right side with visual aura expressing as fortification spectrum during vertigo. Physical examination found dysesthesia around the right side of the forehead and unsteady gait.
The patient’s clinical history revealed a more frequent occurrence of migraines during the period of pregnancy. The headache was usually a throbbing, unilateral temporal pain for 20 min each time. It would result in nausea and vomiting, which led to functional limitation in daily activities and led to bed rest to alleviate her symptoms. Meanwhile, the patient also had a visual aura with waves of light that lasting approximately 10 min. She had no family history regarding her illness, history of drug use, allergy, smoking, or drinking.
A neurological examination showed clockwise rotary nystagmus when she gazed to the left side, and an abnormal finger-to-nose test at the right side. The patient had normal muscle tone and muscle strength, and no appearance of the Babinski Sign. Vestibular system tests including Dix-hallpike, Roll-test as well as a head thrust test were all negative as well.
Laboratory test showed the HbA1C was 5.1%, and plasma homocysteine was 9.5 μmol/L. The autoimmune antibodies including pANCA、cANCA(−)、MPO、PR3、ENA、ACA-IgA、ACA-IgG、ACA-IgM、ANA、ds-DNA、DNP were negative except for the AECA(++). Thrombophilia markers were also tested, including protein C activity (130%)、von Willebrand factor activity (109%) 、free protein S activity (76%) as well as antithrombin III activity (109%). Other tumor markers regarding lung cancer and colon carcinoma were all negative and thyroid gland function was also normal. The routine test of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was normal, while the aquaporin (AQP) 4 antibodies were negative in both plasma and CSF.
The electro-audiometry test revealed a mild hearing impairment in the right ear. Other Neuro-electrophysiology tests, including brainstem auditory evoked potential (BAEP)、visual evoked potential (VEP)、electromyogram (EMG) as well as nerve conductive velocity (NCV) were all normal. The cardiac and carotid ultrasound exams were both negative. The diffusive weighted imaging showed subacute infarction in the right lateral medullar on January 8th . The digital subtraction cerebral angiography (DSA) indicated a left intracranial aneurysm on the next day . The infarction and intracranial aneurysm were located on separate sides of the brain, which suggested that the Wallenberg syndrome might not be caused by the intracranial aneurysm. DSA imaging showed that the communicating artery between anterior and posterior circulation of cerebral arteries was not open, and ipsilateral posterior inferior cerebella artery could be seen clearly . We administrated antiplatelet treatment as well as Flunarizine immediately. The patient’s vertigo symptoms diminished just in a few days, with the patient being discharged three weeks later with oral medication, including Betahistine Mesilate 6 mg tid, Dihydroergotoxine 2.5 mg bid, Aspirin 100 mg qd and Flunarizine 5 mg qn. At the patient’s 3-month follow-up, she said she had only once been affected by vertigo and the migraines were less common and less intense than she was previously experiencing.