A 74-year-old Japanese woman presented with a 6-month history of gradually worsening dyspnea on exertion, a 10-year history of bronchiectasis, a 4-year history of infection with Mycobacterium avium complex, and pulmonary mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma in remission that had been treated by surgical resection of the right lower lobe and subsequent chemotherapy with single-agent rituximab. She had no history of recurrent epistaxis, and her family history did not include hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) or PAVMs. She was admitted with pneumonia, symptoms of which were only partially resolved by antibiotic therapy as dyspnea on exertion persisted.
Overall, physical examination findings were unremarkable. Her lungs were clear to auscultation, and clubbing or evidence of telangiectatic lesions on the nasal mucosa or skin was absent. Blood findings revealed C-reactive protein of 0.32 mg/dL and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 50 mm/hour. Arterial blood gas analysis showed slight hypoxemia (PaO2 of 65.9 mmHg on ambient air). Chest radiography showed increased density in the lower lung. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed bronchiectasis and increased density in the right middle lobe and the lingular segment of the left lung. Contrast-enhanced chest CT showed no evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism, but the pulmonary veins of the right middle lobe and left lingular segment were enhanced in the arterial phase. Reconstructed 3D-CECT images revealed abnormal intrapulmonary shunts in the right and left pulmonary arteries and veins. Echocardiography findings did not indicate vascular heart disease. Measuring PaO2 and SaO2 after breathing 100% oxygen for 20 minutes revealed a shunt fraction of 22%. Whole-body 99mTc-macroaggregated albumin (MAA) perfusion lung imaging revealed a shunt fraction of 21.3%. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were normal.
Pulmonary angiography revealed irregular staining of the pulmonary arteries in the right middle lobe and the pulmonary vein during the early phase . Although the typical sac and nidus of PAVMs were not evident, an abnormal shunt was suspected and treated by transcatheter coil embolization. Thereafter, the vein in the early phase was undetectable . The shunt fraction decreased to 12.4%, on 99mTc-MAA lung perfusion images, and the dyspnea on exertion was ameliorated, so the patient was discharged. However, pneumonia reoccurred 3 months later and was improved with antibiotics, but hypoxemia persisted. The shunt fraction on 99mTc-MAA lung perfusion images was elevated to 16%, indicating recanalization of the embolized shunts. Pulmonary angiography did not reveal evidence of recanalization, but new abnormal shunt lesions were found in the periphery of another area of the right middle lobe and in the left lingular segment . The hypoxemia and dyspnea improved after coil embolization of these new lesions, and the patient was discharged. She has remained free of shunt recurrence and is presently under follow-up as an outpatient.