A 75 year old Jamaican Female of African descent was admitted for shortness of breath. She had been complaining of fatigue and shortness of breath for six months since arriving in the U.S. from Jamaica. She reported mild symptoms in Jamaica, but felt they had worsened during her time in the States. She had been admitted multiple times to at least four different hospitals since her symptoms began. She had been treated for both congestive heart failure (CHF) and asthma exacerbations, despite carrying no significant history of either condition. At the time of the admission described herein, she had been discharged from another hospital two days prior on a tapered prednisone regimen prescribed for an "asthma exacerbation".
A review of systems at the time of admission revealed symptoms consistent with New York Heart Association Class IV CHF, including orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, lower extremity edema, and a virtually non-existent exercise tolerance.
On examination the patient was in acute distress, sitting bolt upright in bed and tripodding. She was obese. Jugular venous distension was difficult to discern due to her body habitus. She did not have a palpable point of maximal impulse. Her heart sounds were distant but regular with a II/VI systolic ejection murmur heard loudest over the right upper sternal border which did not radiate. Her breath sounds were absent at the bases and diminished 2/3 of the way up the posterior lung fields. She had 2+ pitting edema to the hips. There was no hepatomegaly or macroglossia.
Her electrocardiogram (ECG) at the time of admission showed diffuse low voltage and Q waves in leads III and aVf . A trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed soon after admission . It showed moderately reduced left ventricular function with an ejection fraction (EF) of 33%, a small left ventricular cavity (20.4 cm2 in diastole, 16.3 cm2 in systole), markedly increased wall thickness (septal diameter in diastole = 1.86 cm), and severe concentric hypertrophy. Additionally, there was moderate mitral regurgitation. A speckled pattern in the myocardium was noted.
Both serum and urine protein electrophoresis demonstrated a normal protein distribution without a monoclonal spike. She had modestly impaired renal function (estimated GFR 51 mL/min by Cockocroft-Gault, 52 mL/min by Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Criteria) with no proteinuria.
She was diuresed using furosemide, and treated with monopril, metoprolol (later changed to carvedilol for better blood pressure control), and digoxin. There was little subjective or objective improvement in her condition with this treatment. The digoxin was stopped on the 5th hospital day, as the suspicion for Amyloidosis at that point in time was high.
She underwent a fat pad aspiration biopsy, which was negative for amyloid by Congo Red Staining. At that time, it was felt that her refractory condition, in combination with the ECG and TTE data was sufficiently suggestive of amyloid disease that she should undergo endomyocardial biopsy as a means of definitive diagnosis. The biopsy revealed AL Amyloidosis with kappa and lambda light chain deposits. Stains for iron and amyloid AA were negative.