A 45-year-old female with a past medical history of rheumatoid arthritis and a remote history of chickenpox was referred for evaluation of an 11-day history of recurrent redness, blurriness, mild pain, pressure, discomfort, and decreased vision in the right eye (OD). Prior to her referral to our facility, she was evaluated at an outside clinic with a one-week history of redness and decreased vision OD. She was started on topical difluprednate and atropine for anterior uveitis which she began 2 days before her presentation to our facility.

On examination, best-corrected visual acuities (BCVA) were 20/100 OD and 20/25 in the left eye (OS). Pupillary examination showed a 1+ relative afferent pupillary defect OD. Intraocular pressures (IOP) were physiologic at 17 mmHg OD and 16 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination revealed 1–2+ granulomatous anterior chamber reaction and 3+ vitreous cells OD, and OS was unremarkable. Fundus examination showed optic disc edema and hemorrhages, diffuse retinal whitening, and necrosis with hemorrhagic vasculitis OD, and OS appeared unaffected. A diagnostic anterior chamber paracentesis was performed, and the ocular fluid was positive for VZV by PCR testing. Given the examination findings, she was diagnosed with acute retinal necrosis prompting an in-office intravitreal injection of foscarnet (2.4 mg/0.1 mL) and ganciclovir (2 mg/0.05 mL) along with initiation of oral valacyclovir 2 grams TID. On a 2-week follow-up after the initial presentation, the patient reported improvement in central vision, and BCVAs improved to 20/50 OD and 20/20 OS. Examination revealed persistent vitreous opacity, but the retinitis has improved with consolidation and well-demarcated borders of the retinitis involving the temporal retina.

On the 6-week follow-up, the patient complained of a sudden loss of vision in the right eye. BCVAs were counting fingers OD and 20/20 OS, and examination revealed retinal detachment OD. The patient underwent surgery for complex rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) repair and continued to be monitored closely. Postoperatively, the vision gradually improved until two weeks post-surgery when the patient was noted to develop a low-lying inferior retinal detachment with surface proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR), prompting a pars plana vitrectomy for retinal detachment repair. This surgery was performed seven weeks after the PVR diagnosis was made, and six months after the patient’s initial presentation at our facility.

An aqueous humor (AqH) sample of the right eye was obtained during surgery for a chemokine/cytokine profile analysis. The levels of a panel of 22 cytokines and chemokines (ie, IFN-γ, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-17A, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, IL-18, IL-1RA, IL-1a, IL-1α, IP-10, MCP-1, MIP-1α, MIP-1β, SDF-1α, IL-21, IL-22, IL-23, and IL-27) were tested in triplicate using a multiplex chemiluminescent immunoassay. The concentration of 7 cytokines/chemokines was detected including IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-8, IL-18, MIP-1β, IP-10, and MCP-1. MCP-1 was the most abundant cytokine (900 pg/mL), while IP-10 was the second most abundant cytokine (800 pg/mL). IL-8 and IL-18 were the third most abundant cytokines, each with a level of 40 pg/mL, while IFN-γ and TNF-α levels of <10 pg/mL were recorded as the least abundant in this patient’s AqH sample.