Computed tomography (CT) was performed at a peripheral hospital in a 24-year-old female who had complained of persisting chest and back pain and been treated with analgesics for nearly 2 weeks after an event of acute thoracic pain. She was finally diagnosed with AAD that had led to compromise of the left coronary ostium. Echocardiography demonstrated a poor left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction that was in keeping with the finding of severely compromised coronary perfusion. She was transferred to our hospital for surgery, and a staged approach anticipating need for postoperative mechanical circulatory support was agreed upon.

Intraoperative inspection of the dissected aorta and the LV myocardium yielded findings perfectly compatible with a process that had been ongoing since the patient had experienced the initial event of thoracic pain. After transection and direct true lumen cannulation of the ascending aorta, the left coronary ostium was found to have collapsed without, however, being irreversibly occluded. Therefore, antegrade cardioplegia was administered via the coronary ostia.

Subsequently, supracoronary replacement of the ascending aorta was implemented in deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. When it was found that repair of the left coronary ostium had failed, the left internal thoracic artery was grafted to the patient’s extremely narrow left anterior descending artery. Grafting of the circumflex artery turned out to be unfeasible due to the extremely narrow caliber of the circumflex system. When weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) turned out to be impossible, the patient was put on ECLS using a sidegraft (6 mm Dacron prosthesis) sewn to the aortic prosthesis for central cannulation (Nova Port Single Lumen Cannula, Novalung GmbH). The venous cannula (BioMedicus Multi-Stage Femoral Venous Cannula, Medtronic Inc.) was placed in the right femoral vein.

The ECLS system provided adequate circulatory support and the patient remained hemodynamically stable. Upon discontinuation of sedatives, her neurologic status was found normal. Considering that coronary malperfusion had been ongoing for some time preceding the surgical repair, and given the devastating LV damage seen intraoperatively and evidenced by CK and CK-MB levels of 8816 and 884 U/L and a troponin level of 488 899 pg/ml, respectively, sufficient recovery of the LV myocardium in the short run appeared unlikely. To prevent complications associated with prolonged ECLS, left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation as a bridge to recovery/transplantation was scheduled for the second day after the aortic procedure.

After re-sternotomy, the arterial cannula was moved from the aorta to the femoral artery and the patient was switched back from ECLS to CPB. After implantation of the pump (HVAD, HeartWare Inc., Framingham, MA, USA), the aortic prosthesis was side-clamped, the sidegraft attached to the aorta was removed, and the LVAD outflow graft was joined to the aortic prosthesis. When chest closure turned out to be impossible due to massive edematous swelling of the heart, the patient was transferred back to the intensive care unit (ICU) with the sternotomy wound temporarily covered.

After regredience of her massive cardiac edema and chest closure 2 days later, the patient took an unremarkable further course. She was transferred to the ward after 16 days in the ICU and discharged to a rehabilitation facility after a total hospital stay of 27 days.