A 32-year-old male presented to the outpatient division of our hospital with coughing and a slight fever. He had a history of aortic valve stenosis (bicuspid valve) and reduced LV ejection fraction (EF, 40%) at the age of 5 years. He had received an operation of aortic valve replacement at the age of 16 years. After surgery, he was followed up by another hospital and was given warfarin with fair control. At room temperature, the patient’s physical parameters were as follows: temperature, 37.0°C; blood pressure, 90/60 mmHg; pulse, 89 beats/min; and oxygen saturation, 99% (room air). Auscultation revealed normal breath sounds. A grade II/VI systolic ejection murmur was noted at the right sternal border. A chest radiograph revealed marked cardiomegaly and mediastinum expansion without a difference of increased radiolucency between the left and right lungs. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 10-cm aneurysm in the ascending aorta . The CT image indicated that the TAA had compressed the right pulmonary artery without any difference of contrast medium character between left and right lung, indicating that the right pulmonary artery blood flow was not disturbed. An echocardiogram showed left ventricular (LV) enlargement (LV end-diastolic diameter, 57 mm) and diffuse LV hypokinesis (EF, 35%). A Doppler echocardiogram showed a trans-aortic valve pressure gradient of 18 mmHg. However, his exercise tolerance was well. Any dyspnea on effort had not seen during out-patient clinic (NYHA I). Ventilation/perfusion lung scintigraphy was conducted to exclude aneurysm-induced compression of surrounding organs, but no significant findings were observed. The patient had never complained of dyspnea during nighttime in the supine position either.
A total aortic arch replacement was planned. However, after intravenous anesthesia (his body weight 78 kg, 5-mg midazolam, 100-mg thiopental and a total of 90-mg rocuronium) and intubation in the supine position, his oxygen saturation (70%) and blood pressure (60/40 mmHg) decreased rapidly. His arterial gas analysis showed the following results on FiO2 100%: pH, 7.234; PaO2, 20 mmHg; PaCO2, 72.6 mmHg; SaO2, 18.6% and HCO3–, 29.6 mmol/L. Cardiopulmonary collapse was resistant to vasopressors (total 12-mg ephedrine) and high oxygenation. As acute pulmonary embolism was tentatively considered in this patient, pulmonary arteriography was immediately performed. The left pulmonary artery was patent. However the right pulmonary artery was totally defected. Swan–Ganz catheter was unable to pass the main branch of the right pulmonary artery. Additionally, because of the absence of breath sounds on auscultation in the left lung field, bronchoscopy was performed and complete compression of the left main bronchus was noted . We finally diagnosed sudden hemodynamic collapse and hypoxia as simultaneous compression of both right pulmonary artery and left main bronchus.
Percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS) was conducted resulting in recover from the cardiopulmonary collapse effectively. We discontinued the operation and transferred the patient to the intensive care unit. After the patient regained consciousness from anesthesia, his hemodynamic collapse was gradually improved, and weaning of PCPS was achieved without use of inotropes. Besides, bronchoscopy revealed that occlusion of the left main bronchus disappeared, and he was successfully extubated. Fortunately, he recovered the next day without neurological deficit. At the second surgery, PCPS was initiated with local anesthesia before general anesthesia and intubation. We denuded the right femoral vein and artery, and introduced cannulas for PCPS. General anesthesia was conducted carefully. We also performed bronchoscopy after intubation and found out that the left main bronchus was almost occluded in much the same way as the prior operation. However, his oxygen saturation was not decreased. At this time, PCPS was thought to be useful to prevent from hypoxia and hemodynamic collapse. The aortic valve prosthesis that previously replaced was completely intact. The aortic aneurysm occupied from just above the prosthesis to the distal aortic arch. We successfully performed total arch replacement and reconstruction of bilateral coronary arteries, brachiocephalic artery, left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery without any adverse events .