Our patient was initially referred to another hospital with mild head injury when he was 8 years old. An intra-axial tumor located in the right insular cortex was incidentally detected on MRI. Surgical resection was waived and followed-up for 10 years until the patient was 18 years old because of slowly growing tumor without symptoms. At the end of the observation period, the tumor size was measured to be one and a half times the diameter measured on the first MRI scan. After the end of the follow-up period, he visited our hospital for intensive examination and treatment.
The patient had no neurological deficit. Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed a low-density lesion with no calcification located in the right insular cortex . T1-weighted MRI demonstrated a hypointense lesion in the right insular cortex . T2-weighted MRI showed a hyperintense lesion that corresponded with the hypointensity on the T1-weighted image . T1-weighted MRI with gadolinium administration did not show any enhanced lesions [Figure and ]. Arterial spin labeling study suggested decreased blood flow at the lesion .
The lesion located in the right insular cortex demonstrated gradual growth for 10 years [Figure -]. The change in lesion volume was assessed using polygonal tracing with fusion. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signals were assessed using the DICOM image viewer OsiriX (®) (v. 7.0; Pixmeo SARL, Bernex, Switzerland) by slice-by-slice region of interest tracings. The growth rate of this lesion was found to be almost directly proportional to time .
In order to remove the lesion and obtain histopathological diagnosis, an awake craniotomy was performed using cortical and subcortical stimulation mapping with a bipolar direct electrical stimulator at 3.5 mA/60 Hz biphasic current to monitor motor and somatosensory response, speech or language difficulties, and other higher brain functions. An anarthria was induced by stimulation of the ventral precentral gyrus . Tumor resection was performed via a transopercular approach. Intraoperatively, the nature of the tumor was gray, soft, and jelly-like tissue with clear boundaries. Fiber structures in the peripheral zone were relatively well-defined and we promoted excision of the tumor using an ultrasonic surgical aspirator. A postoperative MRI showed gross total resection of the tumor . Postoperative course was uneventful without neurological deficits. No recurrence was recognized postoperatively for 12 months.
Histological examination of the hypointense area on T1-weighted MRI showed multiple cystic structures with myxomatous background and proliferation of oligodendroglia-like cells with oval nuclei in the wall of the cystic spaces . Neuronal elements featuring “floating neurons” were observed, indicating a glioneuronal lesion within the cystic cavity . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed intense positive staining for Olig2, S-100 and synaptophysin, and less reactivity for IDH-1 . The Ki-67 staining index (SI) was 1% . A combined deletion of 1p and 19q chromosomes was absent. The histological diagnosis was WHO grade I DNET.