An 80-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with dyspnea and without other respiratory symptoms or fever. She had back pain, which started 1 week before admission, radiating in the right knee. She had similar complaints a year before, due to a herniated disc. The patient’s past medical history included triple-negative, node-positive cancer of the right breast (cT3 cN1 cM0 G2, estrogen receptor- and progesterone receptor-negative, HER2-negative, PD-L1-negative, BRCA-negative) diagnosed 7 months earlier. After eleven cycles of chemotherapy with paclitaxel and carboplatin, a mastectomy was performed. Subsequently, she received adjuvant chemotherapy with capecitabine and percutaneous radiotherapy of the right breast inclusive of axillary, paraclavicular and parasternal lymphatic drainage. When radiotherapy was completed, she had shortness of breath on light exertion. At admission, tachypnea was present with a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute and an oxygenation saturation of 89% breathing ambient air. The heart rate was 78 beats per minute, and blood pressure 160/76 mm Hg. The hemoglobin level was 11.2 g/dL, and the platelet count was 68,000/mm3. The white blood cell count was 7,400/mm3, with 79.6% neutrophils. Serum C-reactive protein was elevated (80 mg/L), and the sodium level was decreased (125 mmol/L), diagnosed as syndrome of inadequate antidiuretic hormone secretion. A pronounced D-dimer elevation (55 μg/mL) was also detected. The patient’s characteristics are summarized in .
A CT scan with pulmonary embolism detection program of the chest revealed smooth interlobular septal thickening with centrilobular consolidation and pleural effusions, as shown in . Angiography of the greater pulmonary arteries was negative for pulmonary embolism, and there were no signs of acute right heart failure, but signs of chronic pulmonary arterial hypertension were evident. Additionally, progressive mediastinal lymphadenopathy and right mammary soft tissue thickening, highly suspicious for a locoregional recurrence of the breast cancer, were detected. Further, the CT scan showed multiple metastases and suspect sclerotic lesions in the thoracic spine.
Advanced tumor progression was suspected, but neither chemotherapy (due to the poor condition [ECOG 3] and low platelets) nor immunotherapy (due to low PD-L1 expression in a previous biopsy) nor an antibody-drug conjugate (due to hematotoxicity) was a causative treatment option. Symptomatic treatment for the respiratory distress consisted of oxygen, inhalation therapy with anticholinergic and beta-agonist bronchodilators, as well as oral corticosteroids. A follow-up CT scan of the chest 7 days later showed regressive pulmonary congestion. The platelets continued to decrease with a count of 22,000/mm3 7 days after admission. The patient’s condition massively deteriorated under the initiated therapy, and finally, end-of-life-care was initiated, given a situation with rapidly progressive carcinoma. The patient died 8 days after admission.
An autopsy was then performed, revealing numerous tumor embolisms in the small- and medium-sized pulmonary vessels, partly with associated thrombi indicating PTTM . In addition, advanced metastatic disease with manifestations in the liver, non-regional lymph nodes, visceral pleura, all vertebral bodies, both suprarenal glands, and the mucosa of the stomach was found. The histomorphology was consistent with the pre-diagnosed triple-negative breast cancer.