A 71-year-old man with highly symptomatic severe aortic-valve stenosis (AS) and in acute heart failure with pulmonary oedema and dyspnoea was urgently admitted to our Heart Center. Transthoracic echocardiography showed high-gradient stenosis (Vmax 4.4 m/s, ΔPmean 49 mmHg, aortic valve area 0.6 cm2) and reduced left-ventricular function (32%; see , ). Pulmonary hypertension was not documented. He had exertional angina, Canadian Cardiovascular Society Class II, and one syncope. His medical history included hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, diabetes mellitus Type 2, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease GOLD III, and multiple prior percutaneous endovascular treatments with stents due to severe peripheral artery disease. At admission, his medical regimen included single antiplatelet therapy, atorvastatin, a beta-blocker, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, and bronchodilators. Upon examination, his blood pressure was 170/90 mmHg. Baseline electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia, left-ventricular hypertrophy with strain pattern, and AV-block first degree.
He had bilateral crackles at the lung bases and clinical findings of severe symptomatic AS. N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level at admission was 11 200 pg/mL (normal <125 pg/mL). After initial management with intravenous diuretics and recompensation on our ICU, the patient underwent coronary angiography which revealed no significant coronary artery disease. Invasive assessment of AS showed a peak-to-peak and mean aortic gradient of 133 and 44 mmHg, respectively. Left-ventricular end diastolic pressure was 35 mmHg. Given his comorbidities and surgical risk, he was deemed a candidate for TAVI by our heart valve team. The pre-procedural multi-detector computed tomography revealed unfavourable vessels for transfemoral access from both groins due to multiple prior stenting procedures and due to a severe calcified aortic valve with an aortic annulus perimeter of 76.8 mm and annulus area of 502.3 mm2 . Further calcification of the annulus was excluded. We evaluated the left axillary artery (9 mm) as an alternative access site and found it to be feasible for TAVI (TAx-TAVI; ).