A 57-year-old Ashkenazi Jew woman, who aside from iron deficiency anemia was relatively well, with no family or personal history of malignancy, was admitted to our department of general surgery for treatment of her transverse colon tumor. Four months prior, she had begun experiencing periumbilical abdominal pain hematochezia, and she had a 10-kg weight loss. Upon physical examination, no masses were palpated, and there were no other pathologic findings. She underwent a colonoscopy, which revealed a large mass that involved nearly the whole circumference of the colon and seemed to be adjacent to the cecum. Biopsies were taken that failed to demonstrate any colonic pathology. She proceeded to undergo computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen that demonstrated a huge mass that occupied the whole colonic lumen and caused a colocolic intussusception . Considerable mesenteric lymphadenopathy was seen with nodes up to 28 × 21 mm in diameter and was deemed to be evidence of positive tumoral lymph node involvement . No inguinal, pelvic, retroperitoneal, or other lymphadenopathy was seen. Considering the gross endoscopic and CT findings, she was scheduled for surgery. A laparoscopic right extended hemicolectomy was performed, which was uncomplicated, and during which considerable mesocolic lymphadenopathy was seen and widely resected accordingly.
Pathology of the surgical specimen showed findings consistent with small B cell lymphoproliferative disorders (LPDs) with plasmacytoid differentiation. At this point, though primary lymphoma of the colon was considered in the differential diagnosis, the disease was thought to be part of systemic dissemination of lymphoma. The patient was referred to the hematology clinic for further investigation. A bone marrow biopsy was performed, and the result was normal. The investigation was complemented by positron emission tomography-CT, which showed no other focus of lymphoma. Also, the result of a test for Epstein-Barr virus infection as a possible predisposing factor for lymphoma was negative. These results support the diagnosis of a primary colonic NHL small B-cell LPD with plasmacytoid differentiation, an exceedingly rare disease with only two such reports in the current literature [, ].