A 72-year-old Asian (Indian) man presented to our Cornea and Anterior Segment Service with a referral diagnosis of scleritis in his left eye. He had a history of having had cataract surgery in his left eye at another facility 6 weeks earlier with good postoperative vision.
The medical history suggested that his postoperative vision was good until day five. He complained of severe pain and diminution of vision in his operated left eye on the fifth postoperative day. With a working diagnosis of SINS his primary ophthalmologist put him on systemic and topical corticosteroids. However, when his vision continued to decrease and pain persisted, his ophthalmologist started topical natamycin every hour, and topical ciprofloxacin every 2 hours while continuing topical prednisolone acetate every 2 hours. This new treatment, however, did not help improve his condition.
At presentation to us his visual acuity was counting fingers at 1 meter in his right eye and 2.5 meters in his left eye. Apart from a cataract (grade 3 nuclear sclerosis) his right eye was apparently within normal limits. A slit-lamp examination of his left eye showed a well demarcated area of scleral necrosis predominately involving the area posterior to the posterior lip of the scleral incision. The anterior lip of the scleral wound was also involved . The sclera around the necrotic region was congested. His cornea was clear. There were 2+ cells in the anterior chamber. As he was very symptomatic a detailed fundus evaluation could not be done but his posterior pole appeared to be within normal limits.
A presumptive diagnosis of SINS was made. The wound was scraped, and necrotic tissue was debrided and sent for microbiological evaluation. Microscopy in potassium hydroxide and calcofluor white stain revealed fungal filaments. Donor sclera of an appropriate size (7.5mm × 11mm) was patched over the thinned sclera . The donor sclera which was preserved in absolute alcohol was obtained from the eye bank. After cleaning the preserved sclera with Ringer’s lactate solution and 5% povidone solution, it was cut according to the area excised. It was sutured with 6–0 polyglactin suture with the surrounding sclera and with 10–0 nylon suture with the limbal portion of cornea.
He was started on topical natamycin (5%) every hour, cyclosporine (0.1%) two times a day, homatropine three times a day and systemic itraconazole 100mg two times a day. A systemic evaluation was done postoperatively to rule out any other etiology of the scleritis. Blood studies showed a normal total and differential count and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 14mm/hour. Rheumatoid factor and anti-nuclear antibody were negative. Liver function tests were within normal limits. All antifungals were discontinued on the 18th day following the scleral graft as there was no evidence of active infection. He was initiated on topical prednisolone acetate (1%) eight times a day and homatropine (2%) eye drops at bed time. He was regularly examined by the primary ophthalmologist. At the last examination in the fifth postoperative month, he was symptom free and his vision was 6/36. An area of retinal pigment epithelium alteration was seen hazily due to posterior capsular opacity. The graft was healthy and vascularized .