The patient was a 29-year-old nulliparous woman (height, 158 cm; weight, 58 kg; BMI, 20.4 kg/m2) who had received oral thyroid hormone replacement due to previous subtotal thyroidectomy for Graves’ disease. No abnormalities in platelet count or coagulation had been noted. She was initially referred to our institution due to suspected placenta previa. At 31 weeks of gestation, the placental position was confirmed within the normal range, and the placenta previa was denied. No additional concerns were described during the remainder of her pregnancy. At 41 weeks of pregnancy, vaginal delivery was induced by oxytocin administration. The patient did not ask for epidural analgesia for her childbirth. The malpresentation or malrotation of the fetal head was not confirmed, which would compress the nerve root and induce severe radiating pain. The obstetrician expected uterine hypertonus when her fetus developed non-reassuring fetal status. The patient was advised of emergent cesarean delivery because the discontinuation of oxytocin did not improve the fetal status.
After careful disinfection with 10% povidone-iodine, waiting for the disinfectant to dry, spinal anesthesia was performed with the patient’s left lateral position. The L2/3 interspace was identified by palpating the posterior superior iliac spine to confirm the L5 and S1 vertebrae. A 25-gauge Quincke needle was used to puncture the L2/3 interspace via median approach.
The first puncture obtained clear cerebrospinal fluid reflux. A mixture of anesthetics containing 12 mg of 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine, 0.1 mg of morphine hydrochloride, and 10 mcg of fentanyl citrate was administered. There were no concerns, such as bleeding or radiating pain, during the puncture or infusion of the anesthetics. The level of the blockade successfully covered the sixth thoracic vertebral dermatome level.
The delivery was uneventful for both the patient and infant, and the estimated blood loss was 500 mL. The patient noticed discomfort and numbness in the left lower extremity 7 h after the spinal procedure, but she did not tell the finding to her obstetrician. On a postoperative day 1, she complained of sensory numbness on the lateral side of the left lower leg and difficulty with dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the left foot. A neurologist was consulted by her obstetrician and assessed the manual muscle strength test and found that her left tibialis anterior and gastrocnemius muscles had weakened by 3/5. The neurologist also noted sensory loss on the lateral side of the left lower leg. Collectively, the injury to the L5 and S1 nerve root was suspected. On postoperative day 3, the patient underwent MRI to rule out the possibility of such complications as epidural hematoma formation. The image showed a T2W1 low signal in the left side of the spinal canal at the L5/S1 level due to adhesive arachnoiditis . No abnormal signal was observed in the spinal cord. She could walk unaided within a few days; however, the dullness and paralysis persisted at discharge on the sixth postoperative day. The symptoms gradually improved and entirely disappeared within 2 months.