A 68-year-old Asian man presented to our cardiologic clinic with chief complaints of long-term swelling of his ankles, intermittent palpitations, and a propensity for becoming easily fatigued. On arrival, he presented the following vital signs: blood pressure of 121/71mmHg, body temperature of 35.9°C, and a heart rate of 52/minute. A physical examination revealed a grade III/VI blowing pansystolic murmur, best heard low over the left lower sternal border, an irregular heartbeat, jugular vein engorgement, and bilateral grade III pitting edema of his lower legs. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with frequent premature ventricular contractions. Color flow Doppler echocardiography showed an enlarged, hypokinetic right ventricle with a paper-thin right ventricular free wall and dilatation of his tricuspid valve annulus compatible with tricuspid regurgitation. Given the evidence from a serial laboratory study and image examination, the cardiologist had a high level of suspicion for arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. An EMB was arranged subsequently for sampling of the patient’s right ventricular pathological tissue via his right internal jugular vein. Using Seldinger’s technique, a 9 French silicone-locked catheter introducer sheet was applied. The bioptome was introduced via the sheet and then directed toward his right atrium. However, the cardiologist felt kinking while introducing the bioptome within the sheet just above the level of the patient’s right subclavian vein. A metallic cup tip was lost when the bioptome was withdrawn. The silicone introducer sheet was later removed without incident.
Out of concern for the floating foreign body inside the vasculature, an angiography via a right femoral approach was performed promptly, but no visible radiopaque foreign body was found within the patient’s vasculature with fluoroscopic guidance. He did not experience any immediate neurological or cardiovascular catastrophe. The cardiologist immediately arranged a computed tomography (CT) scan, and detected a high density lesion within the patient’s prevertebral musculature.
The head-and-neck surgeons arranged neck exploration the next day. Out of consideration for safe surgical removal, we adopted a right lateral cervical approach. After developing superior and inferior subplatysmal flaps, the patient’s carotid sheath was opened by retracting the sternocleidomastoid muscle posteriorly. We explored between his internal jugular vein and his common carotid artery after identifying the vagus nerve, and then continued dissection deep down to the buccopharyngeal fascia. However, we were unable to approach the foreign body using physical digital examination, even after identifying the vertebral transverse process and sympathetic trunk. We then applied a mobile C-arm (X-ray image intensifier, Figure b) to check the exact three-dimensional relationship of the foreign body to the vertebral body. We then identified the missing metallic cup tip, just medial to a vertebral vein, and stuck within the deep prevertebral muscles . The patient underwent surgery to remove the metallic cup tip uneventfully, with no immediate sequela. He was discharged 10 days later. The wound healed well during follow-up.