A 20-years-old, British, male sustained cervical spinal cord injury (ASIA impairment scale B) at C-5 level in 1970 while teaching gymnastics. He was a physical training instructor in army and he landed on the wrong side of a trampoline. This gentleman had been managing his bladder by penile sheath drainage until 2013 when he underwent surgery for upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Since then, he had been draining urine by urethral Foley catheter.
Following a routine change of urethral catheter by a health professional, this patient started sweating profusely. The Foley catheter was draining urine; there was no bypassing, no bleeding per urethra, and no haematuria. Patient’s wife, who had been looking after her tetraplegic husband for more than forty years, told the health professionals that the catheter might have been placed incorrectly but her concerns were ignored by health professionals. Therefore, this patient came to spinal unit for advice. On clinical examination, this patient was sweating profusely over his head and face. Blood pressure was 140/70 mm Hg. The patient did not have symptoms of urine infection nor did he feel unwell. Ultrasound scan of urinary tract revealed no urinary calculi, no hydronephrosis. The balloon of Foley catheter was not seen in urinary bladder but this finding was not recognised by radiologist and spinal cord physician. Patient continued to sweat profusely; therefore, Computed Tomography (CT) of pelvis was performed, but there was a delay of ten days. Special attention was taken to include the entire urethra in addition to urinary bladder for scanning, as misplacement of urethral catheter was suspected by the spinal cord physician. CT revealed the balloon of Foley catheter in the over-stretched prostato-membranous urethra . The tip of Foley catheter was not located within the urinary bladder but was lying distal to bladder neck . Flexible cystoscopy was performed and Foley catheter was inserted into the bladder over a guide wire. The intensity of sweating decreased; noxious stimuli arising from traumatised urethra might take a long while to settle.
24-hours ECG monitoring revealed bradycardia: slowest being 39 beats per minute , 214 episodes, and 36 beats at 00:09:04. There was a pause of 2.08 seconds at 22:14:51 . X-ray of pelvis revealed marked osteoarthritic changes in both hips; X-ray of lumbar spine revealed slight scoliosis concave to the right; anterior hyperostosis, most marked at L4/5; disc spacing was well maintained.
Ultrasound scan revealed normal size right kidney measuring 12.5 cm with no hydronephrosis or calculi. The left kidney was atrophic measuring 8.4 cm, cortical depth of 14.1 mm. No calculus was seen. Blood tests: Urea: 5.9 mmol/L; Creatinine: 69 micromol/L; HbA1c: 36 mmol/mol; PSA: 0.15 ug/L. Urine culture yielded growth of >108/L of Staphylococcus aureus. Cytology of urine revealed abundant neutrophils and red cells. Groups of urothelial cells were seen with slightly enlarged nuclei. Some of the groups have a vaguely papillary appearance, which could be seen in low-grade urothelial neoplasms, infection, instrumentation or stones. A follow-up urine cytology revealed a few inflammatory cells and urothelial cells. No malignant cells were seen.