A 15-year-old male presented to the emergency department for evaluation of neck and chest pain. He was running at a brisk pace when he felt a sudden sharp pain in his neck followed by sustained pain in the center of his chest and neck. He reported the sensation of shortness of breath and nausea, but no dysphagia or dysphonia. There was no history of trauma to the head, neck, or chest. He was previously healthy with no prior medical problems or prior surgeries and had no history of familial or congenital medical conditions. Most notably, the patient had no family history of sudden cardiac death, aortic disease, or connective tissue disease. The patient endorsed having no known allergies and did not take any medications on a daily basis.
On arrival, he displayed mild tachypnea with a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, but otherwise had normal vital signs with a blood pressure of 128/80 millimeters of mercury, heart rate 66 beats per minute, temperature 37 degrees Celsius, with 98% oxygen saturation on room air. His airway showed no evidence of impending compromise. He appeared to be in moderate distress secondary to pain. He demonstrated respiratory splinting and held his neck and shoulders still to prevent worsening of pain. He had mild nasal flaring, but his lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally. He had no evidence of stridor. Palpation of the chest revealed tenderness near the right sternoclavicular region of his chest. Pulses were palpable and equal in all extremities.
A chest radiograph showed lung markings to the periphery bilaterally, no consolidations, and no opacities . The mediastinum appeared widened, which prompted a computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest and neck to better evaluate vascular anatomy. This revealed a pseudoaneurysm of the proximal innominate artery . There was also high attenuation blood tracking from the superior mediastinum to the descending aorta suggesting rupture of the pseudoaneurysm and formation of a mediastinal hematoma .
The patient was taken to the operating room where he was found to have an extensive tear of the proximal innominate artery about one centimeter from its origin. The rupture was contained by the adventitia and surrounding soft tissue. The patient received an ascending aortic to innominate artery extra-anatomic bypass graft, and drains were placed to reduce the mediastinal hematoma. He was evaluated by geneticists postoperatively who suspected a connective tissue disorder. High on the differential was vEDS given his exam exhibiting flexible digits, easy bruising, and normal aortic root dimension. The patient was discharged home on postoperative day five, and nearly three weeks later, genetic testing confirmed a pathogenic COL3A1 mutation diagnostic of vEDS.