A 56-year-old woman was referred to the emergency department due to a severe headache in the frontal area for 2 days before admission. The patient had nausea and vomiting in the morning but had no history of seizures or decreased consciousness. The examination of neurological symptoms was completely normal and showed no symptoms of meningeal irritation. The patient's vital signs were recorded as follows: blood pressure (BP)=130/85 mmHg, heart rate (HR)= 86/min, and temperature (T)=37.3 °C. In her past history, the patient had undergonetympano- mastoidectomy surgery and resection of the cholesteatoma 1 week earlier, and a canalwall down mastoidectomy (CWD) was performed due to right ear cholesteatoma. According to the information obtained from the previous surgeon, microtrauma was inflicted in the dural plate during surgery, but since no significant cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak occurred during the procedure, reconstruction was not necessary. After admission, examination and initial evaluation, the Mount Fuji sign was found on the brain CT scan of the patient, but no evidence of brain abscess or intracranial hemorrhage. The patient was immediately admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Initial treatments such as CBR, 30-degree head elevation, anti-fever therapy, analgesics and oxygen therapy, along with anti-compulsive drug (phenytoin), were prescribed. The patient did not undergo surgery due to a lack of neurological symptoms and a decreased level of consciousness or seizures. However, in the ICU, the patient was maintained under regular and continuous monitoring of vital and neurological signs and level of consciousness. The day after admission, the patient’s headache had completely resolved. The patient was admitted to the ICU for 5 days and was monitored for volume ofpneumocephalus every day with a CT scan. At the end of 5 days, the patient's pneumocephalus was resolved completely, and she was transferred to the ward. The patient was discharged after complete recovery.