The 28-year-old Taiwanese woman whose condition is reported herein had an uneventful birth and developmental history. She exhibited suboptimal performance in exercise since elementary school age, especially in long-distance running. She experienced one episode of reversible proximal limb weakness for 3 days when she was 21 years old. She denied any weakness at baseline. She used antiobesity drugs, and in the preceding 4 months, her body weight decreased from 60 to 47 kg, with a corresponding reduction in body mass index from 22.3 to 17.5. The regimen of antiobesity drugs included metformin, triiodothyronine, topiramate, pseudoephedrine, hydrochlorothiazide, fluoxetine, and oxazolam. She was not prescribed diet change or caloric restriction. After weight loss, she exhibited poor appetite; poor oral intake; dyspnoea on exertion; and progressive weakness and soreness in the four proximal limbs, the neck, and the trunk. She was aided by a wheelchair upon admission.
On examination, the patient had intermittent tachycardia and dyspnoea on minimal exertion but had otherwise normal vital signs. She had reduced muscle strength in the proximal limbs (manual muscle power: bilateral deltoid: 3; bilateral finger abduction: 5; bilateral hip flexion: 4; bilateral dorsiflexion: 5), neck, and trunk, with positive Gowers’ sign and myopathic gait. Generalised muscle wasting involving the neck, trunk, shoulder girdle, pelvic girdle, and proximal and distal limbs but not the facial muscles was observed . No percussion myotonia was noted. The patient had mildly decreased memory and calculation abilities compared with healthy individuals of an equivalent age. Examinations for cranial nerve, deep tendon reflex, sensory, and coordination function revealed unremarkable results. She had no hepatosplenomegaly, goitre, or skin hyperpigmentation.
Laboratory exams indicated elevated serum creatinine kinase (496 U/L), elevated aspartate aminotransferase (102 U/L), elevated resting serum lactate (4.7 mmol/L), and borderline elevated serum calcium (10.2 mg/dL) levels. Blood count, estimated glomerular filtration rate, serum electrolyte levels (including sodium, potassium, and magnesium), and thyroid function were unremarkable. An arterial blood gas test revealed no hypoxemia, hypercapnia, or acid–base problems. A nerve conduction study yielded no evidence of polyneuropathy. Electromyography demonstrated myopathic motor unit action potential with early recruitment pattern as well as no spontaneous activity in all sampled muscles in the four proximal and distal limbs. An aerobic forearm exercise test revealed elevated mixed venous oxygen saturation after 3 min of aerobic exercise, suggesting defective oxidative metabolism in the muscles . Muscle magnetic resonance imaging of the bilateral thighs was unremarkable. Muscle pathology of the right rectus femoris muscle suggested lipid storage myopathy . Tandem mass spectrometry of serum acylcarnitine revealed elevated short-, medium-, and long-chain acylcarnitines with secondary carnitine deficiency . Urine organic acid analysis indicated glutaric aciduria. ETFDH gene analysis revealed compound heterozygous mutations c.250G > A / p.Ala84Thr and c.524G > T / p.Arg175Leu. Both variants have previously been reported to be pathogenic [, ]. MADD was therefore diagnosed. We treated the patient with riboflavin, carnitine, and ubiquinone, and her symptoms rapidly improved. She was able to walk without assistance within 2 weeks, and she became asymptomatic within 3 months.