We present a 40-year-old female, a gravida-9 para-7+1, who previously underwent an interval bilateral tubal ligation (BTL) in December 2016 during a community outreach program, through a mini laparotomy. She had seven previous successful pregnancies and an ectopic pregnancy in October 2019, for which she had an exploratory laparotomy and salpingectomy done for a left-ruptured tubal ectopic pregnancy in November 2018. She presented at a university teaching hospital in northern Uganda on October 20, 2021, with acute abdominal pain for 2 days and amenorrhea for 6 weeks, with no vaginal bleeding. She was fully conscious, in pain, anxious, afebrile, and hemodynamically stable, with a pulse rate of 98 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 121/78 mmHg. She had generalized abdominal tenderness, guarding and rebound tenderness, and cervical motion tenderness. Laboratory investigations revealed a positive urine pregnancy (HCG) test and a hemoglobin level of 12.9 g/dL with normal platelet count. A trans-abdominal ultrasound scan revealed a tender echo-complex right adnexal mass, free fluid in the Cul-de-sac measuring 5.2 centimeters deep, and an empty uterine cavity. A diagnosis of ruptured right tubal ectopic pregnancy was made, and the patient was counseled and consented to an emergent exploratory laparotomy. On exploratory laparotomy, approximately 300 mL of blood were found in the peritoneal cavity. A ruptured right distal tube containing a well-circumscribed mass was also found. There was also evidence of a previous right tubal ligation and left salpingectomy with a normal uterus and ovaries. The blood was evacuated, and a right total salpingectomy was done. The excised right tube containing the mass (gestational product) was sent for histological examination. Histopathology revealed chorionic villi and hemorrhagic vascular decidual tissue in the fallopian tube, features suggestive of tubal ectopic pregnancy. Post-operative patient management was uneventful. However, the couple expressed their dismay about the two ectopic pregnancies and dissatisfaction with the previous BTL, as well as concerns about having sex in the future in fear of subsequent ectopic pregnancies. They were counseled to relieve their fears about sex and future ectopic pregnancies.