A 70-year-old male with a history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and atrial fibrillation presented to the emergency department with chest pain lasting for 1 hour. The patient did not have any previous neurologic deficits or surgical, family, or genetic history, although he was a heavy smoker (75 pack-years). His initial blood pressure was 109/62 mmHg with a heart rate of 103 beats per minute. There were no remarkable findings upon physical exam. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF and reciprocal changes in leads I and aVL, suggestive of ST elevation myocardial infarction. Initial troponin I level (0.021 ng/mL [0–5 ng/mL]) was unremarkable. The patient was started on intravenous unfractionated heparin (UFH).
The patient was immediately moved to the catheterization lab for emergent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of ST elevation myocardial infarction. Vital signs were normal during the femoral artery puncture and insertion of a 6 French (Fr) sheath into the right femoral artery (FA). We punctured at the femoral head level without any mispuncutures during the process. After puncture and before coronary angiography (CAG), however, the patient went into ventricular fibrillation and the blood pressure became unmeasurable. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was immediately initiated with defibrillation every 2 min, although normal rhythm of vital signs were not recovered. As CPR was performed for a total of 30 min, we concurrently inserted a venoarterial ECMO. A 16.5 Fr (external diameter: 5.5 mm) arterial and 21 Fr (external diameter: 7 mm) venous cannula was inserted through the right FA and femoral vein (FV), respectively. CAG revealed an extensive thrombotic occlusion of the mid right coronary artery (RCA) with thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) 0 flow distally. A drug eluting stent (Biomime™ 4.0 × 19 mm) was inserted to the lesion and the RCA restored a TIMI 2 flow (pain-to-balloon time: 120 min).
After the PCI, the patient was moved to the intensive care unit for ECMO care. Initial echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 15% and an extensive regional wall motion abnormality of the RCA territory. However, there was blood pressure drop with concurrent massive nasal and gastrointestinal bleeding. Hemoglobin level became 5.9 g/dL, which was approximately 8 g/dL decrease compared with initial levels. Blood pressure was recovered to normal after massive transfusion; however, we lowered the target activated partial thromboplastin time to approximately 40 s to prevent additional bleeding. There were no cannulation site complications such as hematoma or signs of infection during ECMO care, although diffuse swelling developed in the right lower extremity (LE) the next few days. Pneumatic compression devices were applied to both LEs to prevent DVT. ECMO therapy was maintained for 4 days, while vital signs slowly recovered. As the LVEF was restored to 46% on the 4th day, the ECMO was weaned and removed. The ECMO cannulas were removed by manual compression. Despite the risk of stent thrombosis, dual-antiplatelet therapy was stopped after ECMO removal (day 4) in concern of additional bleeding.
On the 7th day of admission, the patient recovered orientation. However, leg edema did not improve despite ECMO removal. He also started complaining impaired function, pain, and hypesthesia of the LE. Compartment syndrome was initially suspected. We clinically ruled out compartment syndrome , since the patient was negative for Homan’s sign and had good distal pulsation with warm circulation. The patient had burning sensation and Grade 3 weakness in hip and knee flexion motions with no deep tendon reflex. Neurologic findings were not dermatome specific. LE Doppler sonography and computed tomography (CT) showed DVT extending from the right external iliac vein to the calf vein without any evidence of puncture site hematoma or intramural bleeding . The patient was started on rivaroxaban (15 mg twice daily) for DVT (day 8). The swelling of the right LE gradually improved over the next 30 days, although his pain and weakness were not alleviated. As the patient was suspected to have post-thrombotic syndrome (PTS), which is pain and abnormal sensation after the onset of DVT, further studies such as the nerve conduction study (NCS) or electromyography were not considered until later on. The patient was discharged to a rehabilitation hospital on the 35th day.
During outpatient department follow up, the patient consistently had pain, abnormal sensation, and weakness in the right LE, which resulted in insomnia and depression. Although he was given thioctic acid (600 mg qd) and pregabalin (150 mg bid) during outpatient department follow up, his pain remained. Femoral and pulmonary arterial CT angiography was performed 100 days post-ECMO insertion showed no thrombus in the right LE or pulmonary arteries. However, the NCS revealed no sensory nerve action potential in the right peroneal nerve and tibial nerve, suggestive of impaired sensation. Additionally, the compound muscle action potential was not observed in the right femoral , peroneal and tibial nerve, indicating motor nerve palsy. These results collectively suggested FN. The patient is continuing rehabilitation exercises and slowly recovering from the weakness, although the tingling sensation remains to a lesser degree. The patient shares his regrets on his previous smoking habits which caused his myocardial infarction and eventually FN. An informed consent for publishing data was obtained from the patient. A timeline of events is summarized in Table .