A 21-year-old male was referred to our hospital due to worsening pain in his right shoulder. He denied any history of trauma or excessive load-bearing activities, and there was no family history of cancer. During the physical examination, we observed a deformity in his right shoulder, which appeared asymmetrical compared to the left side, and he experienced pain upon palpation of the distal third of the clavicle. Plain radiographs revealed an osteolytic lesion with cortical thinning in the distal third of the clavicle, while axial and sagittal views of the MRI showed tumor growth on the lateral third of the right clavicle with contrast enhancement (a-c). Before surgery, Multislice-Computed Tomography (MSCT) scans of the abdomen, and thorax, and a complete bone survey were conducted, revealing no additional masses in other regions. Based on the clinical and radiological results, we suspected a primary benign bone lesion with a Bone RADS score of 1, in accordance with the guidelines of the American College of Radiology. We planned for an open biopsy along with curettage and internal fixation of the clavicle which was performed three days later.
During the surgery, we used the anterior clavicle approach to remove the tumor. We confirmed that there was no fracture. The tumor was sent for diagnosis and the cavity left was filled with bone graft and fixed with a 6-hole plate with a locking mechanism .
Microscopic examination revealed bone tissue with diffuse tumor cells, of moderate size, with eosinophilic cytoplasm. Some cells exhibited oval nuclei, some eccentric, some showing grooves. Among them were numerous eosinophils and lymphocytes, as well as multinucleated osteoclastic giant cells. We proceeded with Immunohistochemistry staining, which yielded positive results for CD1a (+) and negative results for LCA (CD45) (−), CD30 (−), and CD138 (−). Therefore, based on these findings, a diagnosis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis was concluded .
We brought our patient's findings along with our treatment result for clinicopathologic conference with multidisciplinary team, which all agreed on LCH to be the diagnosis. On his nine-month follow-up, no tumor-progressive changes were seen on examination nor complained by the patient . However, the callous formation has been minimal which concerned us for potentially impaired bone healing. The patient has then received radiotherapy and his latest MRI only showed no residual mass and excellent clavicle alignment.