The patient is a 59-year-old male who had struggled with oxalate nephrolithiasis since the age of 13, without formal workup. He previously underwent multiple lithotripsies, as well as a partial nephrectomy and remained relatively controlled with a baseline creatinine of 1.2-1.3 mg/dL (reference range: 0.70–1.30 mg/dL). Unfortunately, in September 2016, the patient progressed to chronic kidney disease, after an episode of dehydration. He was seen in our institution in November 2016 after presenting with an episode of acute on chronic renal failure. He had no renal reserve and was initiated on hemodialysis. Further history revealed a daughter with oxalate stones disease as well, raising concern for hereditary oxalosis; other serological studies were negative, and biopsy confirmed acute tubular necrosis (ATN) with oxalate nephropathy. Genetic testing was pursued, and the results showed an AGXT mutation consistent with a type 1 primary hyperoxaluria. All preoperative liver testing results were within the normal limits. Given this diagnosis, the patient was evaluated by the transplant committee, and a combined liver-kidney transplant was recommended [, ]. The patient underwent a combined orthotopic liver (OLT)-kidney transplant in July 2017. A donor cholecystectomy was done as per the standard protocol. Pathologic examination revealed Cystoisospora belli organisms. The patient was treated with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) DS 800–160 mg every 6 hours for ten days followed twice daily for three weeks. There is currently no evidence of C. belli reactivation.
The donor was a 20-year-old Caucasian male who suffered an anoxic brain injury. He had no history of biliary disease/symptoms and had no evidence of acute or chronic cholecystitis, biliary disease, or other biliary disease at the time of donation. There was no reported history of acute or chronic diarrhea, and he was otherwise immunocompetent. He had no medical comorbidities, no prior surgeries, no history IV drug use, or other risky behaviors. He had no history of recent travel outside of the United States. Notable pretransplantation labs included bilirubin of 0.5, AST 62, ALT 76, and alkaline phosphatase of 49.
The donor gallbladder specimen measured 5.6 × 2.1 × 0.6 cm. It had a tan-gray and smooth serosa, with a limited amount of attached adipose tissue. There were no pericystic lymph nodes, and the cystic duct was not obstructed. The lumen had no calculi and no erosion, and mucosa was tan-brown, with an average wall thickness of 0.3 cm. This was consistent with a grossly normal gallbladder. On H&E staining, oval-shaped intracellular structures, measuring approximately 20 µm, were identified within the cytoplasm of the biliary epithelium, consistent with C. belli. The background gallbladder was otherwise unremarkable [, , ]. The organisms were highlighted by the PAS/D special stain. . The liver histologic evaluation was otherwise unremarkable, with no significant fat, fibrosis, or inflammation. .