Patient information

A 36-year-old female presented with dyspnea and chest constriction that had persisted for 20 days without any preceding predisposing factors. Progressive exacerbation of dyspnea and chest constriction was accompanied by nocturnal bouts of dyspnea and limb weakness lasting for 20 days. The patient denied experiencing fever or palpitations. The patient had no history of hypertension or cardiac ailments. No relevant treatment was undertaken before admission, and there was no record of prior surgeries or medications. The patient lacked pertinent personal or familial medical history. The patient exhibited acutely distressed countenance, lip cyanosis, marked lower extremity edema, blood pressure of 122/68 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 34 breaths/minutes, scattered moist rales in the bilateral lower lung fields, tachycardia at 188 beats/min, irregular rhythm, and discernible gallop rhythm upon cardiac auscultation.

Outpatient laboratory examinations: erythrocyte 5.12*1012/L (normal range 3.8–5.112/L). Liver function: total bilirubin 43.6 µmol/L (normal range 3.4–20.5 µmol/L), direct bilirubin 20.5 µmol/L (normal range 0.5–8.6 µmol/L), indirect bilirubin 23.1 µmol/L (normal range 1.7–17 µmol/L). N-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was 4021 pg/mL (normal range 0–450 pg/mL). Cardiac enzyme and troponin levels were within normal ranges, ruling out acute myocarditis and acute myocardial infarction. Outpatient electrocardiography revealed a rapid atrial fibrillation rhythm with type A preexcitation syndrome. Outpatient echocardiography. The left ventricular end-systolic volume was 113 mL, end-diastolic volume was 176 mL, the right ventricular anterior–posterior diameter was 31 mm, left atrial index was (LAVI) 19.9 mL/m2, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 36%. M: Diffuse hypokinesia of ventricular wall motion and mitral regurgitation over an area of 12 cm2. This suggests an enlargement of the entire heart. Severe mitral valve regurgitation and impairment of left ventricular systolic function impairment outpatient chest CT showed calcified spots in the upper lobe of the right lung and an enlarged heart. Thyroid ultrasound revealed thyroid parenchyma with uneven echogenicity and increased blood flow.


Initial diagnosis and treatment

The patient experienced an abrupt escalation in dyspnea severity during an outpatient consultation and was initially diagnosed with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), atrial fibrillation with preexcitation syndrome, and acute heart failure, as ascertained through an electrocardiogram, cardiac ultrasound, and an anomalous NT-proBNP finding.

Immediate resuscitation measures were initiated in the emergency department. Multifunctional monitoring indicated that the patient’s blood pressure fluctuated at approximately 134/60 mm Hg, respiratory rate was 38 breaths/minute, oxygen saturation was maintained at 93%, and heart rate was 190 beats/minute. Numerous dry and wet rales were auscultated in both lung fields, and a furosemide injection 40 mg IV was administered immediately to improve the pulmonary edema. Oxygen support was provided because the patient had rapid atrial fibrillation with preexcitation syndrome, and digitalis glycoside drugs were not administered to prevent possible ventricular fibrillation. After the administration of esmolol hydrochloride, the patient’s heart rate did not decrease significantly, and the patient rapidly developed acute heart failure decompensation. The patient presented in a forced sitting position with severe dyspnea, oxygen level of 88%, respiratory rate of 40 breaths/minute, heart rate of 156 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 126/69 mm Hg. Following confirmation of the absence of a history of bronchial asthma, 5 mg morphine was intramuscularly administered and 5 mg dexamethasone sodium phosphate was intravenously administered. Administered intravenous dihydroxypropyltheophylline 0.5 g of solution was administered intravenously to the patient to relieve airway spasms, and subsequently, recombinant human brain natriuretic peptide was injected to ameliorate heart failure. Following a loading dose of 1.5 µg/kg administered over 5 minutes, continuous infusion at a rate of 0.01 µg/kg/minute was initiated. After 30 minutes of resuscitation therapy, the patient’s heart rate remained above 140 beats/minute and rapid atrial fibrillation with preexcitation syndrome persisted. Consequently, amiodarone hydrochloride injection was initiated. Initially, 150 mg was administered intravenously for 10 minutes, followed by a subsequent infusion of 360 mg at a rate of 1 mg/minute. Following approximately 2-hours of resuscitation therapy, the patient acute heart failure was successfully corrected. Monitoring revealed an oxygen saturation of 96%, respiratory rate of 25 breaths/minute, heart rate of 126 beats/minute, and blood pressure of 132/74 mm Hg. The patient electrocardiographic rhythm persisted with atrial fibrillation; however, there were no signs of preexcitation syndrome. An improvement in dyspnea was noted, and low-molecular-weight heparin was administered to prevent thrombus formation. Calcium injections (5000 IU) were administered subcutaneously twice daily. Concurrently, alterations in the coagulation function were observed. Subsequently, propranolol hydrochloride was administered orally at a dose of 20 mg 3 times daily, accompanied by a minimal dosage of furosemide tablets (20 mg) and daily oral intake of spironolactone (20 mg). The patient received 20 mg methimazole tablets orally twice daily. Following a 2-week course of treatment, the patient exhibited robust recovery, marked by substantial amelioration of symptoms associated with heart failure, notably dyspnea. The patient was discharged with a prescription for oral medication.


Final diagnosis

Laboratory examinations on the second day: thyroid-stimulating hormone < 0.005 µIU/mL (normal range 0.27–4.2 µIU/mL), serum free T3 30.02 pmol/L (normal range 3.1–6.8 pmol/L), serum free T4 96.22 pmol/L (normal range 12–22 pmol/L), and antithyroid peroxidase antibody 270.90 IU/mL (normal range 0–34 IU/mL), NT-proBNP 3381 pg/mL (normal range 0–450 pg/mL). Coronary angiography did not reveal any stenosis of the coronary lumen, ruling out coronary artery disease. Upon evaluating the patient’s symptoms, conducting a thorough physical examination, considering the lack of previous medical history, and analyzing laboratory and imaging results such as thyroid function, the conclusive diagnosis is reached through a process of elimination encompassing the following conditions: thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy, acute heart failure, and atrial fibrillation with preexcitation syndrome.


Outcome and follow-up

During the 1-month post-discharge follow-up period, the patient had no symptoms of heart failure or dyspnea. Physical examination revealed an absence of overt positive signs. Electrocardiography indicated the restoration of normal sinus rhythm with effective heart rate control. A review of the thyroid function revealed a return to normal levels. The NT-proBNP was 321 pg/mL (reference range 0–450 pg/mL); and notable alterations in the patient indices were evident compared with the initial admission. Evaluation of the echocardiograms revealed significant changes compared with the initial visit. The left ventricular end-systolic volume was 78 mL, end-diastolic volume was 141 mL, the right ventricular anterior–posterior diameter was 27 mm, and the left atrial index (LAVI) was 14.2 mL/m2, LVEF was 45%. The mitral regurgitation area had contracted to 1.7 cm2. Subsequent thyroid ultrasound revealed heterogeneous parenchymal echogenicity in the thyroid gland, and the blood flow signal had decreased compared to the prior examination.