A 81 year old female had sustained a direct contact injury of the left knee due to a fall on ice. Radiologically a displaced oblique patellar fracture was proven in anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the knee . No other injuries and/or fractures could be noted. At this time the patient was surgically treated with open reduction and tension band wiring of the patellar fracture . Immediately after surgery full protected weight bearing was allowed for 6 weeks with an extension splint (SAMA, Salzmann Medico, St. Gallen, Switzerland). Anti-thrombotic prophylaxis was performed with low molecular weight heparin. Early functional physical therapy was initiated, for six weeks with limited passive flexion to 80°. Follow-up six weeks after surgery was done with clinical assessment and anteroposterior and lateral full weight bearing radiographs. At this time the activity related level of pain was rated as none. The patient was completely satisfied and passive range of motion for flexion/extension was 110°-0°-0°. Full weight bearing with unlimited range of motion was allowed after six weeks. Three and a half months after primary injury the patient felt a giving-way of the left knee when descending a stair during physiotherapeutic exercise. She heard a cracking sound and noted a stabbing pain in her lower leg. In anteroposterior and lateral radiographs an avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity (Ogden type 3a1) was observed . Retrospectively a multi-lobulated small cystic lesion at the tibial tuberosity was already present at the initial presentation. After a lateral parapatellar skin incision and medial parapatellar arthrotomy the tibial tuberosity fragment was refixed with two non-resorbable sutures (FibreWire®, Arthrex Swiss AG, Volketswil, Switzerland) which were looped around two modified 3.5 mm AO cortical long neck screws . Intraoperatively multiple bone cysts were seen. Biopsies were not taken to prevent further fragmentation of the tibial tuberosity. Immediately after surgery protected full weight-bearing with crutches and an extension splint (SAMA, Salzmann Medico, St. Gallen, Switzerland) was allowed for two weeks. Anti-thrombotic prophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin was initiated. Passive flexion was initially limited to 35° for two weeks, then increased for the next two weeks to 70° and for the next two more weeks to full flexion under physiotherapeutic supervision.
The patient had a radiographic follow-up six weeks postoperatively with anteroposterior and lateral full weight bearing radiographs. Clinical assessment was done at 6, 12 weeks and 6 months after surgery. The patient was completely satisfied and pain free at the last follow-up. Range of motion was flexion/extension 125°-0°-0°. Radiographically the avulsion fracture had healed and there was no displacement of the tibial tuberosity .