My patient was a 19-year-old man diagnosed in early childhood with ADHD and ASD. He was referred by his local doctor for ongoing treatment as an adult. He had experienced long-term difficulties in establishing and maintaining lasting relationships and reading social cues. His conversations were awkward and restricted to a narrow range of subjects and he was frequently impulsive and insensitive during these interactions. These impairments had contributed to his increasing social isolation and conflict within the family environment. He had a low threshold of irritation and intolerance of noise, light and crowds. There was also a long history of outbursts of anger, physical intimidation and frequent destruction to property at home. He was also disorganized, forgetful and had difficulty completing tasks. He has always been overactive, restless and impulsive. There was no history of pervasive mood disturbance.
There were early concerns about a potential developmental delay and he was referred for a pediatric assessment at age two years. He received speech therapy prior to school and also repeated his pre-school year. Although he was of average intellect, his significant and specific learning, behavioral and communication difficulties warranted a placement in a special education unit to manage his needs. He experienced difficulties in both reading and writing and he performed below all national standards of literacy and numeracy. Reading remained effortful and unrewarding, with difficulties focusing on and reading along a line of text. At the age of seven he had an occupational therapy assessment, which reported difficulties with coordination, fine motor control, planning and sequencing. In the classroom he was reported to be distracted and restless, presented with extreme outbursts of anger and frequently ran away. He had poor interpersonal skills, established few friendships, had odd idiosyncratic language and repetitive hand flapping, and had a history of being bullied.
He commenced stimulant medication during early childhood and had trials of immediate-release dexamphetamine and methylphenidate with improvement in classroom behavior. He had little interest or motivation in taking his medication, resulting in generally poor adherence. Without stimulant medication his behavior quickly deteriorated.
Since leaving school he had obtained a number of part-time unskilled jobs for eight to ten hours per week. He was, however, unable to maintain them because of behavioral and communication difficulties. He did not smoke cigarettes or consume alcohol or illicit substances. There was no significant family psychiatric history.
On presentation, he was taking methylphenidate extended-release 72mg daily via an osmotic-controlled release oral delivery system and melatonin 4mg every night. He had been prescribed this medication for the previous two years.
During my clinical assessment, he was constantly restless, appeared disinterested and was easily distracted. He made little eye contact either when listening or speaking and his non-verbal interaction was limited. His answers to questions were minimal and his speech lacked normal prosody. His blood pressure and pulse were within the normal range although he was significantly overweight with a body mass index of 34kg/m2 (weight 102kg, height 1.72m).
Following completion of his assessment an additional dose of methylphenidate was recommended in the late afternoon to try and reduce his frequent aggression at this time. However, he stated that this suggestion was of no interest to him and he did not care that others might be upset by his behavior.
During the three months following his initial assessment there was no alteration to his pharmacotherapy and no improvement in his behavior. As a consequence of his persistent social difficulties the option of a trial of low-dose phenytoin was discussed. It was explained to my patient and his mother that improvements in social functioning had been observed by myself and been reported by other patients who also had taken low-dose phenytoin; although, these effects had not been demonstrated outside the clinic nor was this an approved indication for the medication. My patient and his mother signed a disclosure and informed consent document and a trial of medication was organized for the following consultation.
Two weeks later a sublingual test dose of approximately 2mg phenytoin was administered. Prior to this dose my patient’s interaction reflected his usual behavior, with little interest and social engagement. He was reluctant to participate in conversation and his verbal responses were minimal and lacked elaboration; there was only minimal facial expression, which appeared to be unconnected to the content of his speech. Within 10 minutes of taking the sublingual phenytoin he reported a reduction in the effort required to contribute to conversation and was able to sustain eye contact both when listening and speaking. He was surprised about the effortless nature of his eye gaze and also commented that he had never done this before, and that previously he had always found it easier to avoid eye contact when speaking. He was now experiencing the reverse, finding it harder to break away from the mutual eye gaze. He stated he felt more relaxed and was less distracted by other environmental visual and sensory stimuli. His non-verbal interaction, demonstrated by the raising of his eyebrows, smiling and nodding of his head, appeared to be more spontaneous and natural. During this assessment he read aloud two standardized examples of a text, pre- and post-administration of the phenytoin. He reported a reduction in the effort required and improved comprehension and accuracy. He stated that he was no longer as distracted by the other lines of text on the page, which previously had resulted in becoming overwhelmed and lost on the page. His speech was also more fluid with more appropriate intonation. He denied any adverse effects of the test dose. The following day he started taking compounded 2mg phenytoin capsules in the morning in conjunction with his methylphenidate.
After two weeks both he and his mother stated that his communication with the family had improved and there had been no aggressive outbursts. During the consultation he was noticeably more engaged and appeared to enjoy the interaction. His ability to maintain eye contact and his non-verbal communication - facial expression, head movements and posture -were more synchronized and spontaneous.
Over the next four weeks he became inconsistent in taking the phenytoin, and then ceased altogether. His behavior reverted to the previous pattern of poor social interaction; he became oppositional with outbursts of anger and physical violence.
Nine months later he resumed taking the phenytoin, this time as a single 4mg capsule in the morning. After his first dose there was an improvement of his social behavior similar to his previous response, although there was an apparent deterioration in the late afternoon. The dose was increased from 4mg to 5mg and a larger capsule formulated to try and prolong the release of the phenytoin. This appeared to achieve a more consistent improvement in behavior throughout the day, evident both at home and at work. Increases in the dose above 5mg were not associated with any additional benefit. He remained on the 5mg dose of phenytoin for over 18 months and reported that his work performance had consistently improved sufficient to increase his working hours and his level of responsibility. The violence and destruction at home abated. His confidence improved and for the first time he has established and sustained peer-appropriate friendships.
His behavioral ratings prior to treatment with phenytoin and after seven months on the 5mg phenytoin are presented in Figure . The manner in which my patient endorsed the items on the AQ highlighted a reduction of symptoms, with the most robust improvements in his enjoyment of social occasions, ability to cope with chit chat, and his preference to be with people rather than be alone. His total AQ score dropped from 41 pre- to 27 post-treatment with phenytoin; a score of 32 or more is considered to indicate clinically significant levels of autistic traits . Before treatment with phenytoin, his DASS ratings recorded both depression and anxiety as severe and stress as very severe. Post-treatment, there was robust change in all domains, with an absence of depressive symptoms and with both anxiety and stress being recorded as moderate.