A 59-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of right lower extremity pain and swelling. Vital signs at triage were temperature (oral) 98.2° Fahrenheit; heart rate 83 beats per minute; respiratory rate 17 breaths per minute; pulse oximetry 99% on room air; and blood pressure of 135/78 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). The patient had a hospital admission 40 days prior to presentation for PE and right popliteal DVT with a positive nasopharyngeal COVID-19 test. She denied a familial history of hypercoagulable states or a personal history of thromboembolic disease prior to her COVID-19 infection. In the ED, she underwent an ultrasound of the right lower extremity. The ultrasound showed the previously seen right popliteal DVT , as well as interval development of right mid-femoral DVT .
Repeat COVID-19 nasopharyngeal swab testing was negative. Per the patient, when she was discharged previously she was unable to follow up with a hematologist/oncologist due to COVID-19-related lockdown restrictions but maintained compliance with her apixaban at five milligrams (mg) twice per day. Her international normalized ratio (INR) on presentation was 1.36 (reference range: 0.83–1.09) and her D-dimer was 2054 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) (0–500 ng/mL). She was admitted for anti-coagulation and started on low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) at 1 mg per kilogram. Throughout her hospital course, she was placed on warfarin with INR values ranging from 0.98 to 4.14. An echocardiogram was performed that showed a normal size, thickness, and function of the left ventricle. In addition, the right ventricle was normal in size and function. The patient was discharged with 12 mg of warfarin daily with hematology follow-up.
The patient had been admitted approximately 40 days prior for submassive bilateral central PE with a right popliteal DVT . A detailed report of her previous admission is warranted given the patient’s previous DVT and PE findings with a positive COVID-19 nasopharyngeal swab test.
On ED arrival during the first admission, vital signs at triage were heart rate 120 beats per minute; blood pressure of 150/109 mm Hg; respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute; and pulse oximetry of 89% on room air. Laboratory studies revealed a 0.89 ng/mL troponin I (0.00–0.05 ng/mL) with the additional following labs: D-dimer 5397 ng/mL and INR of 1.0. The chest computed tomography angiography showed acute bilateral central PE with probable right heart strain with multiple small bilateral peripheral ground glass infiltrates suggestive of COVID-19 pneumonitis. The patient was given at the time a heparin infusion with a bolus based on actual body weight and protocols.
She was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and underwent urgent thrombolysis with thrombectomy. During the procedure, one mg per hour of alteplase was catheter directed while mechanical thrombectomy was performed. The total amount of alteplase received was 24 mg. Repeat angiography approximately 24 hours later showed significant improvement in blood flow to the right and left main as well as segmental and subsegmental pulmonary arteries with significant decrease in central clot burden but with residual central filling defects. An echocardiogram was performed during her admission. However, due to all images being suboptimal in quality, the study was technically limited with “probable normal LV systolic function…right ventricle is not well visualized.” During her hospital course, she was placed on 10 mg of apixaban twice a day for one week and transitioned to 5 mg twice a day with which she was discharged on the same schedule. The patient underwent rehabilitation, which included daily exercising. She stated she was compliant with her apixaban medication at 5 mg twice a day.