In 2006, a 52-year old female patient was admitted to a neurological department due to sudden difficulties with swallowing and speech, ophthalmoparesis with a vertical and horizontal eye movement disorder, dysesthesia of the hands with a quality of “pins and needles” and a glove-like distribution, as well as generalized areflexia. Muscle strength was normal. A Miller Fisher syndrome was diagnosed. Under treatment with 150 g intravenous immunoglobulins the symptoms completely remitted within a few days. In the following years, the patient consulted the general practitioner and several gastroenterologists because of unspecific abdominal pain, from which she has been suffering since childhood. Diagnostics including computer tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and gastroscopy were normal.
In October 2017 the meanwhile 63-year old patient was hospitalized with generalized epileptic seizures with prolonged postictal confusion. Cerebral MRI showed no pathological findings, and therapy with levetiracetam was started.
In December 2017 the patient was admitted to our clinic for internal medicine because of persisting diarrhea, abdominal pain, renal failure and a reduced general state of health. Again, the patient had generalized epileptic seizures with postictal confusion and significantly reduced vigilance, accompanied from a lactic acidosis (serum-lactate 26.0 mmol/l (reference 0.55–2.2 mmol/l), pH 6.863), leading to admission to the neurological intensive care unit. Moreover, a slight, presumably residual ophthalmoparesis as vertical gaze palsy with conjugate, bilateral limitation of the eye movements in upgaze was evident. The anticonvulsive therapy with levetiracetam (3 g/day) was extended by lacosamide (400 mg/day). A mechanical ventilation was necessary due to the sudden and massive metabolic acidosis as well as a respiratory failure during an epileptic seizure (serum-lactat 14.7; 10.6; 16.0 mmol/l). In CSF, lactate (12.01 mmol/l (reference 1.12–2.47 mmol/l) and protein level (67 mg/dl (reference 15–45 mg/dl) were significantly increased. There were no signs for an infectious origin in CSF (polymerase chain reaction for neurotrophic germs, including Tropheryma whippelii). CT and MRI of the brain as well as abdominal- and thorax-CT were normal. The electroneurography revealed a slight mixed axonal-demyelinating polyneuropathy, the electromyography was normal. Besides a sinus-tachycardia with 140 bpm and a mild pericardial effusion, no signs of a Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome, that would be common in mitochondriopathies, were present.
Attempted extubation failed as another severe epileptic seizure occurred with life-threatening lactic acidosis and hyperkalemia (lactate 26.0 mmol/l; pH 6.925; potassium 7.8 mmol/l (referece 3.6–5.2 mmol/l). EEG showed an alpha rhythm, with intermittent slow waves and tendency to generalize. In cerebral follow-up MRI, multiple fat embolies were detected. CT-angiography of the lung revealed a pulmonary embolism. As a reason for the fat embolies, multiple vertebral fractures were verified in CT, presumably as a result of severe epileptic seizures. A surgical fixation of vertebral fractures was performed. Intensive care therapy including ventilation was necessary for more than eight weeks. Weaning was successful after dilatative tracheostomy and nutrition via percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube. Vitamin-B6 was supplemented. Subsequently, a rehabilitative therapy was performed. After five months, the patient returned to her normal life. Tracheostomy and PEG were removed.
Taking into account all the symptoms (abdominal pain, relapsing remitting course, neurological deficits, epileptic seizures, peripheral neuropathy, lactic acidosis, cardiac disturbance), two main differential diagnosis were discussed: porphyria and a mitochondrial disease (MERRF syndrome). None of both diagnoses could be verified: Laboratory test revealed no hints of porphyria (Porphyria Specialist Center of the European Porphyria Network University Hospital Düsseldorf, Germany). A muscle biopsy gave no hint of a mitochondrial disease and revealed only a slight unspecific atrophy that was very likely due to immobility (Institute of Neuropathology of the University Hospital Essen, Germany). In terms of differential diagnosis, other metabolic diseases came into consideration. Comprehensive diagnostic for diseases of copper metabolism, lead poisoning or adrenoleukodystrophy remained inconspicuous. Finally, the analysis of the amino acids in the urine, CSF and serum showed a strong abnormality with ubiquitously increased amino acids, especially proline (proline in serum 3085 μmol/l (reference 90-342 μmol/l), in urine 46,531 μmol/g Crea (reference < 100 μmol/g Crea), in CSF 104 mg/dl (reference < 6 mg/dl), Hydroxyproline in urine 1395 μmol/g Crea (reference <100) Table ). Furthermore, vitamin-B6 was decreased with 3.3 μg/l (reference > 4.9 μg/l). We supplemented vitamin B6 with 200 mg/d.
Therefore, a hyperprolinemia type I or type II was most likely. The targeted genetic analyses by Sanger sequencing revealed no pathogenic variant within the PRODH-gene (hyperprolinemia type I) but identified two novel variants within the ALDH4A1-gene . In combination, both heterozygous variants within the ALDH4A1 gene could lead to a compound heterozygosity (variants in trans), that would cause the described disease phenotype. Since the patient’s son had only one of the two heterozygous variants of his mother, the compound heterozygous state of both variants in our patient was proven.