A 49-year-old male presented to the emergency department at Bascom Palmer Eye Institute complaining of right eye pain and decreased vision about 17 h after being struck in the eye with a tree branch. On examination, he was noted to have a 1.5-mm corneal laceration with fibrin in the anterior chamber and signs of traumatic cataract with posterior synechiae and pigment on the anterior lens capsule. No signs of endophthalmitis were noted on B-scan. The laceration was repaired, and the patient was treated prophylactically with intravitreal ceftazidime 2.25 mg, vancomycin 1 mg, and voriconazole 50 μg. Aqueous humor cultures for fungi and bacteria were negative, and B-scan was unremarkable at initial follow-up.
After an initially uncomplicated postoperative course, the patient returned 26 days later with pain and an elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) of 45 mm Hg. On B-scan, there were mobile subhyaloid and vitreous opacities indicative of endophthalmitis . The patient underwent pars plana lensectomy and vitrectomy with 1,000 cSt silicone oil injection, peripheral iridectomy, and administration of intravitreal vancomycin 1 mg, ceftazidime 2.25 mg, and voriconazole 100 μg. The lens capsule was left in place. The undiluted intraoperative vitreous sample demonstrated Gram-variable bacilli which were later identified as O. turbata.
The immediate post-treatment course was uncomplicated. However, 1 month later, the patient returned with decreased vision and an acutely-elevated IOP of 55 mm Hg. The patient underwent silicone oil removal.
The course was again stable for another 2 months until the patient presented with worsening eye pain and inflammation with an IOP of 45 mm Hg, keratic precipitates, and 4+ anterior chamber cell. B-scan demonstrated dense vitreous opacities with multiple focal hyperechoic foci and peripheral membrane formation. Ultrasound biomicroscopy revealed diffuse anterior chamber opacities and retained lens capsule adherent to the posterior iris . Intravitreal vancomycin 1 mg and ceftazidime 2.25 mg were administered. Anterior chamber paracentesis was performed, culture of which revealed no fungal or bacterial growth. B-scan about 1 month later revealed new vitreous opacities and inferior membranes. The patient was suspected to have chronic endophthalmitis and subsequently underwent pars plana vitrectomy and total capsulectomy with administration of intravitreal vancomycin 1 mg, ceftazidime 2.25 mg, and voriconazole 100 μg. Anterior chamber fluid cultures were ultimately negative, and no further organisms were identified in the lens capsule on pathology. The patient had sustained mixed mechanism chronic IOP elevation and eventually underwent glaucoma drainage implant surgery. The final aphakic best corrected visual acuity was 20/80 and IOP was 19 mm Hg. There have been no reactivations of inflammation or infection for 1 year after the last surgery .