A 64-year-old woman was admitted to hospital because of dehiscence of a sternal wound, after a mitral valve replacement that was performed 2 months earlier due to severe insufficiency. She presented a clinical history of rheumatic mitral stenosis, which was treated with closed mitral valvulotomy 35 years previously, resulting in a mitral insufficiency. Twenty-three years previously she had suffered a bacterial endocarditis due to viridans group streptococci that led to cerebral embolism.
On examination, a white material was found to be exuded from the sternal wound when pressed over the wound margins. A computed tomography scan of the chest showed a dehiscence of the surgical wound, with swelling of soft tissue above the sternum and osteitis of the sternal bone. Apart from a C-reactive protein level of 2.6 mg dl−1 and an albumin level of 3.1 g dl−1, laboratory studies were unremarkable.
Empirical treatment with clindamycin (300 mg/6h i.v.) and ceftazidime (2 g/8h i.v.) was started. The treatment was changed to imipenem (500 mg/6h i.v.) and ciprofloxacin (750 mg/12h p.o.) after a preliminary microbiology laboratory report of growth of an actinomycete with presumed susceptibility to several antimicrobials. Surgical debridement of the wound was performed. This treatment was maintained for 3 weeks, but successive wound cultures continued showing the presence of the actinomycete organism. Because the symptoms did not improve, sternal cerclage was removed and antibiotic therapy was shifted to teicoplanin (400 mg/24h i.v.) plus ciprofloxacin (750 mg/12h p.o.) and rifampin (600 mg/24h p.o.) for 2 weeks, followed by ciprofloxacin plus rifampin for an additional6 weeks, resulting in wound healing.
Culture of wound samples on chocolate and blood agar plates for 72 h at 37 °C in aerobic conditions yielded creamy-white, dry, wrinkled and non-haemolytic colonies. After these 3 days, a colour change was observed in the colonies from white to yellowish. Colony appearance showed synnemata and no aerial hyphae (see ). Gram staining yielded Gram-positive short coryneform rods without branching. Modified Ziehl–Neelsen staining confirmed slight acid-fastness. Both conventional Ziehl–Neelsen and auramine stains were negative. The micro-organism was non-spore-forming, and catalase and urease positive. Casein, hypoxanthine, tyrosine and gelatine were not decomposed. Arylsulfatase production was negative within 3 days. Nitrate was not reduced to nitrite and indole was not produced. With the API NH strip (bioMérieux) acid was produced from glucose, fructose and sucrose. 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis using the blast algorithm showed 99.9 % similarity to G. bronchialis strain DSM 43247 (GenBank accession no. ).
An antimicrobial-susceptibility assay was performed using Etest strips (bioMérieux) on Mueller–Hinton agar with 5 % defibrinated horse blood and 20 mg β-NAD l−1 (MH-F; Oxoid). Readings were taken after 48 h of incubation, and susceptibility categories were defined according to Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines for mycobacteria, nocardiae and other actinomycetes . The isolate was resistant to clindamycin (MIC=8 mg l−1), and susceptible to amoxicillin/clavulanic (0.016 mg l−1), ceftriaxone (0.5 mg l−1), imipenem (0.008 mg l−1), ciprofloxacin (0.06 mg l−1), amikacin (0.06 mg l−1), tobramycin (0.12 mg l−1), clarithromycin (2 mg l−1), minocycline (0.25 mg l−1), linezolid (1 mg l−1) and co-trimoxazole (0.03 mg l−1). Although no susceptibility breakpoints have been established for vancomycin and teicoplanin by the CLSI, MIC values were low (0.25 and 1 mg l−1, respectively).
The isolate was analysed by two MALDI-TOF MS-based systems, a Bruker Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics) and a Vitek MS (bioMérieux). Identification of G. bronchialis (99.9 % identity) was obtained with the Vitek MS (saramis 3.0 software) following the procedure recommended by the manufacturer. Briefly, target slides were inoculated into the spots by picking a freshly grown overnight colony and overlaid with 1 µl matrix solution, α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid. The same result was attained with the Bruker Biotyper (version 3.1 software), using a complete protocol of protein extraction with formic acid and acetonitrile, following the Bruker Biotyper instructions, but the score value (1.72) was lower than the one defined in the manufacturer’s criteria (≥2.00) for acceptance of identification at the species level.