An 11-year-old Sudanese boy presented with frequent bleeding diathesis (ecchymosis, epistaxis, and gingival bleeds) . The most commonly encountered type of hemorrhage was extensive bleeding after trauma followed by subcutaneous bleeding. The patient had a history of delayed bleeding episodes since the day of circumcision, which took approximately 1 month to stop. Repeated episodes of epistaxis were also reported. He did not receive blood or blood product transfusion. He reported bleeding in the subcutaneous tissue following trauma when he was playing with his friends. Hemorrhage into joints also occurred after trauma. Spontaneous joint bleeding was not reported. Pain and slight swelling of muscles sometimes persisted for months. Looking into the family history, all family members were normal except his mother. The mother had a history of severe interval bleeding diathesis (menorrhagia). The patient had no known chronic sickness, drug allergies, or any developmental abnormality.
On examination, the patient was neither icteric nor cyanosed, and was not dysmorphic. There was no noticeable change when checking the ear, nose, and throat. The cardiopulmonary examination was normal. The patient’s central nervous system examination showed good sensation and reflexes. He had no skin rash or organomegaly. The liver function tests and complete blood count were all normal. Viral screening for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV) were negative .
The coagulation tests were performed when he was asymptomatic. The main abnormal investigations were as follows: fast lysis of whole blood clots and shortened euglobulin lysis time. The other tests including clotting time, prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and thrombin time (TT) were all within the normal values. This suggests that there were no abnormal changes in blood coagulation. This was further confirmed by the testing of coagulation factor activity. Platelet count, bleeding time, and von Willebrand factor were also normal .
Concerning the clot lysis test, the blood was collected and promptly placed in a glass test tube and incubated at 37°C. The clot was formed and retracted normally, but then underwent lysis. Following a few hours of incubation (5–8 hours with interval assessment), the clot was hardly visible, and it was just a small strand of fibrin. The fibrinogen and d-dimer concentration were within normal limits. To determine the status of fibrinolysis, euglobulin lysis time was calculated, and the result indicated shortened lysis time . To further investigate, we treated the patient’s plasma with a pooled normal plasma and repeated the euglobulin lysis time, which returned to normal. However, in such cases, it is preferable to use thromboelastometry to verify the diagnosis. Unfortunately, due to a lack of facilities, this technique was not performed. The defect seems to be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait .