A 69-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department with a 1-year history of progressive and disabling paraparesis (ASIA C, Nurik 5) associated with right sciatica and subacute sphincter incontinence. Physical examination revealed a paraparesis with M3/5 motor strength in both lower limbs from L2 to S1, with bilateral patellar and Achilles reflexes, positive Hoffman signs in both upper limbs, positive clonus and Babinski in lower limbs associated with right sciatic pain of intensity 9/10 on the visual analogue scale (VAS) in the territory of the L5 root and positive Lassegue and Bragard maneuvers. The cervical myelopathy scores were: modified Japanese scale 5 (mJOA) 9/17, Nurik scale 6 5.

Imaging studies
An emergency MRI revealed three points of stenosis of the spinal canal: 1) a degenerative cervical narrowing C5-C6 with focal myelomalacia; 2) an intra-spinal extramedullary intradural tumour D6-D7 with a spinal imprint of 15 mm x 8 mm x 7 mm; and 3) a right posterolateral disc extrusion L4-L5.


Surgical treatment and postoperative evolution

The diagnosis of EETRS was confirmed, and a posterior decompression D6-D7 was performed by laminectomy and exeresis of the dorsal extramedullary intra-surgical blockage, associated with a right L4-L5 intra-surgical blockage. At the cervical level, the stenosis was already known and there was no evidence of a worsening of the clinical picture, mainly at the level of the upper limbs. For this reason, the rapid progression of the symptoms was attributed to the recently diagnosed oncological condition. The surgery was performed under intraoperative monitoring of somatosensory and motor evoked potentials. The total operating time was 2 hours and 20 minutes, under general anaesthesia. The anatomopathological analysis was consistent with WHO grade I transitional meningioma. During the immediate postoperative period, the patient evolved favourably, presenting a remission of sciatica with an EVA 3/10. The hospital discharge was on the third postoperative day, walking with a walker, and with effective spontaneous diuresis. In the seven and fourteen day postoperative controls, a notable improvement of motor strength was evidenced with sciatic pain of 2/10, walking with a cane at the month, and without it at the three months postoperative. The last control at the year postoperative evidenced a residual pain of 1/10, with a M4 deficit for L5 right, without instability in the gait and signs of upper motor neurone decreased, mJOA 17/17, Nurick 1. The patient continued with the presence of the bilateral Hoffman sign, however, the Lhermitte sign persisted negative and never evidenced the loss of the fine motor dexterity in the upper limbs.
