57-year-old woman, Laboratory Specialist Technician in the Microbiology Service with a personal history of polymyalgia rheumatica on chronic corticosteroid treatment. In 1996 she showed a Mantoux of 20 mm after accidental puncture with a sample from a patient with TBC and completed six months of TILT. In the controls carried out in 2017 and 2020 with QuantiFERON® TB Gold in-tube (QFT-GIT) she tested negative. In mid-March 2021 she suffered a work accident with biological risk after accidental puncture in the second finger of the right hand with a hollow needle used to puncture the vial of blood culture from a patient with TBC.

Following exposure via the bloodstream, the immediate measures for the wound were applied as established in the protocol for action in the face of a biological risk. The worker then contacted the Occupational Risk Prevention Service (SPRL) where an initial assessment of the risk of infection was carried out. The patient initiated prophylactic treatment with emtricitabine, tenofovir and raltegravir (post-exposure prevention of HIV), which lasted five days until the source patient was located and a blood sample was obtained for serological analysis of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV), the results of which were negative.

The biohazard accident was reported through the online form (Annex B) as established in the procedure for reporting and investigating events of the SPRL in compliance with the Occupational Risks Prevention Law 31/1995 of 8 November.

He was monitored with determination of QFT-GIT at the end of April 2021 with a positive result. He presented an erythematous area with a small erosion at the tip of the index finger of the right hand and a doubtful small superior adenopathy in the epitroclea of the right arm.

He was referred to the Dermatology Department for a punch biopsy, a large needle aspirate biopsy (LNAA), and a skin lesion tru-cut, which were sent to the Department of Pathology for examination of possible inoculation of tubercle bacilli. The diagnosis was a case of granulomatous necrotizing-caseous inflammation compatible with cutaneous tuberculosis. The PCR for tuberculosis performed at the request of the dermatologist was positive. DNA was extracted from the paraffin tissue of the biopsy using the QIAamp DNA FFPE tissue kit (Qiagen, Germany) for qualitative molecular detection of the M. tuberculosis complex (MTB) with the High-Resolution Melting technique using the FluoroType® MTB kit (Hain Lifescience, Nehren, Germany) in the FluoroCycler® 12 (Hain Lifescience). The sensitivity and specificity of the kit for qualitative detection of the MTB complex in paraffin tissue is 60.0% and 71.4%, respectively, and depends on the amount of bacilli present in the sample. A fragment of the biopsy was sent to the Microbiology Department for the isolation of the causative agent of the clinical picture by the corresponding cultures and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. The growth of M. tuberculosis was detected and no antimicrobial resistance was observed.

In mid-May 2021, treatment with rifampicin (R), isoniazid (I), pyrazinamide (P) and ethambutol hydrochloride (E) was initiated, manifesting cutaneous improvement. On the last day of the same month, treatment was suspended due to intolerance with generalized asthenia, nausea and vomiting, poor general condition with generalized arthralgias, non-specific skin lesions, without dysthermic sensation or analytical alteration of the hepatic profile.

At the end of July, the patient was evaluated in Internal Medicine, observing the normalization of the hepatic profile and the disappearance of the referred clinical. The determination of QFT-GIT was still positive, although quantitatively better than the previous one. At this same time, treatment with R/H and levofloxacin (Lfx) was initiated with good tolerance. In August, the patient reported a picture of asthenia that was related to her history of polymyalgia rheumatica, and prednisone was prescribed in a descending pattern. She continued with the triple TB therapy until mid-March 2022. The second treatment pattern was concluded after seven months, with complete recovery from the clinical point of view regarding the dermatological lesion.
