27-year-old female, native and resident of Mexico City, single, merchant, no family history of importance to her condition; no allergies, chronic diseases, recent immunizations, transfusion history, or previous hospitalizations. In terms of surgical history, she had bilateral intraocular lens placement for strabismus at age 7.

His condition began in August 2021 with odynophagia, rhinorrhea, dry cough, without predominance of time, without fever or other added symptoms. 48 hours after the beginning of the condition, he went to a doctor, who prescribed him treatment with montelukast, salbutamol, ambroxol and ceftriaxone for a week, after which he presented improvement of the symptoms.

Ten days after the end of treatment, the patient presented paresthesia in the right pelvic limb, without improvement with postural changes. One day later, lower paraparesis was added, which made it impossible to walk. Minutes after the previous event, she presented paresis of the right thoracic limb, incoordination of movements and loss of fluency of speech. She was treated empirically with multivitamins, without improvement.

The next day, she presented with sudden, stabbing pain localized to the posterior cervical region, accompanied by nausea, staring, and loss of response to stimuli, with subsequent generalized onset convulsive seizures, tonic-clonic, without recovery between them, so she was transferred to a hospital unit, where she was received in status epilepticus, which required advanced airway management and sedation.

Imaging studies performed at admission showed diffuse hemorrhages of various sizes with ill-defined borders in the white matter with diffuse demyelination and perilesional edema consistent with hemorrhagic disseminated encephalomyelitis.

Treatment with methylprednisolone boluses, 1 g every 24 hours for 5 days, was given, which resulted in improvement of neurological symptoms. Subsequently, tracheostomy and withdrawal of sedation were performed, and maintenance antiepileptic drugs were continued, without new seizure events.

The patient showed improvement in neurological status, and achieved automatic respiration and interaction with the external environment, but without recovery of language function and with very little recovery of motor function; the patient was left with a lower paraparesis sequelae with 2/5 on the Daniels scale and residual paresis of 3/5 in the right thoracic and 4/5 in the left thoracic limbs. Rehabilitation therapy and progression of mechanical ventilation were subsequently initiated.
