A 35-year-old male with no known past medical history presented to the hospital for progressively worsening rectal pain for the past three days. The patient stated that pain was worse with defecation and while sitting upright. He described the sensation of feeling an outgrowth or nodule present near his anus. He tried applying “lotion” at home without any relief of pain. He did endorse constipation for two to three weeks prior to presentation. He denied melena or hematochezia. The patient also complained of unintentional weight loss of 20 pounds over three months. He denied any constitutional symptoms.
The patient reported he was seen by his family doctor four months earlier and underwent an annual physical examination, which was normal. A complete metabolic panel and complete blood count was done at this visit with no abnormality. He denied any history of unsafe sexual practices, intravenous drug use and had never chronically used probiotics.
On admission, his vital signs showed a temperature of 36.2 °C, heart rate 111 beats/minute, blood pressure 138/42 mmHg, respiratory rate of 21 and saturating 100% on room air. On physical examination, tenderness was elicited to light touch and palpation at the perianal region. A hard, indurated region was palpated at the perianal region on the medial side, which was surrounded by erythema.
Laboratory examination was negative for leukocytosis. His basic metabolic panel showed sodium of 132 mEq/l, potassium of 3.2 mEq/l, bicarbonate of 6 mEq/l and an anion gap of 23. His blood glucose was 280 mg/dL. Lactate was within normal limits. Urinalysis was positive for ketones and negative for infection. A contrast enhanced CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a perianal abscess.
Initial management included initiation of broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics with vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole. General surgery was consulted, and the patient underwent incision and drainage of the perirectal abscess. Blood cultures came back positive for gram-positive rods and cocci, and later speciation showed Lactobacillus in both anaerobic bottles. Infectious disease was consulted, and oral amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium therapy was initiated at a dose of 500 mg-125 mg twice daily. Further laboratory testing revealed an HA1c of 15%, leading to an endocrinology consult, a new diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, and the initiation of insulin therapy. The patient continued to improve and repeat cultures were negative. There was low suspicion for endocarditis and echocardiogram was not pursued. He was discharged with a ten-day course of oral amoxicillin clavulanate 500 mg–125 mg and referred to endocrinology for outpatient follow up.