A 69-year-old elderly woman presented to the Bazhong Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital with symptoms of abdominal pain and vomiting. She was diagnosed with intestinal obstruction and underwent laparoscopic exploration, removal of foreign body in the ileum, lysis of adhesions, and resection and anastomosis of the affected intestinal segment. After surgery, the patient was instructed to abstain from oral intake, thus she was treated with a 250mL infusion of C14-24 fat emulsion containing 75g (manufactured by Sichuan Kelun Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.) once a day via intravenous drip. The postoperative review revealed a triglyceride (TG) level of 19.71 mmol/L. On the third day after surgery, the patient experienced worsening abdominal pain and black stools, prompting them to seek medical attention at our hospital (Bazhong Central Hospital). Upon admission, a comprehensive physical examination was performed on the patient. Specifically, auscultation of the lungs revealed decreased breath sounds and the presence of crackles, indicating the presence of pulmonary inflammation. Abdominal examination revealed abdominal distension, generalized tenderness, and muscle guarding. Further, an abdominal CT scan was performed on the patient, revealing acute pancreatitis with pancreatic swelling and slightly decreased enhancement of the local density. The specific performance might be peripancreatic fluid collection, thickening of the peritoneum and omentum, homogeneous decrease in splenic density, and homogeneous increase in gallbladder density. Moreover, Extensive fluid accumulation was observed surrounding the abdominal aorta, splenic artery, and anterior renal fascia, with blurred fat planes in the abdominal cavity. The chest CT scan indicated inflammation in the bilateral lower lobes of the lungs, minimal pleural effusion, and atelectasis in the lower lobes of both lungs. Further analysis of the complete blood count revealed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 33.68×10^9/L, with 89.1% neutrophils (Neu), hemoglobin (Hb) level of 146g/L, platelet count (PLT) of 242×10^9/L, procalcitonin (PCT) level of 1.17 ng/mL, and C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 12.03mg/L. The fecal occult blood test was positive, suggesting gastrointestinal bleeding likely induced by postoperative and prolonged fasting. It is worth noting that due to the severe hypertriglyceridemia, it was not possible to evaluate the liver and kidney function, as well as the lipid profile. Overall, blood purification, plasma exchange, oral lipid-lowering medications, CT-guided precise puncture drainage and catheter placement in the necrotic area of the pancreas, along with antimicrobial therapy, fluid resuscitation, and supportive care, are all considered beneficial in aiding the patient’s recovery. On the first day of admission, the patient underwent plasma exchange, perfusion, antimicrobial therapy, antispasmodics, acid suppression, enzyme inhibition, and measures to stabilize electrolytes and provide nutritional support as symptomatic treatment. On the second day of admission, despite undergoing plasma exchange, the patient’s lipid levels remained elevated, and an electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation (Table 1). To address this, amiodarone was added to the existing treatment plan for rhythm control therapy. Nevertheless, on the third day of admission, the patient exhibited poor mental status and drowsiness. Despite undergoing another round of plasma exchange, both lipid levels and inflammatory markers remained elevated. At this point, the patient developed multi-organ dysfunction involving the cardiovascular, respiratory, and coagulation systems, necessitating endotracheal intubation. Blood perfusion with HA380 and HA330 was initiated to support hemodynamic stability. Following perfusion therapy, a subsequent examination revealed a significant decrease in lipid levels compared to previous measurements. Therefore, plasma exchange was discontinued and the patient was switched to oral lipid-lowering medications for continued treatment. By the fourth day of admission, coagulation function indicators had essentially returned to normal. On the fifth day of admission, there was a significant decrease in the patient’s lipid levels compared to previous measurements. However, due to the patient’s rapid respiratory rate, diminished breath sounds in both lungs, and chest CT findings suggestive of atelectasis, blood purification was implemented as an adjunct to the existing treatment plan to alleviate fluid overload. On the eighth day of admission, the patient’s lipid levels showed significant improvement compared to previous measurements. Whereas, the patient developed recurrent fever, and after ruling out pulmonary infection, we considered acute necrotizing pancreatitis as the cause of fever. Hence, on the sixteenth day of admission, we performed CT-guided precise puncture drainage and catheter placement at the site of pancreatic necrosis, during which purulent fluid with a dark red color was obtained. Meanwhile, we continued with antimicrobial therapy and other treatments. On the twenty-fourth day of admission, approximately 5mL of purulent fluid was still draining from the catheter, but the color was lighter compared to previous drainage. A follow-up abdominal ultrasound showed normal pancreatic size and shape, clear contours, and uniform echo in the parenchyma, with no dilation of the main pancreatic duct. The results of the follow-up abdominal CT scan are consistent with the ultrasound findings. Further review of the chest CT reveals improved pneumonia bilaterally, with minimal pleural effusion in both lungs. Considering the significant improvement in the patient’s condition, the patient was discharged on the twenty-fourth day of admission. Moreover, we have conducted long-term follow-up of the patient. The prognosis is favorable, with repeated measurements indicating normal lipid levels.