We report a case of a 51 years-old woman with medical relevant story of ductal breast carcinoma, submitted to mastectomy followed by adjuvant radio and chemotherapy. She had remained disease-free for 7 years following treatment. After this period, due to tumor recurrence, the patient was started on hormonotherapy with Fulvestrant (estrogen receptor antagonist). Three days later, she developed asthenia, anorexia, nausea and vomiting. On day 10 of therapy she was admitted in the emergency department with jaundice, dark urine and pale stools. There was no history of alcohol, drugs or natural products consumption. The patient also denied recent travels. On admission, she was hemodynamically stable and with no fever, abdominal pain or pruritus. Physical examination was positive only for icteric sclera. No other relevant findings including hepatosplenomegaly, ascites or hepatic encephalopathy were found. Also, there were no lymphadenopathies or rash. Blood tests revealed leukopenia of 3.1 × 109 (4.0-11.0 × 109) with normal eosinophil value and thrombocytopenia of 82.000 (150.000-450.000). Immunoglobulin IgE level was normal. Liver tests demonstrated a cytocholestase pattern, with elevated aminotransferases: AST 3170 IU/L (<34 IU/L), ALT 908 IU/L (<49 IU/L), GGT 1132 IU/L (<38 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (AP) 109 IU/L (<104 IU/L), TB 5.1 mg/dl (<1.0 mg/dl) and DB 4.46 mg/dl (<0.2 mg/dl), as well as prolonged prothrombin time: 20s. (<11,6 s.) and APTT 53 s. (< 31 s.) Abdominal ultrasound showed a homogeneous liver, with regular borders. Only steatosis was evident and no nodular or mass lesions were observed.
An extensive workup diagnosis including chest CT, viral serologies (HAV, HBV, HCV, CMV), and autoimmune and metabolic studies failed to show an etiology for the disease. A presumptive diagnosis of liver toxicity to Fulvestrant was assumed. Although the drug was immediately withdrawn, clinical worsening occurred with the development of hepatic encephalopathy and rapid progression of acute liver failure (factor V 35%, AST 5530 IU/L, ALT 1810 IU/L, TB 8.6 mg/dl, APTT 55 s. and PT 23.4 s.) associated with bleeding diathesis. Because the patient had an active tumor recurrence which is a contraindication for liver transplant and chemotherapy wasn’t possible because of severe abnormal liver function, a transjugular liver biopsy wasn’t considered as it wouldn’t change the management of the patient. There was no response to medical support treatment and the patient died. Post-mortem examination revealed a wide hepatic infiltration by neoplastic tissue with morphologic characteristics compatible with adenocarcinoma . The carcinoma cells were arranged singly in small clusters with a high proliferation index . Immunohistochemical stains were positive for estrogens receptor but negative for progesterone and Herb2 receptors , consistent with the diagnosis of primary breast carcinoma. Unfortunately, E-cadherin and CD44 stains weren’t tested.