A 42-year-old man, previously healthy, was living with his step father and other members of an extended family in a small farm. He presented with a first episode of a motor seizure that started on the left side of his body before becoming generalized. Shortly afterwards, he noticed left hemiparesis and dysarthria; he was admitted to our institution through the emergency department.
After a physical examination, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the patient revealed a well-defined, spherical lesion, located in the superior aspect of the anterior limb of the internal capsule and right striatum, with surrounding edema . Laboratory studies found no systemic compromise and no underlying immunocompromise. We decided to excise and analyze the aforementioned lesion. Performing an image-guided frontal craniotomy, using the Leksell Stereotactic G-Frame (Elekta Instruments AB, Stockholm, Sweden), we planned the trajectory to avoid the head of the caudate nucleus, the genu of the internal capsule, the putamen, and other critical structures. The mass was completely excised and the thalamostriate vein, which was adhered to the mass, was preserved. Craniotomy was performed, instead of a stereotactic biopsy, because we suspected the lesion to be a high-grade glioma that was accessible to surgical resection.
In the pathological analysis, there was an evident atypical T and B infiltrate; morphological and phenotypical characteristics of Grade 1 lymphomatoid granulomatosis. The patient was subjected to thoracic and abdominal screening, which revealed paratracheal, jugular, and inguinal adenopathies, but no other masses.
After consulting with the hematology group, the patient received a four-cycle medical treatment with rituximab and prednisone. Clinically, he recovered almost completely with strength of 4/5 and complete reintegration to his daily activities, which involved bimanual work. Six months after his diagnosis, a new MRI showed the absence of new or residual lesions.
Two years after the surgery the patient continued to be free of seizures, and his MRI showed no evidence of new lesions, areas of restriction of diffusion, or anomalous enhancements that could indicate residual or recurrent tumor .