A 56-year-old male was diagnosed with multiple HCCs in Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) stage B. The patient had chronic viral hepatitis B and received standard antiviral therapy. He had no medical history of glucose intolerance, autoimmune diseases, thyroid dysfunction, or other systemic diseases (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome), and no evidence of acute infection, trauma, or drug poisoning. He also had no family history of diabetes, autoimmune diseases, and hereditary diseases. Psychosocial assessment showed that the patient had no mental, physical, or emotional health issues. After unsuccessful treatment with trans-hepatic arterial chemotherapy and embolization (TACE), the patient voluntarily participated in the CISLD-1 trial, provided signed informed consent in July 2019, and started to receive Sintilimab at a dose of 200 mg every 3 weeks. Five months after receiving Sintilimab, tumor marker examination and imaging scans showed that the treatment was effective. The patient’s alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level decreased to 40.4 μg/L from a baseline level of 9829.9 μg/L . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the tumor nodule in the liver had shrunk dramatically with a response evaluation of partial regression (PR) according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1 . During these months, the patient felt mild fever regularly; however, there was no fatigue, nausea, erythema or any other side effect found.
At 24 weeks, after 8 courses of Sintilimab, the patient presented with increased urination and drinking for 1 week, and blood tests showed that his fasting plasma glucose was as high as 22.2 mmol/L, with an HbA1c value of 7.8%. Considering the high risk of diabetic ketoacidosis, blood gas analysis was performed, which revealed that he had severe metabolic acidosis, with an arterial pH of 7.27, serum bicarbonate of 12.9 mmol/L, and lactate of 1.8 mmol/L. The blood ketone body determination was positive. Therefore, the patient was suspected to have new onset diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis and was admitted to our hospital. Further blood assessment showed that the patient’s fasting insulin was as low as 1.5 mIU/L and fasting C-peptide was 1.12 ng/mL (0.78–5.19 ng/mL), which further decreased to 0.21 ng/mL 4 days later. The oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) revealed that the fasting, 1-, 2-, and 3-h plasma glucose levels were 12.34, 18.32, 28.38, and 25.41 mmol/L, respectively, accompanied by a 2-h postprandial C-peptide level of 0.30 ng/mL and a serum insulin level of 10.4 mIU/L. In addition, the patient’s serum inflammatory cytokines, measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), demonstrated an interleukin-6 (IL-6) level of 786.32 pg/mL, which decreased to 338.70 pg/mL 2 months later . There was no infection, medication, thromboembolic event, or other factor (Autoimmune diseases, Cushing’s syndrome, or drug poisoning) that could cause hyperglycemia. Consequently, Sintilimab-induced new-onset autoimmune diabetes was diagnosed. However, the anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GADA) antibody, anti-islet cell antibody (ICA), and anti-insulin (IAA) antibody tests were all negative. In addition, the type 1 diabetes-related alleles of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and II, which were explored at the loci of HLA-A, B, C, DRB1, DQA1 and DQB1 by sequence-based typing primed PCR , revealed that the most relevant allele was HLA-A∗0201 . For other endocrine function assessments, thyroid hormones showed that the patient’s serum total triiodothyronine (TT3) and free triiodothyronine (FT3) were slightly decreased, but later become normal without oral thyroxine treatment . Moreover, the levels of anterior pituitary hormones and their regulated hormones were all normal . The patient received insulin therapy delivered by micropump, maintaining water and electrolyte acid-base balance and other supportive treatment to correct acidosis. Thereafter, he was treated with insulin therapy subcutaneously, which was adjusted daily to the dose of once-daily basal insulin glargine (long-acting insulin, 30 units) plus thrice-daily prandial insulin aspart (fast acting insulin, 14 units) during his hospital stay. The patient’s plasma glucose returned to normal levels gradually and he was discharged 10 days later . Subsequently, the patient’s plasma glucose was monitored in the outpatient setting and the insulin therapy was gradually adjusted to once-daily basal insulin glargine (28 units) plus thrice-daily prandial insulin aspart (15 units). Then, the patient received continued Sintilimab administration, which resulted in a further decreased in his AFP level . And the patient’s plasma glucose level was stable during follow-up visits.