A 38-year-old female nurse presented with high fever (>40°C), chills, dry cough, nausea, vomiting, loss of taste and smell, and myalgia during the outbreak of COVID-19. After the initial assessment, it was clear that her high fever, myalgia, and dry cough had continued for ten days. After the infectious disease specialists confirmed the diagnosis of COVID-19 via reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay, she was administered hydroxychloroquine (200 mg, PO q12h) and oseltamivir (75 mg, PO q12h) for five days. Two days later, anorexia and diarrhea were added to her symptoms. Six days later, she also reported the loss of taste and smell and hair loss, which continued for ten days. No noticeable sign of abnormality in sensory or motor nerve function was observed during two weeks. Also, laboratory tests, including complete blood count, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were normal in her first admission.
After 20 days, the patient’s symptoms were completely relieved. However, she was admitted to the emergency room due to brief episodes of unconsciousness and chest pain at night, caused by an extremely sudden drop in pulse rate, as reported by her husband at home and coworkers during the shifts. In the emergency room, she had no fever (36.9°C), and her respiratory rate and oxygen saturation level were normal. The skin examination showed a pruritic rash, distributed on her breasts, shoulders, and legs, which were associated with her fainting episodes .
Cardiac monitoring was performed during one of her shifts when she fainted. The results showed bradycardia, and premature ventricular contractions (PVC) taken within less than 15 minutes. Next, 24-hour Holter monitoring was performed, which showed a temporary complete heart block . Laboratory tests, including complete blood count, troponin, creatine kinase-MB, D-dimer, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, lactate dehydrogenase, and COVID-19 IgM antibody rapid test were completely normal during her hospitalization. She was retested with PCR assay for COVID-19, and the result was normal in the third day of her second hospitalization.
She did not show any defects on her chest CT scan during her first and second hospitalizations for COVID-19. The cardiologists decided to use a pacemaker for her. After four days of assessment, the result of Holter monitoring was normal, and her sinus rhythms and PVCs returned to normal without any interventions . Accordingly, she was discharged from the hospital. Echocardiography was normal, with an ejection fraction up to 60% without pericardial effusion. Also, her skin rash disappeared one day after admission. After two weeks, she did not have any symptoms, her cardiac monitoring was normal, and all of her symptoms were completely relieved.