A 78-year-old male patient presented for resection of a cT4NxM0 left upper lobe lung adenocarcinoma. His past medical history was significant for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, previous smoking history, ulcerative colitis and proctitis for which he was receiving Sulphasalazine. The patient did not receive corticosteroids or neoadjuvant chemo- or radiotherapy. Preoperative spirometry was unremarkable. Preoperative computerised tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed a left upper lobe mass with adjacent pleural tethering and consolidative changes proximate to the left mainstem bronchus (LMSB). As multiple small calcified lymph nodes were seen in the right hilar and subcarinal regions , the patient was planned for mediastinoscopy and lymph node sampling, followed by left upper lobe wedge resection should frozen section examination of the right hilar and subcarinal lymph nodes return negative for malignancy. The left mainstem bronchus measured 13.1 mm (anteroposterior) by 14.0 mm (craniocaudal) on the preoperative CT. Measurements were taken 2 cm distal to the carina, perpendicular to the axis of the bifurcation General anesthesia was induced with propofol, remifentanil and atracurium. After induction, a single lumen tube (single-use polyvinyl chloride endotracheal tube 7.5 mm internal diameter) was inserted under direct laryngoscopy on first pass and secured at 23 cm at the lips. Endotracheal tube introducers were not used. Using a standard anesthetic breathing circuit and anesthetic machine, positive pressure ventilation was instituted with pressure-control mode with a peak airway pressure of 20cmH2O and positive end expiratory pressure of 4cmH2O, achieving a tidal volume of 8 mL.kg−1 in a 2L.min−1 air:oxygen mix. Maintenance of anesthesia was performed with total intravenous anesthesia of propofol and remifentanil, titrating the effect site concentrations to achieve an appropriate depth of anesthesia according to bispectral index monitor. The patient was paralysed with an atracurium infusion.
Mediastinoscopy was performed in supine position via a suprasternal incision, with dissection along the pre-tracheal fascia. The mediastinal lymph nodes frozen section returned negative for malignancy, and surgery proceeded to resection of the left upper lobe lesion via a left open thoracotomy. With the patient still in supine position, and using a bronchoscope (Ambu® aScope™ 4 Broncho Slim 3.8 mm outer diameter), a 9Fr Fuji Uniblocker® was inserted into the LMSB with the balloon deflated. The balloon was inflated with air incrementally under bronchoscopic guidance to a volume of 7 mL to achieve lung separation – within the manufacturer-specified maximum volume of 8 mL. The volume of air required was taken note of and the balloon was then deflated before turning the patient to the right lateral decubitus position. After final patient positioning, bronchoscopy was again used to confirm the position of the EBB and the balloon inflated to the required volume for lung separation. No obvious irregularity or compression of the LMSB was noted on bronchoscopy. There was no sign of blood before, during and after balloon inflation. Initial EBB balloon pressure measured via the pilot balloon was 31cmH2O. A Portex® cuff inflator pressure gauge was used intraoperatively for balloon pressure measurement. The EBB was not manipulated following placement, and there was no patient coughing throughout surgery. One-lung ventilation was instituted using pressure control with a peak airway pressure of 24cmH2O and positive end expiratory pressure of 8cmH2O. An air leak of approximately 100-150 mL per breath was detectable following inflation of EBB balloon, but this was managed with an increase in gas flows to 4L.min−1, sufficient to prevent collapse of the ventilator bellow and to achieve a tidal volume of 6 mL.kg−1. There was no desaturation, abnormal capnography or abnormal airway pressure or flow curves.
A large left upper lobe tumour (3.3 cm × 5.8 cm) with pleural puckering and dense adhesions between the left hilar tissues was found intraoperatively. During surgical dissection around the LMSB, multiple air pockets with air-trapping were noted between the mediastinal pleura and mediastinal organs. A rupture was found in the posterior wall of the LMSB starting just below the carina and extending 7 cm distally , with the EBB balloon seen just beneath the peribronchial tissue. A large volume air leak was noted immediately during surgical dissection of the surrounding tissue with complete collapse of the ventilator bellow. The EBB was immediately deflated and removed, and the ETT guided into the right mainstem bronchus using a fiberoptic bronchoscope and the ETT balloon inflated to a pressure of 28cmH2O. Thus, one-lung ventilation was achieved with right endobronchial intubation.
The LMSB was repaired with 3/0 Polydioxanone (PDS) sutures and tagged to the esophageal wall posteriorly. The ETT was then withdrawn into the trachea under bronchoscopic guidance following repair of the LMSB. The left hemithorax was then irrigated with povidone iodine and saline, and no air leak was detected with a Valsalva maneuver of 40 cmH2O. The Valsalva maneuver was performed by switching the ventilator to manual ventilation and the adjustable pressure-limiting valve closed to 40 cmH2O. Fresh gas flow was increased and the breathing circuit bag squeezed for 15 seconds to generate the needed Valsalva maneuver pressure. 40 cmH2O was used at the surgeon’s request. No subcutaneous emphysema was present on clinical examination.
Throughout the operation, the patient was relatively stable hemodynamically. There was a slight drop in blood pressure during initiation of one-lung ventilation but this was resolved with boluses of phenylephrine and ephedrine. There was no significant hypoxia during one-lung ventilation and the lowest saturation recorded was 96%.
The patient was extubated uneventfully at the conclusion of surgery and transferred to the intensive care unit. Broad-spectrum antimicrobial cover with Piperacillin-Tazobactam was initiated empirically. However, on the 3rd postoperative day, the patient developed altered mental status and severe bilateral pneumonia, worse on the right – the dependent side intraoperatively . This required subsequent reintubation and positive pressure ventilation. Post-operative bronchoscopy and CT revealed the LMSB repair to be intact. The postoperative course was subsequently complicated by acute respiratory distress syndrome, and a left lower lobar pulmonary embolism. The patient received a total of 67 days of positive pressure ventilation, of which 2 days were in the prone position. Unfortunately, the in-hospital stay was further complicated by multi-organ dysfunction, leading to the eventual demise of the patient.