The patient is a 22-month-old Caucasian boy, born at 36 weeks by spontaneous vaginal delivery with normal prenatal care. He had no family history of glaucoma or anterior segment dysgenesis. At birth, he was noted to have bilateral cloudy corneas with no epiphora nor photophobia. He was started on presumptive treatment of topical dorzolamide 2% and hypertonic sodium chloride ophthalmic solution 5% prior to his presentation at the Bascom Palmer Eye Institute. A bedside eye exam revealed a “corneal opacity centrally sparing the periphery” and he was diagnosed with possible congenital glaucoma associated with Peters anomaly. Extraocular findings included short extremities and brachydactyly, cleft palate, characteristic facial features, developmental delay, and pulmonary stenosis .
An exam under anesthesia (EUA) was performed the same day. Intraocular pressures (IOP) were 32 mmHg and 27 mmHg in the right eye (OD) and left eye (OS), respectively (Tono-Pen XL, Reichert Inc. Depew, NY). Bright red reflexes were noted prior to dilation in both eyes (OU). Other ocular abnormalities included iridocorneal adhesion superiorly OS and posterior capsular cataract OU. Given the absence of limbal enlargement, normal axial lengths, and an intact red reflex prior to dilation, glaucoma surgery was deferred. Phenylephrine 2.5% OU was added for optical dilation and visual rehabilitation, and topical dorzolamide 2% was continued.
Four months later, a second EUA was performed, IOPs were 30 mmHg OD and 35 mmHg OS by Tono-pen. The corneal opacities were noted to have enlarged centrally, though the clear peripheral cornea still maintained intact red reflexes. The irides were noted to have formed whispy attachments to the corneas in both eyes. The view of the lens and posterior structures at this point were suboptimal. A diagnosis of Peters anomaly type 1 was made. Genetic testing subsequently identified a homozygous pathogenic variant in B3GLCT (c. 660 + 1 G > A splice donor; Invitae, Pediatric Genetics Specialty Practice, 60 W Gore St, Orlando, FL 32806, Oct 2017). His axial length measurements and B scan ultrasound estimate of cupping were both stable compared to baseline. Patient was monitored on the same medications without surgical intervention. Genetic screening were offered to patient’s parents but were declined.
In the subsequent serial EUA, more adhesions between the iris and cornea OS were noted despite the generally improved corneal opacities OU. Posterior segment improved as the media opacity cleared. Fluorescein angiography (FA) was performed (RetCam3, Ophthalmic Imaging System, Natus Medical), and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) images were obtain (Spectralis flex module, Heidelberg Engineering). The optic discs were noted to have morning glory-like appearances suggestive of colobomatous changes, with a cup to disc ratio of approximately 0.7 OU. Diffuse chorioretinal atrophies were noted [Fig. a-b]. The right eye had a well-defined white-yellowish, comet shaped lesion along the superotemporal arcade [Fig. a]. A similar lesion that was well-circumscribed, oval-shaped and atrophic was seen in the central macula of the left eye [Fig. b]. FA demonstrated early hyperfluorescence of the lesion with no leakage in the right eye, and early hyperfluorescence secondary to a window defect corresponding to the macular lesion in the left eye. Late frames of the FA showed hyperfluorescence of the atrophic lesions [Fig. c-d]. There were neither leakage from the optic disc, nor vascular abnormalities in the peripheral retina. Intraoperative SD-OCT of the macula showed severe diffuse thinning of the retina and choroid in the atrophic lesions. Additionally, in the left eye oval shaped atrophic lesion, a complete loss of retinal structure was noted [Fig. ]. Written informed consent to publish the acquired images were obtained from the patient’s guardians.