We report the case of a 65-year-old Berber man admitted to our urology department because of renal failure. He had a history of symptoms of bladder fullness and emptying with a 1-year evolution characterized by decreased force and caliber of the urine stream, intermittency, dysuria, frequent urge to urinate, urgency and terminal dribbling with nightly urination (three to five times). The evolution of his symptoms included acute urinary retention 1 month prior to urological testing. During the patient’s medical history interview, he referred to chronic lumbar pain but no weight loss. During the physical examination, his full bladder was found not to be palpated, his genitals were adequate for age and sex and a DRE revealed a normotonic sphincter. His prostate was enlarged and had an adenomatous surface. The routine laboratory findings revealed biologic renal failure with the following laboratory panel values: urea 43.5mg/dl, creatinine 0.8mg/dl, sodium 144mEq/L, potassium 4.5mEq/L, chloride 118mEq/L and free PSA 4.12ng/ml. An abdominal ultrasound confirmed prostatic enlargement, estimated at 45ml with regular edges, good definition of homogeneous echogenicity and regular bladder wall thickness hypertrophy . Another image showed bilateral ureterohydronephrosis , and PVR urine volume was found to be 35ml. Uroflowmetry demonstrated maximum urinary flow rate and average urinary flow rate to be 13ml/s. Our investigations were completed with drip infusion pyelography, which showed significant dilatation of the upper urinary tract and a partial defect of the distal ureter .
The patient underwent bilateral JJ stent insertion with transurethral resection of the prostate. The Foley catheter was removed after 2 days, after which the patient was able to void without difficulty. The patient was discharged 3 days after surgery without any obvious complications. A pathologic examination revealed benign prostatic gland hyperplasia. At the patient’s 3-month follow-up examination, his JJ stent was removed. He had comfortable urination without renal failure.