A 32-year-old Japanese woman with recurrent hyperthyroidism was introduced to the out-patient department of Kohnan Hospital. She had a family history of Graves’ disease. She began to feel thirst, frequent palpitations, and body weight loss from around June 2006, and hyperthyroidism was detected. Her serum free triiodothyronine (T3) was more than 20pg/mL, free thyroxine (T4) was 7.7ng/dL, TSH was less than the detectable level and anti-TSH receptor antibody (TRAb) was 77.5% (normal range, less than 10%). The 24-hour uptake of iodine-123 to the thyroid gland was 38.47% in the right lobe and 44.16% in the left lobe (total 82.63%). A head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast medium revealed thickening of the bilateral ocular muscles, but no evident tumor in the sella turcica . The diagnosis was established as Graves’ disease, and propylthiouracil (PTU) was administered. TRAb had fallen to the normal range, and a euthyroid state was achieved in June 2008. However, occasional elevation of free T3 was detected, so PTU administration was continued. Re-elevation of TSH was seen in December 2010 . A head MRI revealed abnormal findings in the sella turcica, and she was introduced to the neurosurgical department of Kohnan Hospital in May 2011.
On admission her blood pressure was 152/112mmHg. Electrocardiography recorded her heart rate as 70 beats/minute but she complained of frequent palpitations. Her consciousness was clear, and no abnormal neurological signs were detected. Endocrinological examinations in the morning with oral intake of 100mg of PTU revealed free T3 of 2.77pg/mL, free T4 of 1.09ng/dL and TSH of 2.433μIU/mL. Because of her frequent palpitations the thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) loading test without discontinuing PTU was performed, which revealed no abnormal response. All other pituitary hormones were within the normal ranges, and head MR imaging with contrast medium showed an area of less enhancement in the left lateral wing of the sella turcica with a diameter of 5mm , and transsphenoidal surgery was planned under a diagnosis of TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma.
The milky-white soft tumor was enclosed within a thin cellulose-like membrane. Total removal was achieved in addition to medical fixation of the cleavage with pure ethanol. Postoperative histological examination showed diffuse cell arrangement with mild variation in size but without atypism or mitosis of the nucleus . Immunohistochemical examination disclosed plurihormonal expression of pituitary hormones including TSH-β, and the diagnosis was established as TSH-secreting plurihormonal adenoma .
Administration of PTU was discontinued from the day of surgery. Diastolic blood pressure did not exceed 100mmHg for six days after the operation. Pituitary and thyroid hormones were re-evaluated at 11 days after the operation, showing free T3 was 3.31pg/mL, free T4 was 1.00ng/dL and TSH was 1.567μIU/mL. Additional TRH loading test found no abnormal responses, and she was discharged at 12 days after the operation. Her blood pressure was 133/86mmHg, and palpitations had disappeared without medication.