An 81-year-old male was admitted to the Huizhou Central People’s Hospital on September 18, 2022, with a principal complaint of fever and dyspnea. Three days before admission, the patient developed a fever with a maximum temperature of 39.5°C with no apparent cause. The fever was accompanied by dyspnea, chills, fatigue, muscle pain, and intermittent cough. The patient produced little sputum and did not complain of abdominal pain or diarrhea. The patient did not report marked improvement after self-medicating with oral cefuroxime and acetaminophen. One day prior, the patient visited the emergency department of our hospital. Chest computed tomography (CT) indicated a considerable consolidation in the left lung, patchy exudative lesions in the right lung, and a small amount of pleural effusion in the left lung. The patient received piperacillin-sulbactam (4.5 g IV q.8 h) antibiotic injections, but the fever persisted, and the patient was subsequently admitted. The patient had a 5-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and was not taking hypoglycemic medication regularly.

Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 39.1°C; pulse, 95 beats/min; respiratory rate, 30 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 132/70 mmHg. The patient was conscious but described feeling in poor spirits; there was no evidence of rash, subcutaneous bleeding, or superficial lymph node enlargement. Breathing was slightly rapid, with coarse breath sounds in bilateral lungs and wet rales in the left lower lung. No other major abnormalities were noted.

Laboratory test results were as follows: blood gas analysis (FiO2 33%): pH, 7.505; pO2, 53 mmHg; pCO2, 27 mmHg; HCO3, 21.3 mmol/L; ferritin, >2000 µg/L (reference range: 13–150 µg/L); blood phosphorus, 1.52 mmol/L (reference range: 0.85–1.51 mmol/L); blood sodium, 145 mmol/L (reference range: 135–145 mmol/L); and urine erythrocytes, 530/µL (reference range: 0–17/µL).

After admission, the patient was diagnosed with severe community-acquired pneumonia and administered meropenem injection (1.0 g IV q.8 h) and oseltamivir capsules (75 mg q. 12 h) as empirical antibiotic/antiviral treatment, hepatoprotective medication, and transnasal high-flow oxygen therapy. The patient’s dyspnea was aggravated on the night of admission, with the oxygenation index falling to 62.5, leading to the initiation of emergency tracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation. Given that the patient had a severe infection of unknown etiology, 10 mL of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid was collected via fiberoptic bronchoscopy on day 2 after admission for metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS). During this period, antinuclear antibody panel, serum 1,3-β-D-glucan assay (G test), galactomannan (GM) assay, SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test, Legionella DNA test, and tests for IgM antibodies to respiratory pathogens (including L. pneumophila, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Rickettsia, Chlamydia pneumoniae, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, influenza A virus, influenza B virus, and parainfluenza virus) were all negative. Additionally, multiple sputum and blood cultures were negative. On day 4 after admission, the patient’s temperature remained above 38.5°C, the dyspnea did not improve, cough and sputum increased, inflammatory indicators were higher than before, and severe liver and renal insufficiency was observed. Chest CT re-examination indicated bilateral increases in lung lesions. On day 4 after admission, mNGS results indicated the presence of L. pneumophila (76 sequences, coverage 32%) and Candida albicans (115 sequences, coverage 43%). According to the clinical manifestations and results of mNGS, severe L. pneumophila pneumonia was suggested. Given the severe hepatic and renal dysfunction, the antibiotic regimen was changed to omadacycline injection (first dose: 200 mg IV q.d., second dose: 100 mg IV q.d). Five days later, the dyspnea resolved completely, re-examination of inflammation and organ function indicators showed dramatic improvement, and intravenous omadacycline was continued. On day 14, the patient was weaned from tracheal intubation, and transnasal high-flow oxygen therapy was administered. On day 22, all inflammation and organ function indicators had generally returned to normal, and chest CT indicated that the bilateral lung lesions were markedly resolved. Omadacycline was discontinued, and the patient was discharged the following day. At the 2-month follow-up, the patient’s general condition was satisfactory, with only occasional cough and no dyspnea. Chest CT indicated the lung lesions were almost entirely resolved, with only a few fibrotic streaks remaining.