An asymptomatic 23-month-old boy, weighed 10.5 kg, was incidentally diagnosed with congenital heart disease while presenting to the hospital for another illness. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed one 18-mm ASD located in the inferior portion of the atrial septum that resulted in an overriding inferior vena cava (IVC), and the right inferior pulmonary vein (RIPV) partially returned to the right atrium (RA) near the orifice of the IVC. TTE also showed a complete left-to-right atrial shunt, no tricuspid regurgitation, and right ventricular dilation (with a diameter of 15 mm). Cardiac catheterization confirmed a normal anatomy of coronary arteries and a pulmonary to systemic flow ratio (Qp/Qs) of 3.2:1.
The patient was placed in a supine position with the right side of the body elevated to 30°. Two arms were placed along the body and the patient was under general anesthesia with a single-lumen endotracheal tube. One 14F-arterial cannula (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, Minn, USA) used as a superior vena cava (SVC) cannula was inserted through the right internal jugular vein with Seldinger technique. Four trocars were set up on the right chest wall, included the following: one 12 mm trocar in the 5th intercostal space (ICS) at the anterior axillary line as the main working port, one 5 mm trocar in the 4th ICS at the mid-axillary line as the secondary working port, one 5 mm trocar in the 5th ICS at the mid-axillary line as the camera port and one 5 mm trocar in the 6th ICS at the mid-axillary line for right heart sucker.
The ventilation volume was reduced to 50%–75% compared with conventional practice. The anesthetist continuously monitored the oxygen saturation with a finger pulse oximeter and maintained it ≥95% throughout the operation. With this ventilation technique, the lungs were collapsed enough for the surgeon to open and hang up the pericardium. The large right lobe of the thymus covered the majority of the pericardium surrounding the aorta and the SVC. Therefore, we dissected this lobe from the pericardium (while preserving the tissue and supplying vessels) and hung it on to the anterior chest wall with a suture. The pericardium was opened parallel to and at 1.5 cm away from the anterior chest wall. The inferior edge of the pericardium was hung up to the diaphragm (the caudal end) and through the trocar (the cephalic end) by some sutures to expose the surgical field (Video 1). At this stage, respiratory ventilation was continued as usual.
To expose the ascending aorta, the top of the right atrial appendage was sutured and pulled down through a trocar. A 2–0, 17 mm braided suture (ETHIBOND EXCEL® Polyester Suture, ETHICON, JOHNSON & JOHNSON, Shanghai, China) was used to make a purse-string suture on the anterior wall of the ascending aorta, right beneath the semicircular fat plica (A) (Video 2). A 12F-arterial cannula (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, Minn, USA) was placed superiorly through right anterior chest wall in the 4th ICS, 1 cm away from the right border of the sternum. This process was performed from the outside combined with endoscopic visualization from inside to avoid injury to the internal thoracic artery and ensure that the cannula was best directed to the purse-string suture . We placed a piece of a 10 F rubber catheter (Red Rubber Latex All-Purpose Intermittent Catheters, Medline, USA) about 1.3 to 1.5 cm away from the tip of the arterial cannula to work as a brake. Subsequently, a surgical scalpel blade No.11 (Aesculap, Inc.) was used to open the ascending aorta inside the purse-string suture. The arterial cannula was then introduced via this ostium into the ascending aorta until the brake on the cannula reached the aortic wall (B, C) (Video 3). The arterial cannula was fixed and the cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was started.
A CO2-pump line connecting to the camera port was used to fill the pericardial and pleural spaces with CO2. Initially, CO2 was pumped with a rate of 0.5 l/min, and then the pump rate was adjusted to maintain the partial pressure of CO2 in arterial blood ranging from 35 to 40 mmHg. Arterial line pressure was maintained >50 mmHg during the operation.
A loop was placed around the SVC to act as a tourniquet but not snaring. The patient was placed in the Trendelenburg position. The tourniquet on the SVC was tightened after opening the RA (Video 4). The blood returning to the RA from the IVC was drained by a stiff sucker, which also acted as an atrial retractor to expose the lesion. The edges of RA were hung to the pericardium by stitches to expose structures inside the RA. After determining the location, size of the ASD, as well as the anatomical correlation between the IVC and the RIPV, an artificial patch was used to close the ASD and form a canal to drain blood from the RIPV to the LA through the ASD (A, B) (Video 5). Right before completing the ASD closure, the lung was inflated to remove air from the left atrium. The RA was closed in a two-layer fashion using continuous stitches. The extracorporeal circulation was stopped and the surgery was finished uneventfully. The operative and cardiopulmonary bypass times were 259 and 133 min, respectively. The patient stayed in the intensive care unit for 18 h and was discharged on postoperative-day 7 without neurological complication or blood transfusion. TTE prior to discharge revealed a completely closed ASD, patent IVC, and RIPV ostia. Both the patient and his family were extremely satisfied with the cosmetic results of surgical scars (C).