A 75-year-old Japanese man was referred for sudden asymptomatic gross hematuria. Ultrasonography and abdominal X-ray suggested bladder calculus, and computed tomography (CT) was performed. CT showed intramural right ureteral calculus (1.8 cm in diameter) and a well-circumscribed hypervascular mass measuring approximately 2.1 cm at the right trigone of his urinary bladder . Hydronephrosis was absent in bilateral kidneys. We then performed a cystoscopy to confirm the bladder mass. Examination revealed a non-papillary nodular mass located at the right trigone . The mass appeared to be completely covered by normal urothelium, suggesting a submucosal tumor. The mucosa was elevated behind the mass; however, we were unable to confirm the right ureteral orifice and calculus preoperatively. Since CT showed the mass to be adjacent to the calculus, the tumor may have interfered with the discharge of the calculus. No invasive growth was observed by magnetic resonance imaging . Urine cytology was negative for malignant cells. We then performed transurethral resection (TUR) of the mass. Following resection, we confirmed right ureteral orifice and intra-ureteral calculus. As a result, we performed transurethral lithotripsy. Our patient recovered without perioperative complications and has remained free of recurrence for 5 months.
On gross examination, the resected surface of the mass specimens was solid, firm, and tan-white to yellow without apparent necrosis and hemorrhage.
On histologic examination, the urothelium was largely denuded; however, residual urothelium showed no atypia. In the submucosal lesion, we observed spindle-shaped to oval-shaped cells that had mildly hyperchromatic nuclei and eosinophilic elongated or tapering cytoplasm arranged in loose fascicles or perivascular whorls around often-hyalinized blood vessels or in a vague storiform-growth fashion, embedded in variably fibromyxoid or edematous stroma associated with dilated thin-walled blood vessels . Mitotic figures are rare. On immunohistochemical examination, the tumor cells were positive for alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin, CD34, and h-caldesmon, and CD99 was weakly and focally expressed . The cells were negative for S-100, CAM5.2, AE1/AE3, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), STAT6, MUC4, and claudin-1.