A 44-year-old man presented to the emergency department with acute onset of abdominal pain. He reported that his pain started 2 days ago and had become progressively worse. The pain was diffuse across his mid-to-lower abdomen. The patient had normal bowel movements and denied any fever, chills, nausea, or vomiting. His medical history was significant for end-stage renal disease (ESRD) from his congenital renal hypoplasia. He received kidney transplant 7 years ago. Unfortunately, he developed acute antibody rejection and had been requiring intermittent hemodialysis for the past 2 years. He desired to undergo renal transplant again and had been on immunosuppression with oral prednisone (5 mg/day) and mycophenolate mofetil (250 mg/day). On physical examination, the patient had a blood pressure of 105/60, heart rate of 103, respiratory rate of 20, body temperature 37.1°C. His abdominal examination demonstrated generalized tenderness. There was remarkable lower abdomen rebound tenderness, just below the level of the umbilicus. Bowel sound was absent. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast was performed [Figures and ].
Abdominal CT (axial view, and coronal, demonstrated ruptured jejunal diverticulum with associated free intraperitoneal air (white arrows) and surrounding mesenteric edema left mid abdomen. Numerous small bowel diverticuli were noted with marked jejunal diverticulosis. The patient underwent a segmental jejunal resection and anastomosis. His postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was dismissed from the hospital and continued his immunosuppression, including prednisone and mycophenolate mofetil. A month later after his hospitalization, the patient appeared with the same presentation and was found to have recurrent jejunal diverticulum perforation. He again underwent a segmental jejunal resection and anastomosis. Nephrology was consulted. The information on the risks and benefits of mycophenolate mofetil as well as information on alternative options such as azathioprine was provided. Mycophenolate mofetil was discontinued. Three months after hospitalization, the patient continued to do well without any further episode of abdominal pain.