A 56-year-old man was referred to our hospital with a 6-month history of abdominal distension and discomfort (A). He had a medical history of schizophrenia. His abdomen was markedly distended, and severe edema was present in both lower limbs. He had no symptoms of gastrointestinal obstruction. Neurological examination findings were normal. He had slight anemia (hemoglobin of 10.5 g/dl), and other laboratory data were within normal limits. A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a 30- × 18- × 30-cm giant mass located between the stomach and transverse colon. It included a large cyst and solid component that showed enhancement (B). The main feeder artery for the tumor seemed to be the right gastric artery. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed a huge heterogeneous soft tissue mass. The solid component showed high signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging (C, D). Upper and lower endoscopy was not performed because the patient declined. CT-guided biopsy was not performed to avoid dissemination. Our preoperative differential diagnoses were sarcoma with a mucinous component, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, lymphangioma, and mesenteric cyst. A histological diagnosis was not obtained preoperatively, and the tumor was too large to identify its boundary with the surrounding organs by radiological examination. We expected that the tumor was arising from the stomach, transverse colon, or mesenterium.
We decided to perform surgery because the tumor showed the tendency to grow. During laparotomy, we identified a huge encapsulated tumor. The tumor occupied most of the pelvic cavity, but the caudal side of the tumor had no adhesions with pelvic organs. We gradually dissected along the capsule and moved the tumor outside the body (A). Finally, we found that the tumor was adhered to the stomach and transverse colon. We resected the distal stomach and 15 cm of the transverse colon with the tumor. Reconstruction was performed using Billroth-I anastomosis for the stomach and end-to-end anastomosis for the colon. We identified the resection margin of the tumor, and we did not perform intraoperative histological examination or lymph node dissection because no enlarged lymph nodes or disseminated nodules were found. The tumor was completely removed. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 17.
Macroscopic examination revealed a 38- × 20- × 19-cm tumor weighing 13,000 g (B). No abnormalities were found on the intraluminal surface of the stomach or transverse colon wall. On histological examination, the tumor was composed mainly of short spindle and vacuolated cells, including lipoblasts and mature adipocytes, with a myxomatous matrix. The main mass was located in the abdominal cavity, but the tumor base was broadly adhered to the gastric wall and seemingly grew from the gastric submucosa, suggesting that the tumor had likely arisen from the stomach . The transverse colon was intact. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were negative for smooth muscle actin, c-kit, and MDM2. These features were consistent with myxoid liposarcoma. The patient was still doing well 2 years postoperatively.