A 16-year-old Japanese primipara was urgently transported from a regional maternity clinic to our hospital because of threatened premature labor in the 25th week of pregnancy. There was no medical or family history of note. At that time, there had been extremely powerful earthquakes occurring in the Kumamoto area where she lived, and as a result, she had been forced to stay in an emergency shelter. When she arrived at our hospital, treatment with ritodrine hydrochloride, magnesium sulfate, betamethasone and hydroxyprogesterone was initiated, and her premature uterine contractions were successfully controlled.
Soon after her admission, considerable polyuria (3000–6000 mL/day), nocturia (5–6 times a night) and polydipsia gradually became obvious . Because she was restricted to bedrest to prevent premature labor, precise diagnosis and treatment of polyuria was necessary. From the 27th to the 28th week of gestation, the amount of urine increased from 4000 to 6000 mL/day . Fasting plasma glucose levels during hospitalization were around 78–88 mg/dL and the results from a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test indicated that she was not diabetic . Although she developed polyuria, serum sodium levels were constant at around 137–140 mEq/L during the clinical course . Serum osmolality was maintained at around 260–265 mOsm/L, while urine osmolality (191–293 mOsm/L) showed below the levels of serum osmolality, indicating that her urine concentration ability had deteriorated . The serum level of AVP was 1.7 pg/mL (0.3–3.5; Table ), which is inconsistent with central DI. At the time of admission, hepatic dysfunction was not observed . A water deprivation test would have been unsuitable for diagnosis in this case because dehydration can deteriorate the maternal-fetus environment. Although a precise diagnosis of GDI was not made at that time, we decided to use oral 1-deamino-8-D-AVP (DDAVP) tablets for diagnostic treatment to determine whether her urine would respond to DDAVP and treat DI, as well as to rule out nephrogenic DI. Thus, the patient was first given 120 μg of oral DDAVP tablets, and then the dose of DDAVP was gradually increased to 360 μg until the amount of urine was less than 2000 mL/day with a urine osmolality of 305–365 mOsm/L . At the 32nd week of gestation, fetal maturation was confirmed and medical support to prevent premature contractions was ceased. Soon after this decision, a male fetus weighing 1660 g and 45 cm was delivered with a one-minute Apgar score of 8/9. Immediately after the normal delivery, DDAVP tablets were no longer necessary to control her polyuria. Daily urine amount decreased to 1300–1600 mL/day . At this point, s-Osm was 268 mOsm/L and u-Osm increased to 540 mOsm/L without DDAVP treatment . Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and confirmed that the normal bright spot in the posterior pituitary on the T1 image was present . After these observations, clinical diagnosis of GDI was confirmed.
At 2 weeks post-partum, the patient’s sodium, serum and urine osmolality were within normal range. She remained clinically well, and is currently breast-feeding with no complications.
At 4 weeks post-partum, she developed postpartum destructive thyrotoxicosis with increases of free-T4 and free-T3, and suppressed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), with positive thyroglobulin antibody . After 8–12 weeks of follow up with no medications, she had completely recovered thyroid function.