An 11-year-old boy who was diagnosed with MS was referred to our clinic with the complaint of reduced vision in his left eye. He had noticed a decreased vision in his left eye following a mild head trauma 2 weeks prior to our visit. He was found to have optic nerve swelling and was referred to a neurologist. Neurological examinations were normal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed high T2/FLAIR intensity lesions at juxta-cortical, subcortical, and periventricular white matter, as well as corpus callosum, calloso-septal interface and cervical and thoracic spinal cord without restricted-diffusion or enhancement (Supplementary Fig. 1). The diagnosis of pediatric-onset MS (POMS) was established by an MS specialist. Intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone (1g daily for 5 days) was administered, but his vision did not improve prompting referral to our center.
In ophthalmologic examination in our clinic, the patient's visual acuity (VA) was 6/10 in the right and finger counting (FC) at 50 cm in the left eye. Anterior segment examination revealed bilateral mild injection of conjunctiva. There were no cells in the anterior chamber (AC). The intraocular pressure (IOP) measurements were within normal limits. A prominent relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) was present in the left eye. Vitreous organization, 2 + vitreous cells and haze, snowballs and snowbanks were observed in both eyes.
In fundus examination, the left optic disc had blurred margins along with peripapillary hemorrhage. The right eye optic nerve examination was unremarkable . Perivascular sheathing in the peripheral retina could be appreciated in both eyes.
Retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) optical coherence tomography (OCT) scans revealed remarkable increase in the left eye optic nerve head RNFL thickness . Macular spectral domain (SD)-OCT illustrated the posterior vitreous cells; Both eyes exhibited perifoveal non-cystic retinal thickening, which could potentially serve as an indicator of significant peripheral retinal vascular leakage, as suggested by a recent study . In fluorescein angiography, optic disc leakage, periphlebitis and vascular leakage in equator and more predominantly in the periphery of the retina were observed bilaterally; no macular leakage was evident..
All laboratory testing including PPD, ACE, VDRL and RPR were reported within normal range or non-reactive.
The patient was diagnosed with bilateral POMS associated intermediate uveitis. Considering active uveitis despite receiving high dose systemic corticosteroid, posterior sub-Tenon triamcinolone acetonide (20 mg/0.5 ml) was administered to each eye.
At the same time, the patient was treated with another IV methylprednisolone (1 g daily for 3 days) and also plasmapheresis for five sessions in neurology ward; the treatment was continued with Rituximab (prescribed as 500 mg, IV infusion separated by two weeks and then every 6 months).
After four months, the patient's vision improved to 10/10 and 9/10 in the right and left eye, respectively. The intensity of vitreous cells and haze decreased to 0.5 + in both eyes. At 4 months follow-up, fluorescein angiography demonstrated that optic disc and vascular leakage had subsided bilaterally .