A 50-year-old man with a history of an atrial septal defect and hypertension presented to our hospital for further examination of a previously diagnosed gallbladder polyp. He had no right quadrant pain, fever, jaundice, weight loss, or carcinoid syndrome-related symptoms such as diarrhea, flushing, edema, or wheezing. The patient hoped to avoid cholecystectomy. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed an 8.3-mm elevated polyp in the region around the gallbladder neck . During the next 3 years, the polyp gradually increased in size to 9.9 mm . Furthermore, contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed enhancement of the polyp . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed no abnormality in the bile duct or pancreatic duct, while the polyp showed iso-intensity on T1-weighted images and low intensity on T2-weighted images .
The patient had smoked 20 cigarettes per day for 20 years. He also had a history of drinking alcohol (one bottle of beer per day). Physical examination showed no abnormalities. Blood tests also showed no abnormalities, including elevations of tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen (1.5 ng/ml) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (9.3 U/ml). Taken together, these results suggested that the polyp included a malignant component. Therefore, we performed laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The whole gallbladder was successfully removed. Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a tumor of approximately 10 mm in diameter in the gallbladder neck region . Histologically, hematoxylin and eosin staining showed an alveolar pattern consisting of monomorphous round cells with centrally located nuclei . The extent of tumor infiltration was within the lamina propria of the mucosal membrane, and the tumor resection margin was negative. Immunohistochemical staining revealed positivity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 . Immunohistochemical staining of Ki-67 showed that the proliferative index in the tumor was < 3% and that the mitotic count ranged from 0 to 2 per 10 high-power fields . Taken together, these results led to a diagnosis of a grade 1 well-differentiated NET. Immunohistochemical staining was negative for DAXX and slightly positive for ATRX . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he developed no signs of recurrence either clinically or radiologically for 8 years.