A 10-year-old right-handed girl fell from a monkey bar and sustained a left flexion-type SHF and a radial shaft fracture with UN palsy, which were immediately operated on at another hospital . During the surgery, open reduction and internal fixation by Kirshner wires were performed anteriorly under direct visualization of the UN, which was not grossly damaged . Four-month postoperatively, she was referred to our department with complaints of an asymmetrical cosmetic elbow deformity and residual UN palsy. On examination, she had full range of elbow motion restored with cubitus valgus deformity while presenting loss of sensation in the UN territory and gross intrinsic muscle atrophy with claw deformity and positive Froment and Egawa signs . The Tinel sign of the UN was positive just proximal to the fracture level. Radiographic images showed 17° of cubitus valgus deviation with contralateral deviation of 3° in the humerus-elbow-wrist (HEW) angle . An electrodiagnostic study conducted five months after the injury showed non-evoked compound motor action potential of the abductor digiti minimi and sensory nerve action potential of the little finger, and denervation potentials of the flexor carpi ulnaris and the first dorsal interosseous. To treat the deformity and persistent UN palsy, half a year after the injury, her elbow was re-explored by a posterior approach. It was found that the UN was adherent to surrounding soft tissues at the level of the positive Tinel sign, without any gross nerve abnormality. Considering traction-type neuropathy, the UN was subcutaneously transposed with neurolysis . Moreover, corrective osteotomy of the distal humerus 14° was conducted using a locking plate . The elbow was placed in 90° of flexion in a long arm splint for 3 weeks. Soon after the surgery, she showed improvement of sensory disturbance and numbness. The plate was removed 10 months after the surgery . At 14-month postoperatively, she demonstrated a satisfactory symmetrical elbow appearance, with restored grip strength (right: 26 kg, left: 23 kg), key pinch (right: 5.0 kg, left, 4.5 kg), full range of elbow motion (0–150°), and 5-mm 2-point discrimination of the ulnar ring finger and little finger .