A 37-year-old woman visited our hospital complaining of weakness in both hands. Five years prior to admission, she had noticed mild weakness of insidious onset in her left hand. However, she did not undergo medical treatment or visit clinics. Weakness developed in her right hand 2 years later. The weakness in both hands progressed gradually and the severity increased. She began to experience difficulty in writing, handling chopsticks, and making a fist. The patient visited local clinics, but was not sufficiently evaluated. On admission the patient had severe weakness and muscle atrophy in both hands, without sensory change. Her past medical history and the antenatal and postnatal periods had been uneventful. She had attended school and had led an apparently normal life until she noticed neurological manifestations. Relevant diseases, a familial history of neurological disease, smoking, and alcohol were not noted. She had taken an antihypertension drug and oral thyroid hormone at a local clinic. On examination, her vitals sign were stable, with a blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg and a heart rate of 72 beats/min. A neurological examination revealed that she was alert and her orientation was intact. Cognitive impairment was not detected. There were no abnormal findings on cranial nerve examination.
Motor system examinations using the Medical Research Council (MRC) grade revealed severe motor weakness in both hands (flexor pollicis longus, MRC grades 3/5 and 2/5 on the right and left, respectively; flexor digitorum profundus and sublimis, MRC grades 3/5 and 3/5; flexor carpi ulnaris and radialis, MRC grades 3/5 and 3/5; extensor pollicis brevis and longus, MRC grades 3/5 and 2/5; extensor carpi radialis, MRC grade 3/5 and 2/5; extensor carpi ulnaris, MRC grades 3/5 and 3/5; extensor digitorum communis, MRC grades 2/5 and 2/5; abductor pollicis brevis, MRC grades 3/5 and 3/5; and abductor digiti minimi, MRC grades 2/5 and 2/5). Prominent muscle atrophy and deformities were observed distally in both hands . The motor power of both lower extremities was normal. The deep tendon reflex was decreased in the upper extremities.
The patient exhibited symmetric and intact responses to all sensory stimuli, and her cortical senses were intact. Her neck was supple, no carotid bruit was audible, and the results of a cerebellar function test were normal.
Laboratory investigations revealed a normal hemogram, serum electrolytes, and renal function. Cerebrospinal fluid findings were normal. Evaluations for vasculitis involving rheumatoid factor, anti-dsDNA antibody, lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, antithrombin III, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-SSA and SSB (Sjogren syndrome A and B) antibody, complement 3/4, anti-jo-1 antibody, cryoglobulin, immunofixation electrophoresis/protein electrophoresis, anti-GM1 antibody, and anti-GD1b antibody were within the normal range or negative, with the exception of a mildly elevated fluorescent antinuclear antibody titer (1 : 40). The results of tumor screening tests involving alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen (CA)-19-9, and CA-125 were normal. Hexosaminidases A and B, and creatine kinase were also within the normal ranges. However, a thyroid function test revealed an abnormally elevated antithyroglobulin antibody titer (794 U/mL, normal range: 0-100 U/mL) and antimicrosomal antibody (26,030 U/mL, normal range: 0-100 U/mL), but the thyroid hormone levels, including T3, free T4, and thyroid stimulating hormone, were normal.
Cervical magnetic resonance imaging revealed no prominent abnormalities except mild disc protrusion at the C5-6 and C6-7 levels. NCSs and electromyography were performed using standard techniques of percutaneous supramaximal stimulation and recordings. These examinations revealed motor neuropathies in the median motor nerve, ulnar motor nerve, and radial motor nerve, with definite motor conduction block manifesting as the compound muscle action potential amplitude being more than 50% lower for proximal than for distal stimulation across a standard peripheral nerve segment . However, the findings of sensory NCSs in the upper extremities, and motor and sensory NCSs in the lower extremities were normal. Thus, even though the patient was negative for antiganglioside antibodies, the electrophysiological study and clinical manifestations resulted in a diagnosis of MMN.
A biopsy of the patient's thyroid tissue by ultrasound-guided aspiration revealed diffuse lymphocyte infiltration, a finding that is consistent with Hashimoto's thyroiditis . She was treated with high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg/day) for 5 consecutive days and then discharged. When she visited our Outpatient Department 1 month later, the weakness and deformity in her right hand was considerably improved and the conduction block of the motor nerves were mildly improved, as evaluated by follow-up NCSs . This patient will be continuously followed up at the Outpatient Department.