A 44 year old afro-Trinidadian female presented with a two week history of abdominal distension, weight loss, decreased appetite and low grade fever. She had a normal white cell count, a haemoglobin of 9.02 g/dL and a CA125 level of 909 U/ml. Ultrasound scan showed moderate ascites with a septated cystic left adnexal mass . CT scan showed smooth peritoneal thickening . There was no lymphadenopathy or peritoneal or hepatic deposits. Chest CT showed no lung parenchyma lesions. An ascitic tap was negative for malignant cells and a mantoux test was negative. Primary ovarian malignancy was suspected and the patient was referred to the gyne-oncology clinic. One week later her symptoms improved and the CA125 level fell to 303 U/ml. Due to this unexpected result, alternate diagnoses were considered. The patient declined to have a diagnostic laparotomy at this time as her symptoms had resolved. She agreed however to be monitored in the clinic but was counselled on the need for definitive diagnosis due to the possibility of ovarian carcinoma.
A few months later she developed dyspnoea due to a large right pleural effusion. A chest tube was inserted and the pleural fluid was negative for malignant cells and acid-fast bacilli (AFB). Repeat CT showed multiple subcentimeter nodules as well as a ‘tree in bud’ appearance throughout the lung parenchyma . The ascitic volume decreased but became denser. Bowel loops appeared matted with mesenteric stranding . In view of the radiological findings tuberculosis was strongly suspected in spite of the negative skin and bacteriologic tests.
The patient then agreed to diagnostic laparotomy (laparoscopy services were not available).
At laparotomy the peritoneal cavity was difficult to enter with thick adhesions and miliary seedlings . Frozen section facilities were not available however biopsies were taken for tissue diagnosis, leaving the uterus and ovaries intact. Histology revealed caseating granulomas with epithelioid and Langhan’s type giant cells. The Ziehl–Neelsen stain for AFB was negative. PCR testing was unavailable however the patient’s symptoms resolved and the CA125 levels normalized after 2 months of antituberculosis therapy. She is to continue her treatment for a total of 6 months.