A 49-year-old female presented to the emergency department with sudden vision loss in the left eye (LE) with onset 5 h before. The patient also reported 2 episodes of sudden blurring of vision in her LE (10 and 8 days before) that lasted about 15 min and then fully recovered. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 10/10 in the right eye (RE) and 1/20 in the LE. An anterior segment examination revealed a left relative afferent pupillary defect. A left fundus examination revealed few intraretinal hemorrhages, mildly dilated and tortuous retinal veins, narrowed retinal arteries and a mildly cream-colored edematous appearance of the retinal posterior pole. The RE examination was normal. The past medical history included anxiety, venous peripheral insufficiency, 2 spontaneous abortions and 1 episode of deep venous thrombosis of the leg 12 years before. Her usual medication was zolpidem 10 mg once a day.
Fluorescein angiography (FA) of the LE showed a delay of dye emergence in retinal arteries (19 s after injection) and a prolonged arteriovenous transit time with laminar flow in the retinal veins only 55 s after the injection. Also, venous network filling was delayed and was not completed 79 s after the injection . No embolic material was seen. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed an increase in thickness and hyperreflectivity of the inner retinal layers with hyporeflectivity of the outer retinal layers . This clinical picture was consistent with the diagnosis of combined CRAO and CRVO.
Initial treatment consisted of urgent HBOT, which begun 3 h after presentation with 100% oxygen at a pressure of 2.4 ATA for 90 min and acetylsalicylic acid at 150 mg/day. Another HBOT session was done 7 h after the first session. There was marked improvement in vision after these HBOT sessions, with BCVA of 5/10.
The laboratory data only showed hyperlipidemia. An autoantibody screening was negative and inflammatory markers were normal. Echocardiography, neck vessel Doppler ultrasound and brain magnetic resonance imaging results were normal. The patient was sent to a hematology consult to complete thrombophilia screening.
The patient completed a total of 9 sessions of HBOT in 7 days (2 sessions on days 1 and 2 and then 1 daily session until stabilization of visual acuity). BCVA improved to 10/10 with significant improvement in FA .
Forty-five days later, she developed a new LE CRVO, and BCVA decreased to 5/10 . At that time, she started oral anticoagulation with acenocoumarol because an underlying hypercoagulable state was suspected. After 2 weeks, the thrombophilia screening results were available and revealed an abnormal resistance to activated protein C (1.21; normal value: >2.14), and a genetic study showed homozygosity for FVL mutation. After 2 months, BCVA decreased to <1/20 because of significant macular edema , and the patient was submitted to 3 monthly injections of 1.25 mg bevacizumab.
At present (after 10 months), the patient is in a stable condition with BCVA of 6/10; the hemorrhages were absorbed, the dilatation and tortuosity of the retinal veins had subsided , and OCT showed no macular edema . Humphrey 24-2 visual field testing showed nasal and paracentral scotoma . Oral anticoagulation will become a life-long treatment in this patient in order to prevent recurrences.