A 49-year-old gentleman came to our institute with dysphagia for the last two years. The dysphagia was gradually progressive in nature and was more for solid than liquid. There was no associated pain during deglutition. The patient had been treated by several physicians for one and a half years for the same complaint but without any relief. The patient lost 5-6kg of weight during this period. He was earlier diagnosed with cervical spondylosis and treated with a cervical collar, analgesics, and neck exercises. However, nothing could relieve his main complaint of dysphagia. When the patient arrived in our clinic, his body posture was stooping forward and he was having difficulty in straightening his torso over his pelvis .
The patient was a known hypertensive and was prescribed tablet telmisartan 40mg since 5 years. The patient was also on metformin 500 mg twice daily for type II diabetes mellitus.During a detailed clinical examination, there was no obvious pathology found in the oraphaynx and laryngopharynx. No neck nodes were clinically palpable. All other systemic examinations were not significant. All the routine blood investigations were normal. Barium swallow oesophagus was suggested and it showed a narrowing of the lumen in the hypopharynx and cervical part of the oesophagus. Ossification was seen in the anterolateral aspect of the C3-T1 vertebrae .
The rest of the oesophagus was normal. This was confirmed by computed tomography of the vertebral column showing syndesmophytes and anterior longitudinal ligament ossification at the cervico-dorsal spine. This was impinging upon the posterior pharyngeal wall and oesophagus confirming the diagnosis of Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis (DISH) .
Upper Gastro-intestinal tract endoscopy, another important investigation for dysphagia, was not performed in this case as there was no intraluminal mass lesion detected in the CT scan. There was another segment showing ossification of the lumbar spine from L1-L5 vertebrae . We advised the patient to have a surgical removal of the osteophytes; but he refused to do any sort of surgical intervention. So we advised him to avoid solid food and ingest soft semisolid food in a small bolus instead. After a 3-month of follow up, the patient wasdoing well and was satisfied with his diet therapy.