We present the case of a 65 year-old lady referred to us from a rural hospital where she was treated with thrombolytic therapy for a presumed acute anterior myocardial infarct. She had presented with central chest pain radiating down her left arm with ECG findings of 2 mm ST elevation in V2 and V3. There was no recent history of psychological stress although she had been on antidepressant drugs for two years. Four hours after thrombolysis she developed acute pulmonary oedema and a new systolic murmur. At this stage it was presumed she had acute mitral regurgitation secondary to a ruptured papillary muscle, ischaemic dysfunction or an acute ventricular septal defect.
She was transferred on heparin and glyceryl trinitrate infusion, in acute pulmonary oedema (confirmed by chest X-ray), with a systolic blood pressure of 110 mmHg, and heart rate of 130/minute. Urgent echocardiogram showed severe mitral regurgitation (see Figure ). Her mitral valve annulus was slightly widened at 3.2 cm and subvalvular structures were intact. She also had left ventricular apical ballooning (LVAB) and systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve leaflet with septal contact – left ventricular outflow tract gradient (LVOT) 60–70 mmHg (see Figures and ). Coronary angiography fourteen hours after her presentation showed no obstructive coronary lesions. Ventriculogram revealed akinesis of the anterolateral wall and apex of her left ventricle, more extensive than any single coronary territory, and grade 4/4 mitral regurgitation (see Figures and ).
She had an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) inserted and was transferred to theatre shortly thereafter. She was in cardiogenic shock, with severe MR and SAM still prominent, despite the IABP. We elected to replace her mitral valve, and at operation, the mitral valve was mildly myxomatous but there were no structural abnormalities, chordae and papillary muscles being intact. She had a mechanical mitral valve replacement (MVR) with a 29 mm St Jude valve. The anterior leaflet was excised and PTFE (gore-tex CV4) was used to reconstruct the subvalvular apparatus. The posterior leaflet was plicated to the annulus. Post-operatively there was no LV outflow obstruction and ventricular function improved to within normal limits by the 10th post-operative day. She recovered well.