A 67-year-old Caucasian woman with an unremarkable medical and breast history was referred to our breast unit with a screen-detected right breast mass. Mammography had revealed a fairly well-circumscribed 2 cm lesion located deep and in close proximity to the nipple and was graded as M3 on the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System scale. Her physical examination and ultrasound showed no abnormalities. A subsequent diagnostic biopsy revealed an infiltrating ductal carcinoma with an adenoid cystic component. The patient was treated with simple mastectomy and sentinel node biopsy. The histologic examination revealed a lesion of 1.7 cm maximum diameter with mixed infiltrating NOS ductal carcinoma and ACC characteristics. The four sentinel nodes were all free of cancer. She had a good post-operative course and remained well with no evidence of recurrence 24 months later.
The tumor was whitish tan and was ill defined in appearance and firm in consistency. No nipple or skin involvement was present. Both the nuclear grade of the lesion and the Bloom-Richardson grade were two based on the overall appearance of the tumor. The lymph nodes were negative. The tumor was staged as T1N0M0 and was estrogen receptor (ER)- and progesterone receptor (PR)-negative. The proliferative activity was low as measured by the Ki-67 labeling method (12%). Immunohistochemically, overexpression of the proto-oncogene HER2/neu was found in 15% of the carcinomatous cells. In fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, which was performed at a later stage, no protein amplification was ascertained.
Two histological patterns were blending into each other without a clear-cut boundary between them . The dominant pattern, comprising more than 70%, was an ordinary, moderately differentiated ductal carcinoma NOS. It consisted of tubule islands and cribiform structures with epithelial cells exhibiting a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, dark nuclear chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli. The mitotic index was low (< 2/10 hematopoietic tissue).
The rest of the histological pattern was limited and mainly consisted of well-defined nests and pseudo-glandular structures occasionally filled with homogeneous basophilic (periodic acid-Schiff stain-positive) material. Interestingly, the neoplasmic nests contained predominantly basaloid cells with sparse cytoplasm coexisting with epithelial cells with more abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm .