A 57-year-old Japanese woman presented with a 1.5-year history of right hip pain when she walked long distances. She had a history of bilateral developmental dysplasia of the hip and had undergone bilateral acetabular osteotomies in childhood. There was no history of trauma, anticoagulant use, or a collagen vascular disorder. She is a housewife. She has no medical history and family history.
A physical examination revealed a firm, immobile mass measuring 18 cm × 12 cm located on the right side of her ilium. An operation scar measuring 14 cm was found in the front of her hip joint. There was no redness of the skin or swelling of the inguinal lymph nodes. There were no neurological signs of motor or sensory disturbances in her limbs. She could walk with one axillary crutch on one arm and could stand on her right leg. The joint motions of her right hip joint were − 20° extension, 30° flexion, 20° abduction, and 10° adduction. There were no differences in the circumferences of her lower limbs. All laboratory data were within normal limits including coagulation studies: white blood cells (WBC) 7300/uL, hemoglobin 12.8, platelet 22.6 × 104/μL, C-reactive protein (CRP) 0.12 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 15 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 11 U/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 11 mg/dL, creatinine 0.50 mg/dL, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 27.8 seconds, and prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) 0.97 INR).
A plain radiograph revealed expanded deformity of her right ilium with marginal sclerosis and calcification inside the bone . Computed tomography demonstrated a heterogeneous mass around the ilium and an area of destroyed bone . On magnetic resonance imaging of the same sites, the lesion showed predominantly isointense or high signals on T1-weighted images, and a mixture of low and high signal intensities on T2-weighted images. There was visible heterogeneous enhancement of the mass on a T1-weighted image following the intravenous injection of gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic acid (Gd-DTPA) .
Based on these findings, our differential diagnoses were giant cell tumor of the bone, aneurysmal bone cyst, or low-grade malignant tumor such as telangiectatic osteosarcoma. Therefore, an incisional biopsy of the lesion was performed. An intraoperative examination revealed that the lesion had a thick capsule; when the capsule was incised, abundant blood was drained from inside. The intraoperative hemorrhage from the incisional biopsy was 500 ml; then, our patient needed a blood transfusion because her hemoglobin level decreased to 6.7 mg/dl from the preoperative level of 12.8 mg/dl. A histopathologic examination revealed large amounts of old clotted blood within the lesion. The capsule of the lesion was composed of dense, fibrous, connective tissue . There was no evidence of neoplasia . Therefore, CEH was suspected.
We discussed the treatment options of the current case because there was no previous example of a huge CEH of bone. Surgical treatment was not recommended due to inaccessibility based on our experience of the intraoperative massive hemorrhage at the previous biopsy. We selected non-operative management for the current case. A consecutive selective arterial embolization program was started and performed five times . In addition, our patient was submitted to an off-label treatment with denosumab, which is a monoclonal antibody and acts as an inhibitor of the RANK/RANKL pathway and diminishes bone turnover. Denosumab was administered using the regimen for giant cell tumors of bone and continued for 3 months. However, the lesion continued to slowly grow, and neuralgia of the femoral nerve occurred , so we suspected that it might be a malignant bone tumor and decided to perform surgical treatment. We expected that we would be unable to prevent and control the operative bleeding in curettage or volume reduction surgery in this case. Therefore, we performed an internal hemipelvectomy, including the capsule of the mass 2.5 years after the incisional biopsy.
At the operation, the mass was completely covered in a capsule, with no evidence of invasion of the neighboring muscle. On macroscopic examination, the lesion was encased in a thick capsule . After the lesion was excised, a hip transposition was done as a limb salvage procedure . On microscopic examination, the mass was composed of a mixture of fibrin, blood clots, and hemosiderin deposition with a fibrous layer containing degenerated muscle fibers and new capillaries. A histopathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of CEH consistent with the diagnosis indicated by the incisional biopsy.
External fixation of her pelvis and her right femur was applied for 6 weeks postoperatively. After removing the external fixation, partial weight-bearing was permitted for 4 weeks, and full weight-bearing with one crutch was allowed 14 weeks postoperatively.
There was no recurrence of CEH at the most recent follow-up of 1 year and 8 months postoperatively. She can ambulate with the assistance of one crutch and a heel lift of 5 cm .