A 7-month-old Chinese boy was referred to the pediatric nephrology and immunology department of our hospital with eyelid edema for more than 2 months and limb swelling for 1 week. In the medical history, there had been recurrent cough that continued for some days. He had a pale complexion, with periorbital and bilateral pitting pedal edema on clinical examination, but no jaundice, petechiae, purpura, or lymphadenopathy. There was no history of tachycardia or tachypnea. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. His blood pressure (81/62 mmHg) was in the normal range at admission. The child had a history of amniotic fluid contamination at birth and no history of asphyxia. Neither the boy nor his family had a significant history of conditions such as kidney-related diseases or autoimmune diseases. However, the grandmother died of hematological disease.
Investigations 3 days prior at clinics of another hospital showed a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 62 g/L without thrombocytopenia (platelet count 396 × 109/L). Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was elevated (579 U/L) (normal <382 U/L). An elevated serum cholesterol of 5.38 mmol/L was noted at that time, along with range proteinuria (1+) and hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin 28.8 g/L). There was no gross or microscopic hematuria. The serum C3 and C4 levels were normal. The laboratory values with reference values are shown in the . The boy was immediately referred to our hospital with a referral diagnosis of “nephrotic syndrome (NS)”.
The patient presented with likely NS with anemia for five days after admission but no proteinuria or hypoalbuminemia. The direct Coombs test was negative. On hospital day 6, the patient presented with “hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)” following episodes of vomiting and diarrhea with fever. There were systemic pitting pedal edema, oliguria, petechiae, and soy sauce-colored urine at that time, along with hypertension (129/89 mmHg). Laboratory workup revealed normocytic hemolytic anemia with an Hb level of 62 g/L, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 86 fL, elevated reticulocyte count of 9.3%, schistocytes count of 3% on the peripheral smear, thrombocytopenia (platelet count 23 × 109/L), a serum creatinine (SCr) level of 0.62 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level of 5.66 mmol/L, cystine (C) level of 1.57 mg/L, C3 level of 0.89 g/L, C4 level of 0.21 g/L, a markedly increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level of 585.1 U/L, hematuria (red blood cells 4,627.9/µl), and proteinuria (3+). Coagulation function, including prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and fibrinogen, was elevated (36.2 s, 58.6 s and 4.26 g/L, respectively). The serum bilirubin, AST, ALT, and serum electrolyte levels were within normal limits. The activity of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13 (ADAMTS13), was normal. The stool rotavirus test was positive. Stool culture grew Streptococcus and Escherichia coli (E. coli), and stool multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) showed that Shigella, Salmonella, E. coli O157, and pathogenic Vibrio were not detected. The infectious workup was notable for a negative respiratory viral panel, negative special viral panel (human parvovirus B19, EB virus, cytomegalovirus, rubella virus, herpes simplex virus, hepatitis virus), negative Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and negative blood culture. Antinuclear antibodies were negative. The chest x-ray was negative. B-ultrasound showed a small amount of abdominal effusion . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed that the kidney, liver and spleen increased in volume with a low-density image . The echocardiogram showed a central atrial septal defect (2.3 mm) with a normal ejection fraction (EF 66%). The 24 h urine protein quantification was not performed due to the difficulty in collecting 24 h urine. Moreover, due to his uncontrolled hypertension and thrombocytopenia, the patient could not undergo a kidney biopsy.
Given the concern for HUS, broad-spectrum antibiotics and fresh frozen plasma infusions were given to treat his gastrointestinal infection and TMA. The following other treatments were employed: intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) infusions, human prothrombin complex infusions, albumin infusions (due to a decreased level of albumin), red blood cell infusions, platelet infusions, intramuscular injection of vitamin K1, low-dose methylprednisolone for anti-inflammatory treatment, antihypertensive treatment (nifedipine and metoprolol), and symptomatic treatment.
The patient was diagnosed further with aHUS, had been administered plasma infusions (PIs) discontinuously and had required plasma exchange (PE) 2 times during the PICU hospital stay. Given the trend of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) with worsening pneumonedema and pneumorrhagia, mechanical ventilation (MV) was given for 7 days. There was a transient remission of respiratory symptoms. However, given the trend of worsening renal function [elevated levels of blood urea nitrogen (BUN)], progressing edema, and worsening hypertension, continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) and hemodialysis (HD) on alternating days were given to treat his acute kidney injury (AKI) for 13 days and 15 days, respectively. The patient's renal function and hematologic parameters (stage 3 AKI with gross hematuria) worsened during the 6th–7th week of the hospital stay while HD and PI therapy was continued, as depicted in . Subsequently, the patient developed a hypertensive emergency with features of intracranial hypertension leading to right temporoparietal hematoma and subarachnoid hemorrhage, as depicted in . He required multiple drugs (furosemide, nitrate, glycerin fructose) for the control of hypertension and intracranial hypertension. Ultimately, he still had a recurrence of ARDS and deteriorated to a stage of involuntary respiration requiring high ventilatory settings with pulmonary hemorrhage, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, and multiorgan dysfunction. Chest CT displayed both lung pneumonia and partial atelectasis of the upper lobe of the right lung . Head CT showed that the subarachnoid hemorrhage was more extensive than before . The patient's parents decided to withdraw the patient from further management. The patient died during the 8th week of his hospital stay.
We obtained 2 ml of peripheral blood from the patient, his parents and older brother respectively. Whole exome sequencing was performed on the patient, his parents and brother. Sanger sequencing was used to verify the mutation site. CNVnator software was used for CNV analysis, and QPCR was used for family analysis. Two heterozygous variations in the DGKE exon region: NM_003647.2, c.610dup, p.Thr204Asnfs*4 and deletion of exons 4–6 were identified. The first variant was classified as de novo compared with the results obtained in the conventional in the Sanger sequencing of the parents and the older brother . The second variant was a deletion of DGKE exons 4–6, which was also detected in the asymptomatic father, but absent in both the mother and the older brother . The patient in this case had aHUS, consistent with recessive transmission with the 100% penetrance.