A 67-year-old Caucasian man presented to the emergency room because of a 4 days’ history of abdominal pain, with one episode of vomiting.
The patient’s past medical history was significant for colonic diverticulosis and an episode of gastrointestinal bleeding one year before. The event had been investigated by two different gastroscopies, a colonoscopy and a MDCT, which produced inconclusive results. Ten months later he was newly admitted because of abdominal pain and fever at 38.0 C°, with valid urination and defecation. A CT of the abdomen was performed, which confirmed the colonic diverticulosis and revealed the presence of multiple diverticula of the small intestine, fat stranding, signs of inflammation as well as a small amount of free liquid in the abdomen. The patient was hence diagnosed with jejunal diverticulitis and managed conservatively with intra-venous antibiotics, with an apparent complete recovery.
He re-presented to the emergency department two months later with acute abdominal pain. The pain was described as severe and constant, localized mainly in the lower abdomen with clinical signs of peritonitis. No change in bowel habits nor urinary symptoms were complained. His vital signs were stable, with a temperature of 37.2 C°; he appeared fully oriented and not in any acute distress. Laboratory examination reported a hemoglobin of 121 g/dL, a WBC count of 12.2 × 10E9/L and a CRP of 249 mg/L. Other laboratory data were within normal limit. An abdominal and pelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography, with administration of oral contrast, was performed. Jejunum and ileum showed several diverticula as well as an inflammatory thick-walled mass involving different loops of the intestine. In addition, free fluid in the abdomen and a small amount of subdiaphragmatic air were reported (, ). On the basis of these findings, the diagnosis of perforated diverticulitis was hereby proposed.
The patient underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy which revealed plenty of purulent yellowish liquid collected in the right abdomen and a conglomerate of intestinal inflamed loops. We hence decided to convert immediately the procedure to laparotomy. Large multiple diverticula were found covering a section of small intestine approximately 2.5 m long, without signs of obvious macro perforation. Among the middle distal tract of the jejunum and the middle distal tract of ileum, strong adhesions were identified . The involved segments of jejunum and ileum were connected by an intestinal loop free of signs of diverticulosis . There were no signs of bowel ischemia. Adhesiolisis was partially carried out, however, because of difficulties associated with the procedure, we opt to perform a double enterectomy, removing only those segments involved in the intestinal conglomerate and deeply affected by the pathology. Roughly 25 cm of ileum and 80 cm of jejunum were resected. Bowel continuity was restored with an ileo-ileal and a jejuno-jejunal anastomosis. Almost 700 cl of pus were drained and the peritoneal cavity was washed with 10 L of saline solution. The postoperative recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged 8 days later. There were no signs of malignancy in the resected intestine.