A 2-year-6-month-old girl was referred to our hospital due to complaints of fever, cough, and tachypnea 10 days prior to her presentation. Upon admission, physical examinations revealed a body temperature of 38.5 °C, and percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 67% in room air. Chest auscultation revealed fine crackles in the posterior lung fields. Clubbing fingers, pigeon breast deformity, and chilblain-like rash on her face were observed . Her anterior fontanelle was not closed (0.3 cm×0.3 cm). Other cutaneous manifestations were not observed. The patient displayed a height of 87 cm (-1.08 SD) and a weight of 11.5 kg (-0.82 SD). The patient experienced recurrent respiratory tract infections since the age of 6 months (once a month), and fatigue after activities was noticed beginning at 2 years of age. Family history found that her 27-year-old father had chest tightness and shortness of breath after activity beginning at 22 years of age. The clubbed fingers presented in all limbs, and mild tissue loss showed up on his face . Chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed interstitial pneumonia with pulmonary cyst , and pulmonary function tests indicated mixed ventilation dysfunction. Combined with positive levels of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and signal recognition particles (SRP) autoantibody, he was initially diagnosed with connective tissue disease (CTD) associated with ILD. After receiving combined therapy with cyclophosphamide and hydroxychloroquine for half a year, the symptoms have been improved while continuing to take hydroxychloroquine. However, about three years ago, the drug was stopped for unknown reasons, and the symptoms of dyspnea reappeared and slowly progressed.
Laboratory examinations of the female patient found an elevation in the levels of C-reactive protein (CRP, 54.19 mg/L, reference range: <8 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 89 mm/H, reference range: <20 mm/H), and white blood cell count (WBC, 16.3 × 103/mm3, reference range: 4 to 10 × 103/mm3). There was no elevation of hepatobiliary enzymes, and her renal and thyroid functions were normal. The autoimmune workup revealed elevated levels of IgG (25.3 g/L), IgA (3.26 g/L), and IgM (1.69 g/L) despite normal levels of C3 and C4 complement. Decreased CD4 + T lymphocyte counts and normal CD8 + T lymphocyte counts were identified. This patient was positive for auto-antibodies, including high-titer ANA (1:1000), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), rheumatoid factor (RF), and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibodies. Cytokine testing showed an elevated interleukin (IL)-6 level (62.4 pg/ml, reference range: 1.7 to 16.6 pg/ml). Pathology tests were negative, and malignancy was ruled out. HRCT scanning of the chest exhibited diffuse ground-glass opacities . Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed widened cerebral sulci and enlarged extra-axial spaces. No abnormalities were found in the electrocardiogram or the echocardiogram. The results of abdominal ultrasound and vascular ultrasonography were normal.
The female (child) patient was initially diagnosed with ILD accompanied by severe pneumonia and received anti-infection treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (2 g/kg). However, the patient’s symptoms did not respond to the treatment , and she experienced hypoxic respiratory failure on Day 12, which required endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. Therapies with methylprednisolone (MP) pulse (30 mg/kg/d×5d) were started on Day 13 followed by intravenous MP in 4 mg/kg daily dosage combined with a second course of IVIG (1 g/kg/d×3d). After the treatment, symptoms of dyspnea improved, and the ventilator was withdrawn on Day 22. At the same time, whole-exome sequencing was also performed, and genetic analysis by Sanger sequencing confirmed a heterozygous mutation (c.463G > A p.V155M) in Exon 5 of STING1 (NM_198282), which had been described to cause SAVI. The mutation was inherited from her father . RNA sequencing on the proband and her father was conducted, which found that the expression of genes related to the interferon pathway was significantly upregulated compared to that of healthy controls . After the diagnosis of SAVI, baricitinib (2.5 mg/day gradually increased to 3 times a day within 2 weeks) was added with prophylactic trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole, and the dose of MP was reduced to 2 mg/kg/d on Day 32. Under appropriate treatment, the patient’s symptoms of fever, tachypnea, breathlessness, and cyanosis improved, while the repeated chest HRCT showed a better result . Low-flow oxygen support (SpO2 at 94–95% in room air) was required, and the patient was discharged on Day 48, following the treatment of MP (1 mg/kg/d) and baricitinib (reduced to 2 mg three times a day). The female (child) patient was followed for 14 months after discharge. She was infected with severe pneumonia in the fourth month. Although the respiratory symptoms improved after antibiotic therapy, combined treatment with pirfenidone (2.5 mg twice-daily dosage) was administered due to the progressed interstitial pneumonia observed in HRCT . In the sixth month, we reduced the MP dose to 2 mg/d (0.13 mg/kg/d), which has been maintained until now. During the follow-up, the lung HRCT scan was stable after treatment ; however, there was no obvious improvement. Laboratory indicators are still positive for ANA (1:1000), p-ANCA, RF, and CCP, while high IgG, IgA, and IgM immunoglobulin counts and low CD4 + T lymphocyte counts remain. Levels of inflammatory markers like CRP and IL-6 were normal, while levels of ESR (29 mm/H) and IFN-γ (20.1 pg/ml) were slightly elevated. Nevertheless, the evaluation of clinical features showed that the respiratory signs and symptoms have almost disappeared, except for slight dyspnea after strenuous exercise. The patient’s height increased from 87 cm (-1.08 SD) to 100 cm (-0.66 SD), weight increased from 11.5 kg (-0.82 SD) to 15.5 kg (-0.28 SD), and the fontanel closed. The little girl now lives a normal life.
After diagnosis, the male (father) patient received oral steroids and tofacitinib combination therapy for over a year, but there was no significant improvement in pulmonary symptoms. Six months ago, tofacitinib was changed to baricitinib combined with oral steroids, and the patient felt an improvement in breathing difficulties. However, similarly, there was no improvement in pulmonary imaging findings.