A 3-year-old boy was referred to our hospital with cough, edema, tachypnea, and tachycardia.
One week before admission, the patient began to exhibit a paroxysm of coughing with phlegm, accompanied with fatigue and plummeting level of physical activity. Soon afterwards, he exhibited edema all over the body, particularly on the face and both lower limbs. Half a day before admission, the patient developed tachypnea and tachycardia.
It is worth noting that the patient had a history of delayed physical growth development. He only learned to sit when he was 10 mo old, and he still could not crawl or stand at 1 year of age. He was sent to a hospital and diagnosed with growth retardation. Doctors guided the boy in a rehabilitation training program for 1 year, after which he appeared to walk and run with no significant difference compared with his peers. However, the parents found that his muscle tension was low, and that he fell over easily. In addition, the patient had strephenopodia after birth, which improved after the use of orthotics.
The family history was unremarkable.
When the patient was admitted to our hospital, he had symmetrical edema in the face and lower extremities. The pulmonary respiratory sounds were rough with a few coarse rales. There was no protuberance in the precordial region. The apical impulse of the heart was diffused. Heart amplification was identified, and the apical beat was at the sixth intercostal space, 4.5 cm outside the middle line of the left clavicle. Neither thrill nor pericardium friction was found. The heart rhythm was regular with a gallop rhythm and low cardiac sound. The abdomen was supple with the liver 4 cm below the costal margin and 6 cm below the xiphoid, with the spleen impalpable. Moreover, the boy had an elongated face, inhibited facial expressions, a high palate arch , clawfoot, normal muscular strength, decreased muscular tone, and decreased bilateral knee reflexes. The Gower’s sign was positive, and the meningeal irritation sign was negative.
The serum cardiac troponin I level was 0.211 µg/L (normal < 0.034 µg/L). The level of brain natriuretic peptide reached up to 27500 pg/mL (normal < 215 pg/mL). The alanine aminotransferase level was 458 U/L (normal < 72 U/L), and aspartate aminotransferase level was 671 U/L (normal < 59 U/L). However, there was no significant increase in creatine kinase (99 U/L; normal < 170 U/L), creatine kinase myocardial band (2.29 μg/L; normal < 3.38 μg/L), and myoglobin (133.1 μg/L; normal < 121 μg/L).
After one week in the hospital, Holter showed about 16.6% of ventricular premature beats (VPBs) of the total number of beats . Echocardiogram showed that the patient had enlarged, weakened left and right ventricles with decreased systolic function. The heart chamber sizes were as follows: Left atrium, 27 mm (normal < 18 mm); left ventricle, 58 mm (normal < 31 mm); right atrium, 40 mm (normal < 32 mm); right ventricle, 22 mm (normal < 11 mm). The ejection fraction was 18%, and the fraction of shortening was 8%. The systolic excursion of the tricuspid annular plane was 13 mm . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed enlarged ventricles, reduced systolic function, and focal delayed enhancement .