A 51-year-old white female who was referred from our outpatient pulmonary clinic to the ED (emergency department) for worsening respiratory distress and six weeks history of persistent dry cough. Prior to this admission, the patient was seen at an urgent care and was prescribed a 10 days course of oral antibiotic empirically without significant improvement. Subsequently, the patient was seen in our outpatient pulmonary clinic for a working diagnosis of pneumonia and a previous chest x-ray depicting bibasilar opacities. In the office, the patient complained of dyspnea with ambulation. She was tested negative for COVID-19. Therefore, patient was prescribed oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily empirically for 14 days and 40 mg of oral prednisone for 5 days. The patient was advised to communicate her progress with the treating physician, so her treatment protocol can be adjusted if needed. However, attempts to wean her prednisone made her dyspnea worse with pulse oximetry reportedly in high 80 s% on ambulation. PFTs (pulmonary function tests) outpatient showed restrictive lung pattern with reduced FEV-1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 s) at 52%, and reduced FVC (Forced vital capacity) at 47%.
Patient reported having associated generalized fatigue, but no weight loss. She denied any hemoptysis, chest pain, fever, chills, night sweats, epistaxis, dry eyes, dry mouth, vision changes, photosensitivity, oral ulcer, dysphagia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, or diarrhea. She denied any urinary disturbances, myalgia, joint pain or swelling, blood in urine or stool, or any Raynaud's type symptoms. Patient reported a recent travel history to Florida, but no history of sick contacts. She endorsed a family history only significant for Crohn's disease in father and daughter. She reported no alcohol use and no smoking history. The patient did not have any occupational or pet exposure.
In the ED, the patients' vital signs were a temperature of 97.6 F, respiratory rate of 26 per minute, oxygen saturation of 88–90% on room air which improved to 94% with 3 L of oxygen on nasal cannula, and blood pressure of 102/53 mmHg. Patient’s body weight was 75.3 kg and her height was 157 cm. On physical exam, patient noticed to be dyspneic and tachypneic. She was alert and oriented to time, place and person. Head and neck examinations were unremarkable for lymphadenopathy, jugular venous distention (JVD), nasal/oral ulcerations, or any other lesions. On chest auscultation, reduced breath sounds were evident at the lower lung fields. Cardiology, gastrointestinal, and neurological examinations were unremarkable. No joint tenderness/swelling or muscle tenderness/weakness appreciated at the musculoskeletal examination. Skin examination revealed no rash or other lesions. The patient was admitted for further evaluation, beginning with retesting for COVID-19 and additional workup.
Initial complete blood count, renal, and liver panel were all within normal limits except for normocytic anemia . Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 49 mm/h (0–15 mm/h), C-reactive protein (CRP) was 3.24 mg/dL (0.00–0.74 mg/dL), and anti-nuclear antibodies 2.09 (0.0–0.90). Urinalysis and complement levels were unremarkable. Creatine kinase (CK) and aldolase were 326 iu/L (22–232 iu/L), 39.5 u/L (1.5–8.1 u/L) respectively. The COVID-19 RT-PCR (Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction) testing was negative twice as an inpatient.
A chest x-ray showed persistent bibasilar infiltrates, finding similar to previous imaging. A Computed tomography angiography of the chest showed bilateral ground glass opacities, with shotty mediastinal lymph nodes, and no filling defects to suggest a pulmonary embolism. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular (LV) function, right ventricular function, and pulmonary pressures.
The patient underwent bronchoscopy with right lower lobe transbronchial biopsies which showed mild lung parenchymal inflammation, fibrosis, and reactive epithelial changes without any sign of malignancy. Gomori methenamine-silver (GMS) nitrate stain and acid-fast stains (also known as the Ziehl–Neelsen stain) were negative for Pneumocystis jiroveci and Mycobacterium species, respectively. Bacterial and fungal cultures from right lower lobe bronchoalveolar lavage remained negative.
Subsequent autoimmune screening returned strongly positive for anti‑Jo‑1 antibody 191 au/mL (reference range 0–40). Other markers, including rheumatoid factor, anti‑cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, anti‑Ro/SSA, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative.
Therefore, ASS-associated ILD was considered in the setting of clinical and radiographic findings of nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) associated with positive anti-Jo-1 antibody.
Patient was started on intravenous methylprednisolone 40 mg every 12 h which failed to improve patient’s symptoms; therefore, she was given intravenous pulse methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily for 3 days. Patient reported some improvement of her symptoms after pulse steroids. She was discharged with 2 L home oxygen as needed and on high dose oral corticosteroids, prednisone 60 mg oral daily. She followed up with rheumatology outpatient two weeks after discharge and was started on oral mycophenolate 500 mg twice daily. However, tapering steroids was difficult and mycophenolate was titrated up to 1500 mg twice daily.
At her 3 months follow-up, the patient continued to have a gradual improvement of her symptoms and she was weaned off oxygen. Chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) at that time showed 20% interval improvement particularly in the lower lobes with improvement of her laboratory markers such as ESR, CRP, CK, and aldolase demonstrated in . Favorably, her prednisone was tapered over six months to 10 mg daily while being on the same dose of mycophenolate.