A 14-year-10-month-old Han Taiwanese boy was presented to the pediatric out-patient clinic with a 3-month history of swelling of the left clavicle. His family history included his father’s ankylosing spondylitis and his mother’s uveitis. Physical examination revealed mild tenderness. An erythematous immobile firm mass measuring approximately 2 × 2.5 cm was found overlying the left proximal clavicle, immediately lateral to the SCJ. Furthermore, he expressed pain when the clinician pressed down on his right hip and bilateral ankles. We did not perform modified Schober test in our patient because LBP was not obvious and he was a suspicious case of JIA.
The patient had right hip arthritis and bilateral Achilles enthesitis. White blood cells count was 7.8 × 103 /μl, with 57% neutrophils and 32% lymphocytes (normal 3.9–10.6 × 103 /μl; neutrophils 42–74%; lymphocytes 20–56%). Biological inflammatory syndrome was observed with elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (33 mm/hr.; normal < 17 mm/hr) and C-reactive protein (22.6 mg/l; normal < 5 mg/L). Human leucocyte antigen (HLA) typing was positive for B27. Meanwhile, uric acid, rheumatoid factor, complements C3 and C4, anti-nuclear antibody, and anti-double-strand DNA were all normal. Furthermore, his renal and liver function, urine analysis, and muscle enzyme tests results were all normal.
The patient was initially treated empirically with oral augmentin (amoxicillin trihydrate + clavulanate potassium) and cefixime for 1 week, but did not respond favorably to the antibacterial treatment. We then treated the patient with naproxen (500 mg/day), a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent, and followed up. He claimed to have no history of trauma, fever, weight loss, loss of appetite, or intravenous drug abuse. We observed no skin lesions, such as acne or pustulosis palmaris et plantaris. Ultrasonography examination revealed a heterogeneous hypoechoic mass in the left SCJ (2 × 2.5 cm; Fig. ), and he was hospitalized to our pediatric ward. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest further indicated a turbid collection at the left SCJ . Bone window testing demonstrated irregular bone surfaces on the SCJ due to erosion, thus suggesting arthritis. Bone scintigraphy (MDP Tc-99 m) showed a focal area of increased uptake in the trochanteric region of the right proximal femur .
We performed a left SCJ arthrotomy on the patient, in which the clavicular head was excised and the left SCJ was debrided. Due to suspicion of malignant infiltration, we performed a histopathological examination, but no malignant cells were observed. A histologic examination of the tissue exposed acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration. Aspirated joint fluid cultures were negative; therefore, diagnosis of infection could be excluded.
In view of the historical facts and clinico-radiological correlation, including CT findings, we made a working diagnosis of JIA of the medial end of the left clavicle and initiated JIA therapy. The onset of arthritis and enthesitis after 6 years of age in a boy with HLA-B27 and a family history allowed him to meet the strict diagnostic criteria of the JIA subtype enthesitis-related arthritis. Given that SCJ disorders are rare, there is a probability that many clinicians do not have substantial training or experience injecting the SCJ with corticosteroids . This lack of experience, combined with a complex and frequently distorted SCJ anatomy, may result in poor injection accuracy. After surgical debridement, we prescribed a naproxen, sulfasalazine 1000 mg/day (4 months before prednisolone), and prednisolone 0.6 mg/kg/day combination for 4 weeks, followed by naproxen + oral methotrexate (MTX) 10 mg/m2/week + prednisolone for the next 3.5 months. Due to persistent high disease activity under salfasalazine, an alternate immunomodulator therapy MTX was selected. Etanercept has been indicated in the treatment of refractory JIA . He achieved full remission from the JIA with etanercept 25 mg twice a week within 4 weeks , and tolerated etanercept with good adherence. The patient reported complete cessation of pain and no longer needed analgesics, MTX, or prednisolone after 3 months. The aim of our treatment was to achieve maximum effectiveness and reduce the dosage of concomitant therapy because concomitant therapy substantially elevates the risk of side effects. A prospective study also revealed the effectiveness of etanercept therapy . Furthermore, 38.3% of patients with JIA treated with etanercept in combination with any medication could completely discontinue these concomitant drugs. Our patient continued the etanercept treatment 25 mg twice a week for at least 2 years to maintain a stable condition without any relapse during the outpatient follow-up. We repeated the ultrasound of the left clavicle, which revealed complete healing of the initial findings after 13 months of etanercept treatment.