A 12-year-old Amara male patient presented to University of Gondar comprehensive specialized hospital, Northwestern Ethiopia, with a complaint of right lateral neck swelling of 6 months duration. The swellings were painless and reported to have increased in size. He had visited a nearby health center on multiple occasions for this complaint and took unspecified antibiotics, but no improvement. There was no history of fever, cough, weight loss, night sweating, loss of appetite, pressure effects, or bowel, bladder, joints or nervous system involvement. He had no family history (first-degree relatives) of diabetes, hypertension, or any other remarkable noncommunicable disease, including cancer. His past medical history is not significant. He had no history of admission to hospital. He had no history of any form of surgical procedures. He was a grade four student in a public school at the time of presentation. On physical examination, there were six discrete firm, nontender, freely mobile right lateral cervical lymphadenopathies, the largest measuring 3 × 2 cm2 . On the basis of the above findings, a provisional clinical impression of lateral cervical lymphadenopathy, due to either lymphoma or tuberculosis, was entertained.
Liver was not palpable below costal margin. There was no splenomegaly. Other clinical findings were within normal limits. Laboratory investigations done on the same day of his presentation, including complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and chest X-ray, were noncontributory. On CBC, total white blood cell (WBC) count was 5800 µL with 50% granulocytes, 45% lymphocytes, 1% eosinophils, and 4% monocytes. Platelet count was 300,000 µL. Hemoglobin was 14.5 g/dL with mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 88 fL. ESR was 14 mm/hour. Renal function test revealed blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 12 mg/dL, and serum creatinine level was 0.68 mg/dL. On liver function test, total bilirubin was 0.6 mg/dL, serum albumin was 4.2 g/dL, and serum aspartate transaminase (AST/SGOT) and serum alanine transaminase (ALT/SGPT) were 30 and 32 IU/L, respectively. Urinalysis was also done and it was normal. Sputum was negative for acid-fast bacilli. Serum was negative for HIV antibody. Chest X-ray and ultrasound of abdomen did not reveal any abnormality.
Due to limited number of pathologists and long waiting list of patients, he underwent fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC). After 2 weeks of his initial presentation, FNAC from cervical lymph node was done and smears were stained with Wright’s stain following the standard procedures. Microscopic examination showed intracellular and extracellular Leishmania donovani (LD) bodies on polymorphous background . Serum tested for anti-rK39 antibodies was strongly positive. Bone marrow aspirations done on two occasions were negative for LD bodies. On the basis of above findings, the case was diagnosed as lymphatic leishmaniasis and the patient was put on sodium stibogluconate (20 mg/kg body weight/day), and paromomycin (15 mg/kg body weight/day) injections, which were given intramuscularly for 17 days and defined as the preferred first-line regimens for primary VL in Ethiopia.
Having completed his medication at the University of Gondar comprehensive specialized hospital, he had a smooth course and was discharged with an appointment scheduled for follow-up after 3 months. When he came for the follow-up after 3 months, he had right lateral neck small mobile lymph nodes and was discharged with advice to return to the University of Gondar comprehensive specialized hospital if there was any new-onset increment of his right lateral neck small mobile lymph nodes.