A sixteen-year-old female patient presented with a complaint of intermittent upper and central abdominal cramps associated with abdominal distension of 12-hour duration. She later developed vomiting of ingested matter and obstipation. The abdominal pain worsened later and became persistent and agonizing in type. She has no fever, chills, or rigor. She also had no vaginal discharge or bleeding; her last normal menstrual period was a week back from her presentation. Her past medical and surgical history was absent for previous abdominal surgery. She was neither an alcoholic nor a smoker.

Physical examination revealed an acutely sick-looking patient in pain. Her vital signs were a pulse rate of 110 beats per minute, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, and temperature of 37.1°C. The pertinent physical findings were on abdominal examination, where a grossly distended central abdomen with hyperactive bowel sounds and mild upper abdominal tenderness were identified. A digital rectal examination revealed an empty rectum. As a result, possible differential diagnoses of intestinal obstruction, primary peritonitis, dyspepsia, cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, and other gynecologic conditions were considered.

Baseline laboratory examinations showed a white cell count of 11.9*103/µL, hemoglobin of 12.2 g/dl, and platelet count of 248k. Urine B-HCG was negative and other blood chemistry results were unremarkable.

Imaging study with abdominal computed tomography (CT) was requested since the presentation was not typical and with myriads of differential diagnoses. Cross-sectional image indicates a significantly dilated sigmoid colon measuring 8.9 cm with air fluid levels seen in the sigmoid colon. It also depicts twisting and wrapping of the ileum along the base of the sigmoid colon and a characteristic whirlpool sign of mesenteric vessels. The diagnosis of intestinal obstruction secondary to ileosigmoid knotting was entertained, and the decision to emergency surgical exploration was made.

The patient was then kept nil by mouth and resuscitated with intravenous crystalloids; an NG tube was inserted; an indwelling Foley catheter was inserted; and the patient was prepared for surgical exploration after informed written consent was obtained.

We took the patient to the operating room, placing her in the supine position on the operating table General anesthesia was given and the airway secured with an endotracheal tube. The surgical site was prepared and draped in a sterile manner. The abdomen was entered through a vertical midline abdominal incision, and the intraoperative findings were around 100 mL of serosanguinous reactive fluid, a significantly distended, elongated, and redundant sigmoid colon that has twisted 360° CCW (counter clockwise) along its mesentery and is wrapped by a loop of terminal ileum and cecum. Both the ileocecum and the sigmoid colon appear normal. The knot was untied, the rotated sigmoid colon was derotated CW (clockwise), and the distension was decompressed with rectal tube.

The patient had an uneventful postoperative course, and oral feeding was resumed on the second postoperative day and discharged home on the fourth postoperative day. Subsequently, resection of the redundant sigmoid colon was performed as an elective procedure after adequate bowel preparation after two months of the initial emergency exploration. Currently, she is being followed in our outpatient department.