A 47-year-old man, with a history of appendicectomy as a child and a severe trauma of the left hemithorax, left hypochondrium and left flank three years from the current presentation was admitted in the Department of Gastroenterology for nausea, repeated vomiting, epigastric pain, and intermittent constipation for over a month. He also had acid regurgitation and pyrosis, as well as loss of appetite and a significant weight loss in the past six months. Physical examination revealed a firm, palpable abdominal mass in the left hypochondrium and left flank.
Laboratory tests showed low iron serum level (46 μg/dL) and leukocytosis. Upper endoscopy described a deformed stomach with an extrinsic compression especially on the antrum, which made difficult the passage through the pylorus. There was no significant distention of the gastric body on insufflation and no mucosal abnormality.
We performed an abdominal ultrasound (US) and highlighted a heterogeneous mass with tissular and cystic components, extended from left hepatic lobe (LHL) to the spleen’s hilum. Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS) pointed out that the tissular component of the tumor was enhanced in arterial phase and presented a wash-out phenomenon in the late phase. The cystic and necrotic components were unenhanced .
Since we could not define the point of origin, we scheduled a contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT). The CT scan described a heterogeneous tumor of 17×15×14 cm containing numerous necrosis and cystic areas with origin in the fundus and greater curvature of the stomach, with extraluminal development . The tumor was causing a mass effect on the stomach, spleen, splenic vein, and enveloping the body and pancreatic tail. Thus, we suspected it was a GIST with necrotic areas.
Due to tumor size and gastric outlet obstruction symptoms, we proposed the patient for surgery. A xypho-umbilical approach was chosen, and the peritoneal cavity was opened. The giant tumor occupied most of the upper abdominal cavity with adherence to the gastric wall. After the gastro-colic ligament was sectioned, tumor appurtenance of the great gastric wall, and infiltration of the tail of the pancreas and splenic pedicle were confirmed. No hepatic or peritoneal metastases were found, and the rest of the abdominal organs seemed macroscopically normal. En bloc surgical removal of the tumor was decided including with adjacent lymph nodes, spleen, and pancreas tail. The pancreas tail was sectioned 5 cm proximal from the splenic pedicle. The tumor block included the greater curvature of the stomach, which was consecutively sealed with a linear stapler.
Macroscopically, the resected piece measured 23×17×10 cm, while the tumor had 22×10 cm with many cystic and necrotic areas. For HP examination, tumor fragments were embedded in 10% formalin for 24 hours and included in paraffin according to current protocols. Classical staining with Hematoxylin–Eosin (HE) described similar characteristics of a mesenchymal tumor, with spindle-shaped cells with high mitotic rate [over 5 mitoses/50 high-power fields (HPFs)], with an 86% risk of progression (PT4Nx).
In the thickness of the muscular tunic of the gastric wall, a partially encapsulated tumor proliferation was noted, with a pseudonodular appearance, composed of fusiform cells, with hypertrophic nuclei, with unevenly arranged chromatin with karyorrhexes and mitoses. The cells were arranged in a fasciculate pattern, with myxoid, hemorrhage, and necrosis areas . Neoplastic proliferation invaded only the submucosa, did not affect the gastric mucosa, and did not invade adjacent splenic or pancreatic parenchyma. The mitotic rate was high, >5 mitoses/50 HPFs. Free margins (R0), no evidence of perineural invasion, lymph node, or peritoneal metastasis was noted.
For IHC, we used an antibody algorithm by the labeled Streptavidin–Biotin and horseradish peroxidase (HRP) methods . IHC staining revealed that tumor cells were strongly diffuse positive for CD117/c-kit , CD34 , and DOG1 . SMA and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) were variable focal positives in tumor proliferation . The Ki67 proliferation rate was positive in more than 5% of the tumor cells in 50 HPFs and the S100 protein was negative.
The patient was successfully discharged and underwent oncology follow-up with Imatinib, with no relapse a year after surgical resection.