On 6 May 2020, a 65-year-old male was admitted due to a 20 day history of weakness and numbness of the right upper extremity. This extremity weakness worsened in the last 4 days. He has a past medical history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and Adult Still’s Disease. His Still’s Disease is currently being managed with methylprednisolone.
On physical examination, his blood pressure was 129/77 mmHg, pulse rate was 88 min−1, and body temperature was 36.7°C. An increase in muscle tone was observed in both upper extremities. His muscle strength was 5/5 in the left upper extremity, and 4/5 in the right upper extremity. Additionally, his biceps tendon reflex, triceps tendon reflex, radial membrane reflex (+++), knee tendon reflex (++++), and Achilles tendon reflex (++) were heightened.
On hospital day 1, he developed a fever (38.7°C), prompting a blood examination. On hospital day 2, repeat blood cultures were collected. The first set of blood cultures tested positive after 2 days. However, subsequent blood culture tests conducted 1 week later returned negative. Cranial computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple abscesses in the right frontal and occipital lobes, and both parietal lobes. On auscultation, he had coarse and minimal breath sounds. Moreover, chest CT revealed necrosis and abscesses in the lower lobes of the left lung. Tenderness in the right subabdominal McCormack point was also observed. An abdominal CT revealed an abscess in the left kidney. Laboratory examination revealed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (12300 /µl), neutrophils 86.4 %, decreased haemoglobin (120 g l−1), normal platelet count (274000 /µl), and increased C-reactive protein (84.9 mg l−1). Immunological testing revealed the following results: CD4 lymphocytes 40 %, CD8 lymphocytes 35 %, and CD4–CD8 ratio of 1.14. Humoral immunity testing revealed the following results: immunoglobulin (IgG of 6.09 g l−1, IgA of 0.92 g l−1, IgM of 0.94 g l−1, complement C3 of 0.854 g l−1, and complement C4 of 0.081 g l−1). He was negative in an HIV screening exam. But his HBsAg, HBeAb, and HBcAb were positive.
On 8 May 2020, he was started on meropenem and vancomycin. On 14 May 2020, R. equi was isolated from his blood culture. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was not performed because it was a rare bacterium that lacked a standardized drug-sensitive breakpoint. Though he was given broad-spectrum antibiotics, his symptoms failed to improve even after receiving intravenous vancomycin and meropenem for 20 days.
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing with broth microdilution was performed on 11 June 2020. The cultured organism was found to be resistant in vitro to penicillin, erythromycin, and vancomycin, and susceptible to ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, imipenem, linezolid, and compound sulfamethoxazole according to CLSI M45 A3. Drug-sensitive breakpoints were referred to Staphylococcus aureus. His treatment regimen was then altered to linezolid and meropenem. However, these medications were discontinued due to drug-induced bone marrow suppression and liver injury. The patient later suffered liver failure and died at home.
R. equi is a non-motile Gram-positive obligate aerobic coccobacillus . The Christie–Atkins–Munch–Peterson test was performed on blood agar plates with Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 25923). After 24 h of incubation, R. equi hemolysed in the form of an arrowhead near S. aureus . After 48 h of incubation, aerobic non-hemolytic, mucoid, and white colonies were evident . The organism was identified as R. equi by MALDI-TOF VITEK MS. Conventional methods revealed catalase positivity, urease positivity, oxidase negativity, gelatinase negativity, and a failure to oxidize or ferment carbohydrates.