A 70-year-old man presented to his primary care physician with chest discomfort, palpitation and dizziness. He denied chest pain, shortness of breath and fatigue. When electrocardiogram revealed ST-segment elevation in all the anterior leads (V1 to V6), the patient was referred to our hospital. An echocardiogram showed the presence of a large immobile mass attached to his right ventricle extending to the outflow tract . The serum level of soluble interleukin-2 receptor was markedly increased to 6,500 U/mL (reference range, 122–496 U/mL). 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomogram showed multiple foci of abnormal FDG accumulation in right cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes, cardiac wall, and stomach with elevated maximum standardized uptake values of more than 27 . A right cervical lymph node biopsy specimen was obtained and revealed histological features of DLBCL, not otherwise specified, with the non-germinal center B-cell-like (non-GCB) immunophenotype, being positive for CD20, BCL6, and MUM1 and negative for CD10. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed a large circumferential ulceration on the greater curvature of the gastric body . Histopathological assessment of the biopsied gastric tumor from nine different sites (white arrows in Fig. a) revealed diffuse infiltration of abnormal large lymphoid cells. These cells were positive for CD20, BCL-6 and MUM1 and negative for CD10. On the basis of these results, the gastric lesion was also determined to be DLBCL, non-GCB subtype. There were no pathological findings suggesting mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma such as lymphoepithelial lesions or eosinophilic degeneration of epithelial cells. Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) was not detected in the biopsy specimens. On the other hand, biopsy specimens from three other sites (red arrows in Fig. a) were found to have microtubular glands and cribriform proliferation, suggesting the existence of a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma (tub2). These adenocarcinoma cells were surrounded by DLBCL cells . On immunohistochemical staining using anti-human CXCR4 mouse monoclonal antibody (clone 44716) and anti-human/mouse CXCL12/SDF-1 mouse monoclonal antibody (clone 79018), DLBCL cells were positive for CXCR4 and adenocarcinoma cells were positive for CXCL12/SDF-1 . The patient was started on R-CHOP chemotherapy regimen (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone), resulting in a complete remission after six cycles. Follow-up EGD after chemotherapy detected a scar lesion instead of a tumor . Biopsy specimens from the scar were negative not only for lymphoma cells but also adenocarcinoma cells.