A 52-year-old Albanian woman from Kosovo presented to our hospital with dyspnea, tachycardia, and jugular distension. On admission she was in New York Heart Association class III, with normal blood pressure and absence of aortic murmur. She was in sinus rhythm and a chest X-ray demonstrated cardiomegaly with right atrium enlargement. A transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated increased pericardial effusion of almost 35 mm and a giant mass above her left atrium communicating with the ascending aorta. A transesophageal echocardiogram showed a large unruptured aneurysm/pseudoaneurysm 61×77 mm of the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva, without thrombosis or shunts, above her left atrium . Her aortic valve was competent, without annular enlargement. A cardiac contrast-enhanced angio-computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of a giant unruptured aneurysm of the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva of 74×60 mm diameter free from thrombotic lining, which was compressing her right atrium . The presence of a significant amount of pericardial effusion indicated a possible rupture of the aneurysm of the sinus of Valsalva or the presence of a pseudoaneurysm; therefore, we recommended urgent surgical repair.
She underwent femoral artery and vein cannulation and on cardiopulmonary bypass a sternotomy was performed. Her pericardium was then opened. An unruptured aneurysm of the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva was identified . On intraoperative examination, a thin-walled unruptured aneurysm of the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva expanding above the roof of her left atrium, compressing and partially gaining adhesions with her right atrium was identified. Her aorta was clamped and her heart was arrested with anterograde cardioplegic infusion. An anterior oblique aortotomy was performed. The orifice of the unruptured aneurysm of the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva was identified . The aneurysm was opened and carefully inspected for any possible communication. A Dacron patch was prepared to remodel the noncoronary sinus, which then was sutured with a continuous Prolene 4/0 suture . Then the aneurysmatic sac was closed from outside above the orifice of the aneurysm. A pathological examination of the resected unruptured aneurysm of the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva revealed conspicuous mucoid deposits, loss of elastic fibers and eosinophilic infiltration. Her postoperative course was uneventful. At 1 month after surgery, a contrast-enhanced angio-CT demonstrated a totally thrombosed cavity of the previous aneurysm which had non-communication with her aorta or any other cardiac chamber . At 1 year after surgery, she was doing well and an echocardiographic examination revealed mild aortic insufficiency.