A 19-year-old male was admitted to the Department of Plastic, hand and reconstructive surgery due to persistant dysaesthesia of the median nerve-supplied area and a soft tissue laceration of the palmar wrist following a wakeboarding accident three days before. As an intermediate wakeboarding athlete starting to wakeboard one year ago, he was wakeboarding on the largest German artificial wakeboarding circled nylon cable system on a lake with a speed of 40 km/h, when the automatic nylon cable system stopped immediately due to an overlapping wire. The male wakeboarder dived in the lake and got struck in the loose nylon cable system with his trunk and the hand. He managed to get off with the trunk still caught with his wrist in the nylon cable, when the nylon cable system was activated by chance and he was pulled 1/4 of the radius of the lake with a speed of 40 km/h, suffering a strangulation of his wrist with immediate numbness of the median-nerve supplied area of the left hand. Furthermore, he had a laceration of the palmar aspect of the wrist covering 0.5 × 5 cm tissue size.
At admission in a rural hospital, the two-point discrimination was > 15 mm for the entire interdigital nerves N1–N7 of the left hand as sensory loss in the median-nerve supplied area. The ulnar nerve was found without any pathology. Furthermore, he could not perform a wrist flexion, while wrist extension was possible. The capillary refill was 1s for all five fingertips. No distinct pain in the snuff box area was evident on admission. The left elbow joint had full range of motion, supination and pronation was limited due to persistent pain at the wrist level. Resting on a plaster, he was transferred three days after the initial injury with persistent clinical lesion of the median nerve in our department.
Conventional x-ray of the hand and the wrist found regular articulation without an evident bony lesion. No disruption of the scapular-lunar ligament was noted. Computer tomography of the wrist and the hand proofed regular bony structures . In the operating room dorsal compartment pressure of the forearm was 19 mmHg, at the palmar compartment of the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle 16 mmHg, which were both normal. The median nerve, 72 hours after the initial strangulation injury, appeared with hyperaemia and moderate swelling and limited haematoma in the carpal tunnel more according to a median nerve contusion. The palmar branch of the median nerve was surrounded by a significant haematoma, which was evacuated. The ulnar nerve was inspected and found without any significant signs of injury or haematoma.
The laceration area was excised completely and the skin could be closed primarily without compression with one subcutaneous drainage being inserted. On postoperative day 1, the patient regained the sensory function of the hand following 72 hours of acute carpal tunnel syndrome with median nerve contusion with remaining dysaesthesia of the thenar skin supplied by the palmar branch of the median nerve. On postoperative day 5 the patient was discharged home after an uneventful postoperative course. He complained of minor dysaesthesias in the mentioned thenar area with recurrent intensity and was advised to recovery for a total of four weeks before returning to sport.