A 78-year-old Chinese woman had an isolated mass that was found in her right breast during a health checkup, and a pulmonary CT scan revealed multiple lesions in both of her lungs. She had a history of cough and expectoration for two months without fever, chest pain, dyspnea, or other complaints. During a physical examination, a nearly 2.0×2.0cm, firm nodule without tenderness was found in the lateral superior quadrant of the right breast. In a routine blood test and tumor marker screen, no remarkable abnormalities were reported. However, the anti-SS-A and anti-SS-B antibodies were positive. Our patient had high concentrations of polyclonal serum immunoglobulins (Igs): IgA 485.00mg/dL (reference range: 70 to 400mg/dL), IgG 2030.00mg/dL (reference range: 700 to 1600mg/dL), Ig light-chain kappa 432.00mg/dL (reference range: 170 to 370mg/dL), and Ig light-chain lambda 249.00mg/dL (reference range: 90 to 210mg/dL).
Prior to a surgical resection of the mammary nodule, a whole-body PET/CT scan was suggested for the purpose of staging the possible malignant breast lesion. The scan was performed on a PET/CT system (Siemens Biograph TruePoint™ 64; Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) at 60 minutes after intravenous injection of 6.5mCi (240MBq) of 18F-FDG and covered the range of the bottom of the skull to the mid thigh. On the PET maximum intensity projection image , an obviously hypermetabolic nodule in the right breast and slightly increased FDG uptake of the lymph nodes (LNs) at the hilus of the lungs and posterior cervical region bilaterally were revealed. On transverse images of PET/CT, the right breast lesion was a 2.3×1.9cm, round, well-circumscribed homogenous isodense nodule with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 7.30 . Multiple irregular nodules with slight to mild FDG uptake were observed in the lungs, and the largest lesion was a 2.7×2.5cm, round, well-defined solid nodule in the right lower lobe and had an SUVmax of 2.96 . In addition, the bilateral posterior cervical LNs were normal in size and had an SUVmax of 4.48. Given the multiple FDG-avid foci in a woman of our patient’s age, a primary breast malignant tumor lesion with pulmonary metastasis was considered first and surgery on the mammary lesion was performed three days later.
Tissues of the mammary lesion were reviewed for histopathological features, and formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues were immunostained with antibodies to IgG4 (1:300, clone HP6025; Zymed, now part of Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA), IgG (1:200, clone A57H; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), S-100 protein (1:1000, polyclonal; Dako), and CD68 protein (1:100, clone KP1; Dako). Congo red stain was used to test amyloid deposits. Pathologically, the mammary lesion showed abundant plasma cells and sinus histiocytes, including large pale pathognomonic histiocytes that exhibited emperipolesis . In addition, lymphoid follicle formation, patchy fibrosis, and obliterative phlebitis, accompanied by atrophy and loss of mammary lobules, were observed. Further immunohistochemical staining showed large histiocytes positive for S-100 protein and CD-68 protein but negative for CD1a. The average number of IgG4+ cells was 118 per high-powered field, and the ratio of IgG4+ to IgG+ cells was 65%.
The lesion in the upper lobe of the right lung and the LN at the right carotid sheath were biopsied. Histology revealed deposition of strongly Congo red-positive materials with few histiocytes and fibrotic cell infiltration in the lung tissue. Reactive lymphoproliferation and deposition of Congo red-positive materials within the adjacent connective tissue were observed in the cervical LN.