A 45-year-old man presented to the outpatient clinic at our hospital with abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG) findings.
The patient underwent ECG as part of a regular health check, and had no cardiac symptoms such as chest pain or shortness of breath.
He had no specific comorbidities and no history of trauma.
The patient had a smoking history of 20 pack-years and an alcohol consumption history of 3–4 bottles of soju per week. His younger brother was diagnosed with a myocardial bridge, and there was no other family history of cardiovascular disease.
The patient had a height of 176 cm and weight of 73 kg, and his vital signs were stable, with a blood pressure of 121/74 mmHg and pulse of 100 beats/min. There were no other significant findings on physical examination.
Blood tests revealed no abnormalities, and cardiac markers were normal. The ECG showed T wave inversion in the anterior lead, and chest radiography findings were unremarkable.
Echocardiography revealed that the LV was divided into two compartments by myocardial muscle fibers, along with tears in the apical lateral and inferior segments . There were no other significant abnormalities. Based on these findings, LV aneurysm dissection or LV pseudoaneurysm secondary to myocardial infarction (MI) were suspected.
Coronary angiography was performed to assess for coronary artery disease (CAD) such as MI. However, no significant luminal narrowing was observed. Although the findings regarding CAD did not appear, treatment was discussed with a thoracic surgeon in light of the possibility of aneurysmal dissection. After consulting with the surgeon, it was decided to prioritize a definitive diagnosis because surgical treatment in cases of asymptomatic aneurysm dissection is not urgent.
CCTA was performed for a more detailed evaluation of the anatomy and myocardial condition. On CCTA, it was shown that the LV was divided into two. A separated accessory chamber (AC) was connected to the LV by a narrow slit-like communication in the LV apical-mid posterolateral wall . No other abnormal findings, such as coronary artery anomaly, were seen, and no findings were suggestive of myocardial ischemia. Together, these findings indicated DCLV as a more likely diagnosis than LV pseudoaneurysm or aneurysm.