We report a 70-year-old male patient who presented to our emergency room with fever and altered mental status for 24 hours before presentation. The patient was also complaining of increasing left flank pain, nausea, and emesis. There was no history of trauma. On physical examination, the patient appeared to be in distress and minimally responsive. Initial vital signs revealed a temperature of 103.3°F, tachycardia, but stable blood pressure. Abdominal examination revealed distended abdomen and left flank tenderness to palpation. He was found to have severe leukopenia with white blood cell count of 0.7 K/μL and a serum creatinine (sCr) of 1.64 mg/dL with a normal coagulation profile. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen/pelvis with intravenous contrast showed a large intracapsular hematoma (13.3 × 10.0 cm), which deformed and compressed the kidney anteriorly ( and ). There were multiple areas of curvilinear hyperdense material within the hematoma, indicating vascular extravasation consistent with active bleeding. Marked left perinephric stranding with extension of the extracapsular hematoma to the distal aorta, iliac vessels, presacral space, and along the left prerenal space was seen . A 1.1 cm stone was identified within the proximal left ureter, and a 6 mm stone was identified within the inferior pole of the left kidney. The proximal left ureter was dilated ( and ).
Despite ongoing resuscitative measures with intravenous fluid boluses and intravenous antibiotics, the patient became hemodynamically unstable 1 hour after presentation to the emergency room. His blood pressure decreased to 70/40 mmHg and Hgb dropped to 9.5 g/dL (from 11.3) that required initiation of blood transfusion and infusion of vasoactive pressor medications. The patient remained critically ill, tachycardic, and hypotensive with a blood pressure of 80/60 mmHg despite 8 L of intravenous crystalloid fluid, 4 U of blood, and pressure support. Interventional radiology was consulted. If managed nonoperatively, it appeared the patient would need both a nephrostomy tube and selective arterial embolization. Given the large hematoma with minimal hydronephrosis combined with the patient's rapid clinical deterioration, interventional radiology did not think they would be able to help with both of these problems. Because of the complicated nature of the combined issues of active renal hemorrhage with hemorrhagic/septic shock, the patient was subsequently taken for emergent exploratory laparotomy and left nephrectomy. During the exploration, active bleeding was encountered with a (2.4 × 2.0 cm) shaggy defect at the interpolar lateral aspect of the kidney . Vascular control of the renal pedicle was obtained and a nephrectomy was performed. Postoperatively, the patient made a steady progress until he was discharged with sCr 1.38 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate 51 mL/min/1.73 sqM, and stable Hgb 9.6 g/dL. The initial blood and urine cultures revealed growth of Escherichia coli that was treated with appropriate antibiotics. Histopathologic examination of the kidney showed acute and chronic interstitial and intratubular inflammatory infiltrate with acute hemorrhage with no evidence of malignancy .