We report an 83-year-old Caucasian woman with a past medical history significant for squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma of the face treated with surgical removal 11 years previously who presented to her primary care provider with left thumb pain for 1 week. She reports pain on the dorsal aspect of the distal left phalanx, including her nail plate, with mild associated swelling. She denies specific trauma or injury. Examination showed a focal area of erythema under the nail plate without other discoloration. Radiographs were obtained in the clinic with no occult fracture or bony erosion findings. She was prescribed an antibiotic and ibuprofen and asked to follow-up if there was no improvement. After several weeks, she presented again with worsening thumb pain. Examination showed similar but progressive findings. A felon was suspected, and she was prescribed oral antibiotics and instructed to complete warm water soaks. Nail plate removal was offered which the patient declined.

Several days after this encounter, she presented to her annual dermatology appointment where the provider noted onychodystrophy of the left thumbnail with firmness to the distal thumb and interruption of the ulnar nail plate. She was offered a referral to orthopedic hand surgery versus a trial of intralesional triamcinolone injection. She chose injection into the left thumb ulnar paronychium. The patient was instructed to follow-up in a few weeks for reassessment and possible biopsy if the lesion did not improve. Reassessment several weeks later yielded no improvement of symptoms. At that time, the left thumb was noted to have significant erythema, tenderness, and swelling of the pad with dystrophic changes to the ulnar nail fold and distal onycholysis. This prompted an orthopedic hand surgery referral for concern of developing subungual tumor. That same day, radiographs showed new osseous erosion of the thumb distal phalanx. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the thumb showed a destructive mass involving the left thumb distal phalangeal tuft extending to the mid phalanx to the nail bed.

Within a week, the patient was evaluated in the orthopedic hand surgery clinic. Computed tomography-guided biopsy was performed for differentiation between osteomyelitis versus an oncologic process. Biopsy revealed an invasive, well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma involving the nail plate with underlying bony infiltration. Orthopedic hand surgery recommended surgical excision with disarticulating amputation through the interphalangeal joint of the thumb. Oncology was consulted prior to surgery and no sentinel lymph node or adjuvant therapy was indicated.

Amputation through the interphalangeal joint of the left thumb was performed without event. Gross examination of the specimen showed tumor involvement of the nail bed. Further examination of the amputated distal phalanx revealed tumor involvement of the bone. Pathologic report of the specimen showed a 1.7 × 1.7 cm invasive squamous cell carcinoma with free tissue margins. Oncology determined no indication for adjuvant therapies with long-term follow-up per National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines with low threshold for imaging if new symptoms arise. At her 4-month postoperative visit, she has recovered well, is pain-free, and is clinically free of disease recurrence.