A 15-year-old female, the eldest sibling of patient 1, was diagnosed with
tyrosinemia type III at eight years of age, after a family screening
following her brother’s diagnosis.
She was born at term by cesarean section (pelvic presentation) following an
uneventful pregnancy, with an Apgar score of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes,
respectively. Her birth weight was 4,030 g (87th percentile),
length 53 cm (87th percentile), and head circumference 36 cm
(83rd percentile). Her neonatal period was unremarkable, as
was her early psychomotor development. She had a history of primary
nocturnal enuresis and vesical instability, treated with desmopressin and
oxybutynin hydrochloride since the age of six.
She was diagnosed with ADHD at the age of five and treated with
methylphenidate and risperidone. She presented learning difficulties when
she attended elementary school (2nd grade), and was included in a
special education program at the age of ten.
At the time of diagnosis, her initial tyrosine level was 1,769 µmol/L. On the
first nutritional status evaluation, her daily natural protein intake was
1.4 g/kg. This value dropped to 1.08 g/kg, and she started taking
supplementation with 0.7 g of amino acids/kg from phenylalanine- and
tyrosine-free amino acid mixtures, enabling a consistent decrease of
tyrosine levels below 300 µmol/L.
Her physical examination and growth were normal (weight and height at the
50‒85th percentile), with an unremarkable neurological
examination. The genetic study revealed the same mutation as her brother in
homozygosity.
After initiating a low-protein diet, her behavior and school performance did
not improve. The minimum level of daily natural protein intake reached was
0.65 g/kg at 14 years of age. She is currently in 7th grade,
still in the special education program, and under treatment with
methylphenidate. Her latest formal developmental assessment (Wechsler
Intelligence Scale for Children®, third edition, Portuguese
version) revealed a global IQ score of 68, with a verbal IQ of 68 and a
performance IQ of 77 .
She slowly began diet liberalization and is now with a daily natural protein
intake of 0.9 g/kg, combined with 0.8 g of amino acids/kg, maintaining
tyrosine levels below 300 µmol/L nevertheless.