We present the case of a 40-year-old Caucasian female nurse who presented with complaints of blurred vision that had developed over the preceding two weeks. The patient denied experiencing other symptoms, including pain, ocular redness or scotoma. Notably, she reported flu-like illness one week prior to the onset of her visual symptoms, during which she self-initiated treatment with oral prednisolone (20 mg/day, during 3 days) and bilastine (10 mg/day, during 3 days).

Her medical history is significant for vitiligo and hypertension, which has been well-controlled with telmisartan (40mg/day) since diagnosis, 3 years earlier. The patient has no known allergies and no relevant family medical history. Her visual acuity was assessed at 20/20 with a refractive error of −0.25 in both eyes at baseline.

Biomicroscopy of the anterior segment was unremarkable, and intraocular pressure (IOP) was recorded at 14 mmHg in the right eye (OD) and left eye (OS). Pupillary reflexes were normal, with equal and reactive pupils. Extraocular movements were intact.

Fundoscopic examination under mydriasis revealed the absence of the foveal reflex, along with a suspected subfoveal serous retinal detachment and multiple small serous retinal detachments in the posterior pole, but no other abnormalities. The retinal vessels appeared normal without signs of vasculitis, and no vitreous opacities or chorioretinal lesions were identified.

Infrared and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) in OD and OS revealed bilateral, multiple, bleb-like small serous retinal detachments in the macula and along the vascular arcades, with varying sizes. A large confluent detachment was present in both eyes, temporal to the fovea. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) appeared normal, showing no significant alterations at this stage. Fluorescein angiography (FA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICG) presented a normal aspect without any leakage or pooling.

A survey for possible infectious causes was carried out and the patient lived in an apartment in an urban area with good sanitary conditions but had contact with a dog and cows/goats once a week, cleaning them. There is no history of international travel within the past five years, nor any recent hair coloring. There was no recent tick bite, no contact with patients with known pulmonary tuberculosis, nor any recent work accident, such as a needle stick. No recent or past consumption of intravenous drugs and no recent or previous use of topiramate or any MEK inhibitor. No recent or past risky sexual relations and no consumption of unpasteurized milk and its derivatives or consumption of undercooked meat.

Regarding vaccination, the patient’s immunization status is in accordance with the national vaccination schedule, including the COVID-19 vaccination. Two initial doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine were administered at the beginning of 2021, followed by a booster dose later in the same year. An annual booster has been received since then, with the most recent dose administered 6 months prior to the onset of symptoms.

A comprehensive laboratory workup was conducted to investigate potential infectious, autoimmune, and systemic etiologies for the serous retinal detachments. Hematological evaluation, including a complete blood count and platelet levels, returned within normal limits. Liver function tests, including aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), as well as kidney function markers (creatinine and urea), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were all normal. Electrolyte levels were also within normal ranges, and thyroid function tests, including thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine (T4), revealed no abnormalities. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) levels and ionized calcium were likewise normal.

To explore autoimmune causes, tests for antinuclear antibodies (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA), anti-extractable nuclear antigen (anti-ENA), anti–Sjögren’s-syndrome-related antigens A and B (anti-SSA and anti-SSB) and anti-Smith antibodies (anti-SM) were all negative. Rheumatoid factor testing was also negative. Syphilis serology (TPPA) was unremarkable.

Infectious serologies showed that IgG antibodies for cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV1), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and parvovirus were positive, while IgM antibodies for these infections were negative, suggesting past infections. Serologies for herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV2), varicella-zoster virus, Toxoplasma gondii, Borrelia, Coxsackie B virus, Coxiella burnetii, and Rickettsia were negative for both IgG and IgM antibodies. Bartonella DNA/PCR testing was negative, as was the Wright reaction for brucellosis. Serological tests for HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C were also negative. Tuberculosis screening with an interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA) and a Mantoux test yielded negative results, with 0 mm of induration. Urine test revealed no hematuria or proteinuria.

Additional imaging and systemic evaluations were conducted. A brain and orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and thoraco-abdominopelvic computerized tomography (CT) scan were both normal. Further assessments, including upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, colonoscopy, breast CT, breast ultrasound, cervical cytology, transvaginal ultrasound, and dermatological screening, revealed no significant abnormalities.

Three months after the onset of the visual symptoms, in a follow-up consultation, her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) remained 20/20 in OD but decreased to 20/25 in OS. Biomicroscopy of the anterior segment was unremarkable, and IOP was 14 mmHg in both eyes. Fundoscopic examination revealed multifocal yellowish subretinal polymorphous material scattered throughout the macula and seemed to gravitate along the lower margin of the serous retinal detachment, forming a curvilinear meniscus along temporal inferior vascular arcade. The previously observed bilateral multiple small serous retinal detachments have coalesced into a single larger detachment, while an accumulation of hyperreflective material in the subretinal space is observed, which translates the fundoscopic vitelliform deposits, as seen on SD-OCT. Additionally, FAF demonstrated the characteristic hyperautofluorescence of the polymorphous deposits, that corresponded to the yellow spots observed during fundoscopic examination. The same lesions showed hyperfluorescence on FA in all phases of the angiogram and ICG showed mild hypofluorescence in all phases of the angiogram.

In both eyes, full field electroretinogram was normal, as electrooculogram (Arden ratio was 2.39 in OD and 2.51 in OS) and pattern visually evoked potentials. Pattern Electroretinogram was normal in OD but showed a mild macular dysfunction in OS (reduction of P50-wave amplitude).

Based on the clinical presentation, multimodal imaging findings, evolving retinal changes, and comprehensive systemic screening to rule out autoimmune, infectious, and neoplastic etiologies, a diagnosis of idiopathic AEPVM was established. The patient is being monitored for visual recovery and the potential need for further interventions.