A 1-year 9-month-old female patient with non-significant past medical or surgical history, a full-term product of a non-complicated vaginal delivery with no neonatal intensive care unit admissions was referred to our center for further investigations regarding the diagnosis of an intraabdominal mass versus an abdominal abscess. The patient complained of abdominal pain and fever for 10 days duration. The pain was located in the epigastric area radiating to left upper quadrant, and associated with nausea, vomiting and anorexia. The pain was severe enough to awaken the patient from her sleep. The fever was intermittent in nature with maximum recorded value of 39 °C orally, responded well to paracetamol. Upon physical examination, an epigastric tenderness was observed associated with left upper quadrant guarding to palpation. Otherwise, the abdomen was soft and lax. The suspected mass could not be palpated.
Laboratory investigations , abdominal X-ray and ultrasonography were performed . Ultrasonography revealed a well-defined, multiloculated, cystic lesion seen in the epigastric region and extending into the left upper quadrant with foci of calcification seen with posterior acoustic enhancement, with no hyperemia seen on Doppler images. The largest locule measured about 4.8 × 4.0 × 5.6 cm seen in the epigastric region containing swirling debris. Findings highly suggest an organized abscess secondary to infected mesenteric cyst or a lymphangioma. Liver, spleen and pancreas were all homogenous with no focal lesions. The long axis of the liver and spleen was 8.7 and 6.7 cm, respectively. Both kidneys appear normal in size, shape and echotexture with no hydronephrosis. The long axis of the right and left kidneys was 7.2 and 7.1 cm, respectively. Gallbladder had a smooth outline with no stones. No intra- or extra-hepatic biliary dilatation were seen. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) imaging with intravenous contrast revealed a multiloculated thick enhancing-walled fluid collection seen in the mesentery anteriorly and extending to the left upper quadrant and flank region. The largest locule is seen in the anterior abdomen measuring 6.7 × 6.2 cm containing two tiny foci of calcifications which caused a mass effect to adjacent small and large bowel loops displacing them posteriorly and laterally. The lesion was associated with sub-centimetric enhancing locoregional lymph nodes with the largest measuring about 0.5 cm in the short axis. A mild amount of fluid was seen in the pelvis. CT scan finding along with ultrasonography results suggest an organized abscess secondary to infected mesenteric cyst or a lymphangioma. A trial of true-cut biopsies performed by an interventional radiologist was not informative in which the histopathological examination of three needle core biopsies measuring 1.5, 1.5 and 0.5 cm indicated fragments of fibrinoid material with no viable cells and composed of skeletal muscles and fibrous tissue, precluding proper diagnosis.
A Multidisciplinary team decision was made to excise the mass by the pediatric surgery team. Intraoperative findings include : multiloculated fused cystic lesions (8.0 × 5.0 × 4.0 cm) on the descending mesocolon. Descending colon loops were healthy and viable. Complete excision of the mass was performed with preservation of the attached descending colon through a midline laparotomy incision. Histopathological examination of the excised mass revealed a variably sized thin-walled vascular spaces almost devoid of blood and containing pale pink fluid mostly representing lymph. Such spaces are surrounded by loose fibrous tissue with inflammatory cellular infiltrate (mainly eosinophils and plasma cells) with lymphoid follicles (A). The spaces are lined by a layer of endothelial cells highlighted by CD31 and CD34 immunohistochemical staining (B and C). No evidence of malignancy was observed.
Postoperatively, a nasogastric (NG) tube was inserted, and the patient was on the following medication: vancomycin (165 mg, Q6h), piperacillin/tazobactam (1 g, Q6h), diclofenac suppositories (12.5 mg, Q12 h) and paracetamol (pro re nata). Medications were stopped at day 5 and the NG tube was removed at day 3 postoperatively. The patient was doing well, vitally stable, passed flatus on day 2, passed stool at day 4 and discharged after 5 days postoperatively. The patient was followed 1 week after the surgery in an outpatient clinic, the wound was healthy, not infected with normal bowel motion and no fever spikes, abdominal pain or abdominal distention.