A 52-year-old gentleman had presented to the emergency room with sudden onset left hemiparesis, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of E2M5Vt. He was diagnosed with a 210 mL volume, middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory infarction on magnetic resonance (MR) imaging with mass effect and a 12 mm midline shift. He was also diagnosed with a right brachial artery embolus on routine large vessel and neck MR angiograms. Carotid vasculature was noted to be normal with no narrowing or filling defect. An emergency right fronto-temporo-parietal decompressive with lax duraplasty was performed followed by a right brachial embolectomy by the vascular team. Further evaluation with a cardiac 2D echogram revealed no regional wall motion abnormality with mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), normally functioning valves and no clots or vegetations. Postoperatively, he had an uneventful recovery and over a week GCS improved to E4M6V5. He was discharged on therapeutic doses of low molecular weight heparin for the brachial artery embolus.
He presented 6 months later for a cranioplasty. He was conscious alert and oriented with modified Ashworth Grade II hypertonia and Medical Research Council Grade 3 power in the left upper and lower limbs. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a sunken skin flap with a 9 mm midline shift to the left along with gliotic changes in the right MCA territory . The autologous bone preserved in a freezer was found to be unhealthy and he underwent a customized titanium mold cranioplasty. Intraoperatively, the brain was sunken. Urine output was maintained at 80–150 mL/h and vitals were stable with minimal fluctuations. The surgery was completed uneventfully.
The patient did not wake from anesthesia and had sudden fall in blood pressure (BP) to 60/40 mmHg a few minutes after shifting, on ventilator, to the intensive care unit. The hypotension lasted for less than a minute and he was stabilized with inotropes and noradrenaline boluses and later a drip infusion, with close titration owing to a very labile BP highly sensitive to minor adjustments in the inotropes. Blood gases, electrolytes, and postoperative hematocrit were within normal limits. A screening echocardiogram at the time showed an ejection fraction of 55% with freely moving valves and no clots or vegetations, ruling out a cardiac cause for the hypotension. During and immediately following stabilization, his pupils began dilating bilaterally from 2 mm to 8 mm over 30 min.
A CT scan showed diffuse severe cerebral edema in bilateral hemispheres with effaced basal cisterns, microhemorrhages, and expansion of the sunken right gliotic brain along with ipsilateral ventricular dilatation. There was poor grey-white matter differentiation in the contralateral (left) side with a midline shift of 5 mm toward the right (cranioplasty) side . GCS remained E1M1Vt (No eye response or motor response, intubated on ventilator support) and pupils was now dilated fixed (8 mm bilaterally). Due to left-sided edema and risk of aggravation of midline shift by the right-sided titanium mold removal, a left-sided decompressive craniectomy and lax duraplasty were deemed suitable and performed.
A magnetic resonance imaging was performed the subsequent day that showed bilateral posterior cerebral artery territory and brainstem infarcts .
Despite all possible efforts and interventions, the patient did not improve, had absent brainstem signs with dilated fixed pupils and a GCS of E1M1Vt, and eventually a fatal outcome.
In this case, other possibilities of malignant cerebral edema include fresh emboli from the heart causing fresh infarcts. Although fresh infarcts developing severe edema rapidly within an hour is rare, a screening cardiac 2D echogram was done at the time which showed normal findings apart from mild concentric LVH, and an ejection fraction of 55%, matching the evaluation done at the time of the initial infarct.
Hypoxia during surgery could theoretically cause bihemispheric edema; however, no such hypoxia or desaturation occurred intraoperatively or immediately postoperatively.
Hypotension due to an unrelated cause and subsequent hypoxic brain injury leading to malignant edema may be considered. However, no other systemic causes of hypotension could be identified. There was minimal blood loss during surgery and an 80–150 mL/h urine output throughout ruling out hypovolemia. Cardiac causes had been ruled out (as mentioned earlier) and there was no cause for septic shock immediate postoperatively. It was hence concluded that the hypotension was a consequence of severe brain edema and loss of autonomic control, further supported by the lability of the BP and extreme sensitivity to inotropic agents.
After excluding the above, the sequence of events suggests postcranioplasty malignant edema due to a change in pressure dynamics, as the most likely cause of the deterioration.