A 53-year-old Japanese woman with a 30-year clinical history of anorexia nervosa (155 cm, 32 kg, body mass index: 13.3 kg/m2) was found unconscious at home. On admission to the Emergency Department, she was in a coma with a consciousness level of 6 on the Glasgow Coma Scale (E3V1M2). Her other vital signs initially recorded in the Emergency Department were as follows: body temperature, 35.1°C; heart rate, 83 beats/min; blood pressure, 84/62 mmHg; respiratory rate, 12 breaths/min; and percutaneous oxygen saturation, 98% (on oxygen 10 L/min via a non-rebreather mask). A laboratory examination showed remarkable hypoglycemia with a blood sugar concentration of 8 mg/dL, anemia with a hemoglobin concentration of 8.2 g/dL, hypopotassemia with a potassium concentration of 3.4 mmol/L, thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 128,000/μL, and coagulopathy with an international normalized ratio of the prothrombin time of 1.49 and activated partial thromboplastin time of 36.2 s. After the intravenous administration of 20 g of glucose and 20 mg of thiamine, her blood sugar concentration increased to 230 mg/dL, and her consciousness level returned to 14 on the Glasgow Coma Scale (E3V5M6). Transthoracic echocardiography showed akinesis of the heart apex and a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 20%, consistent with takotsubo cardiomyopathy. She was obviously emaciated and malnourished but did not have a short neck or neck deformities. A computed tomography scan showed no vascular anomaly around the neck or thorax. A diagnosis of hypoglycemia-induced takotsubo cardiomyopathy [, ] with anorexia nervosa was made. She was admitted to the intensive care unit to receive close monitoring, correction of blood sugar and electrolytes, and continuous intravenous heparin administration (5000 U/day) for the prevention of thrombus in the akinetic ventricular apex.
On hospital day 2, this patient suddenly developed refractory ventricular fibrillation and suffered from cardiopulmonary arrest. A rigorous resuscitation attempt using chest compressions, electrical defibrillation, endotracheal intubation, and intravenous adrenaline administration was immediately initiated by intensive care unit physicians and nurses. Spontaneous circulation was restored in approximately 15 min. A CVC was required for continuous intravenous infusion of inotropic agents and vasopressin. The right neck was then sterilized with 1% chlorhexidine digluconate, and her head was tilted to the left by approximately 30°. On a pre-procedural ultrasound (US) examination, no vascular-like structures were visible behind the posterior wall of the right IJV. The right IJV was punctured by an experienced cardiologist under US guidance with the short-axis out-of-plane technique using an 18-gauge introducer needle contained in an Arrow triple lumen central venous catheter kit (Teleflex Medical Japan, Tokyo, Japan). Although the angle and depth of the needle appeared to be appropriate if the patient had not been emaciated, the right IJV was completely collapsed at the time of the US-guided puncture, and blood was not aspirated. Non-pulsatile dark-colored blood was smoothly aspirated during gentle withdrawal of the needle, and then a guide wire, dilator, and CVC were inserted without resistance. Immediately after the CVC placement, she developed enlarging swelling around the neck. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed massive contrast media extravasation around the neck and mediastinum , whereas the tip of the CVC was correctly placed in the right IJV. The patient was considered at a high risk for open repair. Therefore, transarterial embolization was planned. After 6-Fr short sheath introduction (Radifocus Introducer II; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) from her right brachial artery, a pigtail catheter (4-Fr; Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) was advanced into the brachiocephalic trunk with the support of a 0.035″ hydrophilic guidewire (Radifocus guidewire M; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). Brachiocephalic artery angiography showed a characteristic “blush” appearance of the ruptured right thyrocervical trunk . After selective arterial embolization using a microcatheter (Masters Parkway Soft; Asahi Intecc, Aichi, Japan) and 33% N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate, the extravasation completely disappeared and hemostasis was achieved. A schema of the operative course at the catheterization laboratory is shown in Figure S in the supplementary information file. After receiving 22 units of packed red blood cells, 20 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 20 units of platelet concentrate, the patient was returned to the intensive care unit where correction of body fluid imbalance, hypothermia, acidemia, and coagulopathy was continued. Secondary infection and multiorgan dysfunction developed approximately 2 weeks later, and the patient died from sepsis on hospital day 16. An autopsy was not performed because her family refused.
The search strategy was determined a priori by the survey team, which comprised anesthesiologists (YO and KS), an interventional radiologist (EU), emergency physicians (NN, IY, and JK), and a librarian (MJ, listed in the Acknowledgments). On June 2022, all reported cases of thyrocervical trunk injury associated with IJV puncture were searched for in the MEDLINE database from inception using the following keywords: “thyrocervical trunk” AND “internal jugular vein puncture”; “thyrocervical trunk” AND “central venous catheter”; “thyroid artery” AND “internal jugular vein puncture”; and “thyroid artery” AND “central venous catheter”. PubMed® was used to search the MEDLINE database. Cross-referencing was also performed using the reference list of articles included in this review. The following types of articles were excluded from the analysis: (1) they were not case reports or case letters, (2) they were not in English, and (3) they did not describe thyrocervical trunk injury associated with IJV puncture. This search produced 25 articles of which 10 relevant reports and cases were included in this review [–] . We reviewed the variables of age, sex, underlying medical conditions of the patients, number of punctures, use of real-time US guidance, characteristics of the operator, treatment, and outcome.
The clinical characteristics of thyrocervical trunk injury after IJV puncture described in this review, including our patient, are shown in Table . Seven articles described pseudoaneurysm of the thyrocervical trunk or its branches [–], three reported massive bleeding arising from the thyrocervical trunk or its branches [, ], and one reported CVC misplacement in the right inferior thyroid artery . The cases in the literature review consisted of four men and seven women, aged 33 to 71 years. More than 80% (9/11) of thyrocervical trunk injuries were associated with a landmark puncture without using real-time US guidance. More than half (6/11) of the thyrocervical trunk injuries were associated with multiple (≥ 2) attempts. Aneurysm or active bleeding arising from a thyrocervical trunk injury was successfully managed by surgical repair (4/11) or endovascular treatment (5/11). Endovascular embolization using 33% N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate for the treatment of vascular complications associated with CVC placement has not been reported previously.