A 60-year-old male with a mild factor VIII deficiency presented to the hematology clinic at our hospital with a 1-week history of asymptomatic gross hematuria. He had suffered a hemorrhagic gastric ulcer at the age of 48 and was diagnosed with mild hemophilia A (his factor VIII levels were 6 % of normal) at that time. He had suffered a cerebral hemorrhage at the age of 59. For several years beginning at the age of 50, the patient had experienced mild hematuria, and he had experienced one episode of intramuscular and subcutaneous hemorrhage; both conditions were managed with recombinant factor VIII products.
A physical examination revealed no abnormal signs. Laboratory tests revealed that the patient’s activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was prolonged to 74.6 s (normal range, 28.5–40.9 s), but his prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, platelet count, serum creatinine level, and prostate-specific antigen level were unremarkable. The patient’s urinalysis results were normal, except for the gross hematuria, and urine cytology revealed no cancer cells. The patient was treated with a third-generation recombinant factor VIII product (Advate). However, he had persistent hematuria, followed by clot retention. Thus, he was referred to the Department of Urology. Computed tomography demonstrated that his bladder was filled with a blood clot , but his prostate and upper urinary tract were apparently normal.
He was admitted to our hospital and received the following therapy: clot evacuation by vesicoclysis, continuous bladder irrigation with normal saline, and intravesical instillation of aluminum hydroxide/magnesium hydroxide (Maalox) concurrent with the administration of Advate, which failed to resolve the hemorrhage. Consequently, the patient had repeated transfusions of packed red cells. Although the patient also underwent transurethral coagulation of the bladder mucosa under anesthesia, the bleeding presented with oozing throughout the mucosa and was not controlled. Subsequently, the patient developed pyelonephritis in his left kidney with a severe reduction (<50 mL) in his bladder capacity. Conservative management for 2 months failed to resolve the patient’s symptoms, so he was offered a cystectomy with ileal conduit and consented to it after a detailed discussion.
The quality of intraoperative clotting seemed to be normal with the use of sufficient Advate to raise the levels of factor VIII to 100 % (3000 U, IV bolus) and the transfusion of 3 U of fresh-frozen plasma. His aPTT was 54 s during surgery. The cystectomy was performed safely without severe bleeding events. A 15-cm length of ileal segment at 15 cm from the ileocecal valve was used for the ileal conduit. The technique of side-to-side stapled anastomosis was used for the ileoileal anastomosis, and the Bricker anastomosis technique was used for ureteroileal anastomosis. The total operating time was 220 min and the estimated blood loss was 800 mL.
The resected specimen revealed multiple erosions and ulcers in the bladder mucosa, and sclerosis of the bladder wall. Histological examinations demonstrated inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrous changes in the bladder wall without malignant figures. The cause of the hematuria was unclear.
Postoperatively, Advate (3000 U, q12 h) was administered to maintain 100 % levels of factor VIII for 2 days with no bleeding complications. After removal of the ureteral catheters on postoperative day 13, the patient had urinary leakage from the ureteroileal anastomosis, which induced a pelvic abscess followed by septic shock and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Blood cultures were positive for Candida tropicalis. Several antibiotics and surgical drainage of the abscess were needed.
At 4 months after the cystectomy, the patient had blood in his stool requiring a transfusion of packed red cells. No bleeding site was demonstrated in the colon by colonoscopy and 99mTechnetium-human serum albumin-diethylenetriaminepenta-acetic acid scintigraphy demonstrated that the extravasation of radioactive isotope was detected at terminal ileum, cecum, ascending and transverse colon but not at the oral side of terminal ileum . These findings were suspected to be bleeding from the ileoileal anastomosis. The patient was given Advate (2000–4000 U) three times per week for 6 months, and the blood in his stool resolved. His condition recovered gradually and he was discharged at 8 months after admission.
After discharge, he had mild gastrointestinal bleeding and mild hematuria several times a year; however, this was controlled by Advate. The patient had been doing well, other than the bleeding tendency, until he suffered a malignant lymphoma at the age of 66 and was transferred to another clinic for treatment.