A previously healthy, fully immunized 13 years-old boy was transferred to the intensive care unit department of our hospital with drowsiness, progressing painful hyperaemic right periorbital swelling, fever, bilateral nasal obstruction (right > left) and right purulent rhinorrhoea . Moreover, he presented worsening right visual acuity, right dyschromatopsia and a dull cervical pain for 2 days. His mother mentioned us about a right orbital trauma during a sport event (soccer game) occurred 7 days before.
During ENT evaluation anterior rhinoscopy was performed with the finding of scarce purulent discharge from the right nasal cavity, with generalized hyperaemia and swelling of the nasal mucosae. Nasal fiberoptic endoscopy was difficult to perform due to generalized swelling of the nasal mucosae and only revealed right nasopharyngeal purulent drip. Respiratory space revealed normal.
On admission blood tests documented leucocytosis with neutrophilia and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP).
A brain and maxillo-facial contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed and revealed the presence of a right intraorbital intraconic abscessual formation , acute right maxillary and left sphenoid sinusitis, minimal clival bone erosion and signs of sigmoid and transverse venous sinuses thrombosis.
Urgent ophthalmologic evaluation was requested and resulted difficult to be performed due to the minimal palpebral fissure; however, it demonstrated signs of right optic nerve sufferance.
Based on this finding, a large spectrum intravenous antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone (2 g twice a day) and metronidazole (500 mg four times a day) and an anticoagulant treatment with subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin were introduced.
The boy underwent an urgent surgical treatment with drainage of the right intraorbital intraconic abscess via right superior trans-palpebral approach and right antrostomy and left sphenoidotomy via endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS). Microbiological tests of the purulent collection were positive for multisensible Streptococcus intermedius.
Full recovery of both orbital swelling and nasal complaints was achieved few days after surgery, as well as a progressive improvement with complete recovery in visual acuity.
Antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone and metronidazole was continued for 2 weeks, when worsening signs of meningeal sufferance (torcicollis and rigor nucalis), bradycardia and intermittent fever occurred.
Lumbar puncture, abdominal and cardiac ultrasound (US) and blood culture were performed, but all revealed negative for meningitis, further abscessual formations and bacteremia. Immunological tests including immunoglobulins and IgG subclassis, lymphocyte subpopulations, tests for complement function were performed and resulted negative.
Control head MRI was performed and documented the presence of an abscessual collection of the preclival region extending to the preclival soft tissue posteriorly to the nasopharynx and to the cervical long muscles’ insertion, associated with mandibular, occipital condyles and anterior part of the occipital bone osteomyelitis.
Multidisciplinary team discussion with neurosurgeon, infectivologist, paediatricians and radiologist was achieved and another surgical urgent procedure was performed: partial posterior septectomy, bilateral sphenoidotomy with access to the preclival compartment and preclival abscess drainage in ESS.
Antibiotic treatment was changed to vancomycin (40 md\kg\die in three doses) and meropenem (100 mg\kg\die in three doses) and continued for 34 days with fully complete recovery of the infection and discharged of the patient after ENT, ophthalmologic, neurologic and hematologic controls were referred as negative. Semi-annual imaging with contrasted MRI, as well as ENT, ophthalmologic and neurologist outpatient clinic controls were performed. No recurrences have been detected during the follow-up period (16 months).