An Asian boy from eastern Nepal, who is now 12-years old, was delivered in a local hospital in Jhapa (Eastern region in Nepal, Asia) and was discharged after 1 week of hospitalization for neonatal jaundice which appeared on the second day of life. His mother queried the baby’s apparently smaller phallus, the opening of urethra on undersurface of glans penis, and empty scrotum. The health care providers in the hospital reassured her that it was a normal variant and the testis will descend with time. However, his phallus did not increase in size as expected and his scrotum was still empty. This forced the parents to consult again when he was at the age of 24 months. They were again reassured. They did not know where to go for further advice and hoped that development would be normal with time. Then he did not have developmental milestones like other children. He began to walk at age of 2 years and spoke only words of one or two syllables. In addition, he had progressive hearing impairment on both sides from the age of 4 years. However, he has normal vision, gait, and intellect with good school performance. His mother noted that he had an increased black complexion all over since the age of 3. By the age of 5 years he was found to be taller than most of his peers and around the same time he developed deepening of voice and axillary and facial hair appeared. There is no history of blood transfusion or any prolonged medication. There is no history of maternal ingestion of androgens during pregnancy. He has one elder brother who is normal and healthy. There was no maternal history of hirsutism, genital abnormality, or menstrual irregularity. The family history is negative for infertility, ambiguous genitalia, or unexplained neonatal death.
He is now 12-years old and is attending school. He prefers to wear a t-shirt and jeans; he feels more comfortable playing with boys, watching wrestling, and playing football.
At the age of 8 years he developed abdominal pain. He was referred to a tertiary center for evaluation of his abdominal pain. On presentation, his weight was 39 kg, height was 136 cm with upper segment to lower segment ratio of 75:61 cm. His body mass index (BMI) was 21.08 (which falls between 3rd and 97th percentile). Pallor was present. His blood pressure (BP) was 150/100 mmHg with grade two hypertensive retinopathies. There was a masculine look with mustache; no hypertelorism was present.
On genital examination, the child had ambiguous genitalia with 3-cm long protrusion and presence of hypospadias with Prader score IV. No testis was palpable in his scrotum, inguinal canal, thigh, or perineum and his anus was normal in position. Tanner stage IV male pattern pubic hair was seen .
There was no gynecomastia .
Laboratory investigations revealed normal serum urea and creatinine and normal serum electrolytes. He had low serum cortisol of 1.1 μg/dL at 8 a.m. (reference 4.46 to 22.7 μg/dL) but increased 17-hydroxyprogesterone of 4.13 ng/ml (reference 0.07 to 1.70) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level of 691.0 pg/ml (reference ≤46.0 pg/ml). A test for 11-deoxycorticosterone was not done due to financial constraints.
There was mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy on echocardiography suggesting hypertensive heart disease. There was presence of hemolytic anemia with iron deficiency, hemoglobin E (HbE) variant of thalassemia. There was also severe (76 db) sensorineural hearing loss of the right ear and profound (83 db) sensorineural hearing loss of the left ear.
An X-ray of his left hand revealed premature closure of epiphysis .
Ultrasonography of his abdomen/pelvis revealed a uterus and there was significant doubt about whether an inguinal mass was a testis or lymph node. Solitary cholelithiasis was also noted.
Magnetic resonance imaging of his abdomen/pelvis revealed presence of Müllerian structures and no testis was seen . Karyotyping revealed 46,XX chromosome.
Thus, he was diagnosed as having CAH with 11β-hydroxylase deficiency, ambiguous genitalia, hypertension with hypertensive heart disease, sensorineural hearing loss, and hemoglobinopathy (β thalassemia HbE variant).
There was a treatment dilemma as anti-androgenic medicine might reveal female characteristics. The patient's parents were counselled about the disadvantages of sex change to genotypic sex, fertility issues, sexual functioning, and expensive surgeries. Possible features of gender dysphoria and phenotyping changes on not initiating treatment were also explained. Our patient’s legal guardian was unwilling for our patient to change gender and the patient himself is underage. As our patient is a minor, the condition was well explained to his parents. Our patient was put on cortisone tablet 5 mg at bedtime and spironolactone tablet 25 mg along with amlodipine 5 mg. He responded well to the treatment and his BP came down to 100/60 mmHg; he has been in follow-up for the past 2 years and presently is not having any side effects.
He is now 12-years old. On examination thelarche was seen . His serum luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) have increased. His serum cortisol is still in lower range. So, he was prescribed with leuprolide, which is a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogue, to decrease LH and FSH, letrozole (aromatase inhibitor) to decrease his estrogen level, and the dose of spironolactone was adjusted. His serum iron and ferritin were within normal range.