A 45-year-old black Ethiopian man presented to our COVID-19 isolation center with intermittent dry cough and dyspnea for 05 days associated with new onset mild holocranial headache, low grade fever, myalgia and arthralgia. One day after his admission to the center, he started to develop blurring of vision associated with worsening of the headache. He also had one episode of projectile vomiting of ingested matter. He had no known chronic medical illnesses and no history of drug intake including vitamin A derivatives and tetracycline before the onset of the aforementioned symptoms.
Physical examination revealed blood pressure of 127/91 mmHg, pulse rate of 98 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 86% without oxygen and 92% with 2 L/min intranasal oxygen and body mass index (BMI) of 22.8 kg/m2. He had bilateral coarse crepitation over his lower lung fields. He was conscious with Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15/15 and all the cranial nerves were intact with normal visual acuity (20/20) and visual fields. Meningeal signs were negative and there were no sensory or motor deficits.
Upon investigations, he tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 with nasopharyngeal swab polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and he had mild leukocytosis with left shift and lymphopenia. Lumbar puncture was performed after doing brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure appeared high, though it was not measured. The other laboratory results were non-remarkable .
Brain MRI revealed prominent subarachnoid space around the optic nerves and bilateral papilledema, but didn’t show any mass lesion, hemorrhage, or cerebrovascular lesion and brain magnetic resonance venography (MRV) was normal . Chest x-ray revealed bilateral ground glass opacities mainly in the middle and lower lung zones with right side blunted costophrenic angle which was suggestive of COVID-19 pneumonia .
The patient initially received supportive therapies for severe COVID-19 infection including IV antibiotics, dexamethasone 6 mg IV daily, intranasal oxygen, and prophylactic dose of unfractionated heparin. Acetazolamide 250 mg three times daily was added after establishing the diagnosis of idiopathic intracranial hypertension. He was then followed clinically if he could have an indication for ventriculoperitoneal shunt but his headache and blurring of vision improved and he did not require any surgical intervention. He was finally discharged after 10 days of inpatient supportive medical treatment with significant improvement except occasional cough and mild headache. He did not have any complaint upon reevaluation on the second week of discharge and the acetazolamide was discontinued. He was then doing well throughout his follow up over 6 months in the outpatient department.