A 44-year-old Chinese female with left invasive ductal breast cancer underwent a modified radical mastectomy in April 2005. The pathological stage of her cancer was T2N0M0 with intermediate grade and lymphovascular invasion. The primary tumor was ER, PR, and HER2 positive and phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) negative as determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC). The expression of ER and PR was scored according to the Allred score. HER2 status was scored as positive if >30% of tumor cells showed strong (3+) membrane staining, and PTEN status was designated as positive if tumor cells showed positive staining by IHC. The patient was treated with CAF (cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, and fluorouracil) adjuvant chemotherapy for six cycles and tamoxifen for 2 years without radiotherapy or trastuzumab. Metastases to the supraclavicular and cervical lymph nodes and left chest wall relapse were found in December 2007. Thus, the disease-free survival was 32 months.
From December 2007 to August 2012, the patient underwent multiple-line rescue treatments including several cytotoxic agents, HER2-targeted therapies, and endocrine therapies used for breast cancer . Pretreatment biopsy and pathology results were not available. The rescue treatment was started with chemotherapy, but this was switched to endocrine drugs due to the adverse effects of chemotherapy. The patient obtained clinical benefit from endocrine therapy. The recurrent tumor in the left supraclavicular lymph nodes was HR negative by IHC and HER2 positive by fluorescence in situ hybridization detection in two hospitals in May 2009. Then, chemotherapy and HER2-directed therapy as main choices were applied, and endocrine therapy was also used due to the intolerance or lack of response to chemotherapy. Among these regimens, two regimens provided clinical benefit, namely, anastrozole combined with goserelin for 11 months and exemestane plus lapatinib for 7 months during the earlier treatment. In contrast, a total of seven regimens containing trastuzumab and two regimens containing lapatinib all failed .
After discussion of various therapeutic options including palliative care, in 2012, we decided to treat the patient with everolimus (5 mg/d orally) in combination with intramuscular fulvestrant (500 mg once/28 days). The response and side effects of the regimen are shown in . After 6 days, we increased the dose of everolimus to 10 mg/d for 34 days., Measurable lung lesions diminished modestly as observed by computed tomography (CT) examination . The changes in target lesions based on the maximum reduction of the sum of lesion diameters are shown in . Side effects included third-degree stomatitis and liver toxicity and second-degree hematologic toxicity. After discontinuation of everolimus for 10 days, the side effects were relieved and eventually disappeared. When the patient took 5 mg everolimus daily, the lung lesions increased slightly. We therefore increased the dose to 5 and 10 mg/d alternately, with an estimated daily dose of 7.5 mg, and the lesions diminished again. Subsequently, everolimus was reduced to 5 mg daily or treatment was discontinued due to fatigue and other adverse events. Treatment was resumed again at 5 and 10 mg/d alternatively and after approximately six months of treatment, the patient could tolerate the full dose (10 mg/d) of everolimus.
At the first appearance of tumor progression detected by CT on June 7, 2013, the patient’s pleural effusion was extracted for pathologic examination and molecular profile testing (performed by Caris Life Sciences, Irving, TX, USA). The results confirmed that the tumor was a HR-negative, HER2-positive adenocarcinoma that contained a PIK3CA gene mutation and was positive for PTEN expression . The patient continued everolimus treatment until disease progression was confirmed on June 24, 2013. The response was stable disease as evaluated by Response evaluation criteria in solid tumors, and progression-free survival (PFS) was 10 months. Thereafter, the patient was treated with trastuzumab, emtansine, and sorafenib, individually, with no measurable responses. The patient died on October 27, 2013, with overall survival time of 102 months. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. This case report was approved by the Ethics Committee of Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical Sciences.