An 8-year-old female presented to the pediatric haematology-oncology department at the Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital for scheduled chemotherapy treatment. The child was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (Pre-B-ALL, BCR/ABL p190 positive) 2 months ago and the risk stratification was set as high risk.
The patient commenced the first round of CAM (cyclophosphamide + cytarabine + 6-mercaptopurine) regimen of induction chemotherapy along with oral dasatinib treatment. The child experienced neutropenia and developed a fever (38.5 °C) with occasional cough and pharyngeal discomfort. Chemotherapy was stopped and meropenem was used. Fever repeated with elevated fever peaks. C-reactive protein (CRP) increased to 23.3 mg/dL, while blood and sputum cultures were negative. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple small patchy hyperdense shadows in both lungs with poorly defined borders, mainly in the lower lobes of both lungs . According to the examination results and the agranulocytosis state, teicoplanin combined with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole(TMP-SMX) and caspofungin were prescribed. Methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg qd) was also utilised. The patient's temperature did not decrease, and dyspnea gradually developed. The NGS test result indicated a Pneumocystis jirovecii infection, and ticoranine was discontinued.
The child's dyspnea significantly worsened, and the PaO2 was 59 mmHg (with an oxygen supplementation via mask at 8L/min). She was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) and intubated. Chest X-ray showed large dense shadows in the middle and lower lungs . The Procalcitonin(PCT) was mildly elevated(0.65 ng/ml). The 1,3-beta-D-glucan test (G test) result was positive (634 pg/mL) while the galactomannan test (GM test) result (0.33 μg/L) was negative. EBV, CMV nucleic acid test, as well as blood and sputum cultures were negative. Considering the severity of pneumonia and neutrophil deficiency after chemotherapy, linezolid was commenced for anti-infection treatment, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) (5 ug/kg.d) was administered to promote proliferation and differentiation of the bone marrow granulocyte lineage. Subsequently, the neutrophil count and C-reactive protein (CRP) began to rise rapidly .The sputum mNGS test result also showed a Pneumocystis jirovecii infection 2 days later, and the anti-infective regimen remained unchanged.
The patient's temperature decreased, but a gradually increasing ventilator parameter was required to maintain the oxygen saturation. The oxygenation index (OI) was between 14-and 16, implying the existence of moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome, according to the Pediatric Acute Lung Injury Consensus (PALICC). Inflammatory factor levels were significantly increased: sIL-2R (soluble IL-2 receptor, soluble IL-2 receptor) 5049 U/mL, IL-6 1141 pg/mL, IL-10 70.9 pg/mL, and IL-8 1242 pg/mL . The chest X-ray showed multiple speckled, corn-like dense shadows in both lungs with indistinct borders and lattice-like changes , T-SPOT and serological tests of common respiratory pathogens (Mycoplasma pneumonia, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus, influenza virus A, influenza virus B, Legionella type 1–7, coxsackievirus A, coxsackievirus B, echovirus IgM) were negative. Meropenem and linezolid were replaced with amikacin and tigecycline. The peak and the frequency of fever decreased, but the ventilator parameters were still high, with OI values between 10 and 13.
On the 16th day, the CT scan showed that the patchy hyper-dense shadows were alleviated, but interstitial thickening with grid-like changes and ground-glass opacities appeared in both lungs, suggestive of bilateral interstitial pneumonia . The fibrosis markers significantly increased: collagen type IV (CIV) 140.12 ng/mL, pre-collagen peptide III (PCIII) 151.18 ng/mL, and hyaluronic acid (HA) 1056.81 ng/mL. High-dose methylprednisolone (10 mg/kg.d × 5 d) pulse therapy was given, along with the anti-fibrotic treatment of pirfenidone and acetylcysteine. But the lung function did not improve, and the X-ray showed corn-like high-density shadows in both lungs with unclear borders and grid-like changes . The child's parents opted for withdrawal of medical care, and the girl died after being discharged from the hospital.