A 13-year-old boy was admitted to Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) in a critical situation. After waking up in the morning, he complained of left-sided abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Over the hours, the pain was intermittent and increasing in intensity.
At admission, the patient looked pale, in a forced sitting position. On physical examination, his abdomen was tender in all quadrants with left upper quadrant pain rated as 10 out of 10 in intensity. The pain was described as very strong and increased if he laid down, thus requiring intravenous opioids. Upon examination, heart rate was 92 bpm along with low blood pressure 82/42 mmHg. Diminished breath sounds at the lung bases were noted, most likely due to limited excursions of the chest due to pain. There was no fever (temperature 36.5 C). There was no rash, nor lymphadenopathy. No hematomas or bruises were observed. After intravenous opioids and liquid administration, blood pressure was normalized.
The patient and his father denied any history of trauma. They insisted the child had been totally healthy up until that morning. The child had no family history of coagulopathies, autoimmune diseases, or malignancies. According to his family, there were no bowel abnormalities; use of thrombolytic or anticoagulant drugs.
Several laboratory and imaging examinations were performed immediately. Given the relatively large number of COVID-19 patients during this period, our main differential diagnoses were either a splenic rupture or a splenic artery thrombosis, due to COVID-19. Therefore, a nasopharyngeal swab specimen was collected for COVID-19 testing.
The upright abdominal radiograph showed no abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound revealed free fluid in the abdomen, but without any clear suspicion, so an emergent Computed tomography (CT) with contrast of the chest and abdomen was carried out. The thoracic CT scan was normal. Abdominal CT revealed hemoperitoneum with splenic laceration.
Since the hemoglobin, hematocrit, and patient’s blood pressure were normal, with no active bleeding on CT, the splenic injury was initially managed conservatively. Twelve hours after presentation, a decrease in hemoglobin (Hb = 8.1 g/dL) and hematocrit (HCT = 25.6%) was noted and the patient’s blood pressure started dropping. He received 1 Unit of blood and the decision to proceed to surgery was made. During the operation, it was observed that the patient had plenty of blood in the abdominal cavity. Laceration of the splenic hilum and a large perisplenic hematoma was noted and splenectomy was performed. Two additional Units of blood were transfused intraoperatively.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test, IgM and IgG antibodies for Epstein Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) were negative. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was positive for COVID-19, making us think that the splenic rupture could be a consequence of COVID-19. The child’s clinical condition was stable after surgery. He was discharged, without further problems during the follow-up.