This is the case of a 22-year-old uniparous lactating woman who regained regular menses after 8 months of lactational amenorrhea. After a period of six months of regular menstruation she presented with a history of sudden onset of amenorrhea and abnormal hair growth on the face of four months duration. Physical examination revealed a male pattern of coarser hair distribution in the beard region, anterior chest wall and arms. Abdominal examination showed no abnormality and vaginal examination disclosed clitoromegaly. Ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a solid right adenxal mass measuring 51 × 54 × 58 mm with moderate to significant vascularity. There was no ascites, retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, adrenal gland enlargement, or liver metastasis. Tumor markers and hormonal levels were evaluated [Table ] and showed raised serum testosterone levels.
The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy. Intra-operatively the right ovary showed a 5 × 5 cm firm, tan-brown, well-encapsulated mass without any adhesions to surrounding structures and with engorged ovarian vessels. In view of the diagnosis of stage 1A disease, unilateral right salpingo-oopherectomy alone was performed since the frequency of lesions occurring bilaterally in this stage has been reported to be only 6%.
The cut-section of the specimen showed a tan-brown well-circumscribed tumor with areas of hemorrhage [Figure ]. Microscopic examination [Figure ] showed diffuse sheets of large polygonal tumor cells with vacuolated cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei along with nuclear pleomorphism. Crystals of Reinke, which are usually seen in hilus tumors, were not seen.
Immunohistochemistry staining was positive for gonadotrophin receptors and vimentin, and negative for alpha-fetoprotein and epithelial membrane antigen, providing evidence in favour of a steroid cell tumor.
At post operative follow-up, two months of surgery, the patient had regained normal menses. Her serum testosterone level had gone down to 0.262-ngm/ml, and there was regression of the abnormal hair pattern. The patient is being followed up regularly with measurement of hormone levels as marker of recurrence.