Our case was a 14-year-old right-handed boy who complained of pain in his right middle finger. The finger was injured by a baseball impact, and the treating hospital performed splint fixation after diagnosing a fracture of the right middle finger. The patient failed to follow up his treatment on his own volition. However, pain in the right middle finger continued and the range of motion became restricted. He consulted our institution 5 months after injury.
At first consultation, there was swelling in the PIP joint of the right middle finger and displacement of that finger to the ulnar side at extension position . The range of motion of the PIP joint was limited between extension 0° and flexion 60°.
X-ray images of posterior and anterior views showed bony defect in the articular surface of the PIP joint in the middle phalanx and displacement of the finger to the ulnar side. X-ray image of the lateral view showed depressed articular surface of the PIP joint . CT images showed a bony defect sized 5 × 6.5 × 2 mm in the articular surface of the PIP joint in the middle phalanx . From these imaging findings, we diagnosed the case as malunited intra-articular fracture of the PIP joint and decided to conduct surgical treatment. First, an incision was made by palmar approach and the PIP joint was exposed. A cartilage defect approximately 5 mm in diameter was seen in the articular surface of the middle phalanx, and a cartilage defect of 1 × 2 mm in size was seen in the palmar side of the articular surface of the proximal phalanx . After creating the drilled recipient hole at the osteochondral lesion of the middle phalanx, a cylindrical osteochondral plug of 4.5 mm diameter harvested from the left knee was inserted and press-fitted to the hole. The osteochondral plug was harvested using the mosaicplasty autogenous osteochondral grafting system (Acufex, Smith and Nephew, Andover, MA, USA) from a non-weight-bearing site on the upper lateral femoral condyle. The osteochondral plug was obtained with an obliquely angled cartilage surface along the long axis to facilitate insertion in the recipient hole . The cartilage defect in the proximal phalanx was left untreated as the range of damage was minimal.
Postoperative splint fixation was done only on the day of surgery, and mobilization exercise was started from the next day by changing the splint fixation to buddy taping. The buddy taping was continued up to 3 months after surgery. After removing the buddy taping, the patient gradually resumed sports activity.
As of 1 year after surgery, the patient has no pain, and the ROM of the PIP joint has improved showing extension and flexion to 0° and 90°, respectively. Although slight displacement to the ulnar side remains in the PIP joint, instability is not noted, . There are no adverse effects in the donor site of the left knee. The patient resumed his previous level of baseball activity. Final follow-up X-ray and CT images showed bone union with no dislocation of the implanted osteochondral plug. Although slight displacement of the finger to ulnar side remained, the ulnar displacement of the axis improved from preoperative 14° to postoperative 8°. Also, MR images showed a well-maintained joint space by the transplanted cartilage .