The patient was a 23-year-old woman who was 167.5 cm tall, weighed 62.9 kg, and had a body mass index of 22.4 kg/m2. The patient had no relevant medical history and had not been vaccinated against COVID-19. In early September 2021, she developed a fever with general malaise and tested positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection on polymerase chain reaction (PCR). At the time, the SARS-CoV-2 Delta (B.1.617.2) variant was prevalent in Japan.
As the patient had signs of pneumonia, an intravenous infusion of 200 mg of remdesivir was administered on day 8 of COVID-19, followed by 100 mg of intravenous remdesivir once daily for the next 3 days. On day 9, the patient suddenly developed pain in the right hip, accompanied by general pain. On examination, she had tenderness in Scarpa’s triangle without redness, heat, or swelling around the hip. The range of hip motion was limited by pain on flexion (right 80°/left 120°).
Blood tests on day 15 after COVID-19 onset showed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (14.63 mg/dL; reference: 0.00–0.23 mg/dL), and an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (18.0 × 103 cells/μL; reference: 3.90 × 103–9.80×103 cells/μL) but were negative for rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, human leukocyte antigen-B27, hepatitis, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Urine culture was negative; however, blood culture revealed β-lactamase-producing Staphylococcus aureus infection. An expanded low-density area was observed in the capsule of the right hip joint in the contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) on day 21 after the disease onset, and arthrocentesis was performed on the same day. The joint fluid was cloudy and yellowish-white in color . Culture of the joint fluid was negative. However, the possibility of pyogenic arthritis was considered because β lactamase-producing S. aureus had been detected on the blood culture. Therefore, cefazolin was administered intravenously on day 23 after COVID-19 onset.
However, the patient’s right hip pain persisted without a change in the size of the low-density area of the right hip on CT. On day 36 after COVID-19 onset, after two negative SARS-CoV-2 PCR test results, contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed restricted diffusion in the fluid reservoir of the right hip, suggesting abscess formation ( and ). Therefore, surgical treatment with curettage and irrigation was performed on day 53, 2 weeks after the negative PCR test, according to the hospital regulations .
Intraoperative joint fluid culture and PCR test results for SARS-CoV-2 were negative. However, the cell count of the joint fluid was 20,800 cells/μL (neutrophil: 88%, lymphocyte: 2%, and monocyte: 10%) and the specific gravity was 1.040. Moreover, the protein and sugar levels were 8.0 g/dL and 52 mg/dL, respectively. The Synovasure a-Defensin Detection Kit (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IA, USA) showed positive results, and histopathology of synovial tissue revealed numerous neutrophils with segmental lobe nuclei ( and ).
After surgery, the patient was treated with intravenous cefazolin, and the affected hip joint was continuously irrigated with 100 mg of amikacin sulfate dissolved in 1 L of saline daily for 11 days. Cultures of the drainage fluid during continuous irrigation were repeatedly negative. Oral antibiotics (1600 mg sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim 1600/320 mg/day and rifampicin 450 mg/day) were initiated the day after intravenous antibiotic administration and continuous irrigation was completed.
The patient’s right hip pain improved, and she was discharged from the hospital on day 68 after COVID-19 onset. Rifampicin was discontinued 3 months postoperatively, whereas sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim was discontinued 4 months postoperatively. Loxoprofen was administered from day 9 after COVID-19 onset until 1 month postoperatively, but no steroids were administered. Six months after surgery, the patient had no symptoms and a Harris hip score of 96. Radiography revealed no abnormalities , and MRI showed a marked reduction in the joint effusion of the right hip. Furthermore, no diffusion restriction was observed that would suggest an abscess ( and ). Blood tests revealed a normal CRP level and WBC count.