Parents of a 4 year old female child presented her with deformity of the nose and difficulty in breathing from right side of the nose for 1 year. She developed the deformity as a small swelling at the tip of the nose of about 0.5 cm which increased progressively to the size of about 1 cm in 1 year. There was no history of trauma, fever, sudden increase in size or pain associated with the swelling. There was no association of similar swelling in any family member. Child was immunised and had achieved milestones appropriate for her age. Parents of the child wanted removal of the swelling as it was a cause of social embarrassment for the child and she had difficulty in breathing from right nostril. The child had an identical twin who was operated for intususseption at 6 months of age.
On examination, there was evidence of a diffuse 1.2x1x1.5 cm swelling at the tip of nose in maximum horizontal, vertical and anteroposterior dimensions. The skin over the swelling was found to be normal and free from the swelling. It was soft in consistency. Swelling extended to the nasal columella. Right ala was found to be slightly flared. It was non tender. The septum appeared normal. There was midline cleft of the upper lip . X ray chest showed levocardia. 2D echo was normal. Contrast enhanced Computed Tomography of para nasal sinuses and head showed a non enhancing fat density lesion of approximate size of 0.8x1.2x2.3 cm in the tip of nose and inferior nasal septum causing compromise of right nasal cavity . There was an incidental finding of lipoma in the genu of corpus callosum with bracket calcification. Patient was posted for exploration of the swelling after anesthetic fitness and written consent from the parents.
Nose was opened with stair step incision in the collumella for open rhinoplasty. This incision was chosen over sublabial or septal incision in view of better operative view in the case of former incision. Fatty tissue was found over the left lower lateral cartilage. Right lower lateral cartilage was found to be deficient. Lipoma extended till the middle of collumella on the right of middle crus and right part of the caudal septum. It was excised in toto and specimen was sent for histopathological examination.
Postoperative period was uneventful and patient was discharged on the third postoperative day. Histopathology was suggestive of lipoma . Early followup did not show any recurrence. There was a residual collumellar deformity which required secondary revision . Patient’s patient did not wanted any surgery at that time. Karyotype analysis was normal . She was advised further followup at regular intervals. Patient was satisfied with the surgical outcome.