A 35-year-old woman (gravida 2, para 1) was referred to our hospital due to placenta previa at gestational week 31. Her medical history was unremarkable, and her previous pregnancy was an uncomplicated, normal vaginal delivery at gestational week 38. Her current pregnancy was uncomplicated except for the placenta previa. She denied abnormal genital bleeding before the current pregnancy. Cervical cytology performed during early pregnancy was negative for intraepithelial lesions. Vaginal ultrasonography revealed total placenta previa and one lacuna . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at gestational week 31 revealed total placenta previa and loss of the myometrium between the placenta and bladder wall . Other MRI findings of PAS such as uterine bulging, heterogenous placenta, and T2 dark band were not observed. Based on these findings, we suspected PAS, and an emergency cesarean delivery was performed owing to antepartum bleeding (approximately 100 mL) at gestational week 35. An abdominal midline incision was made, and a healthy male infant weighing 2274 g (− 0.42 SD) was delivered with Apgar scores of 8 and 9, at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The placenta was not delivered within 30 min after fetal delivery, thus requiring hysterectomy for PAS. Estimated blood loss was 1000 mL. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient and baby were discharged on the 8th postoperative day.
Part of the chorion and placenta were adhered to the uterus . The resected uterus was divided to 7 specimens in order to perform macroscopic and histopathological analyses. The surgical specimen showed a white polyp measuring 2 cm, which parted from the uterine fundus and the lower uterine segment . Histopathological examination of the tumor involving the lower uterine segment revealed endometrioid adenocarcinoma (Grade 1), with < 50% myometrial invasion and positive expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors, in addition to PAS . Notably, the tumor involving the uterine fundus did not show myometrial invasion. Histopathological findings were similar in both tumors located in the uterine lower segment and uterine fundus. A retrospective review of the MRI images obtained during pregnancy revealed the tumor involving the uterine fundus, although involvement of the lower uterine segment was difficult to detect . We performed a laparoscopic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy 102 days after cesarean hysterectomy and confirmed the absence of metastases. The tumor was a stage IA lesion based on the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics system. Follow-up performed 4 years after cesarean hysterectomy revealed no recurrence.