A 62-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a two-month history of intermittent fever. Her past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidema, coronary artery disease and mild chronic kidney disease. She was found to have Enterococcus faecalis endocarditis of her native, bicuspid, aortic valve. She was treated with vancomycin, gentamicin and penicillin and subsequently underwent aortic valve replacement (AVR) with a Saint Jude valve in October of 2004. Her postoperative course was complicated by evacuation of a mediastinal hematoma, splenectomy and a partial colectomy with diverting colostomy for hemorrhagic colitis. The patient had been discharged and re-admitted multiple times and was ultimately transferred to the Oklahoma University Medical Center in May 2005.
Upon transfer, the patient complained of dyspnea, orthopnea and lower-extremity swelling. She was afebrile and hemodynamically stable. Her physical examination revealed jugular venous distention, a III/VI systolic murmur in the right second intercostal space, and bilateral lower-extremity edema to the knees. No peripheral stigmata of endocarditis were identified.
Nine blood cultures obtained over a five-day period were positive for Candida lusitaniae. Susceptibility testing was performed on the initial isolate only and revealed sensitivity to amphotericin B, caspofungin and fluconazole . Transesophageal echocardiography revealed multiple vegetations on a partially dehiscent mechanical aortic valve with severe aortic valvular regurgitation and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50% . Therapy with caspofungin was initiated prior to obtaining results of susceptibility testing on the initial isolate and was continued based on the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC). The patient eventually underwent repeat AVR with coronary artery bypass grafting. Vegetations were noted on her removed prosthetic valve . Her post-operative course was complicated by a chest hematoma which was evacuated. Despite eventual clearance of her fungemia, the patient died from multi-organ failure in June 2005.