A 77-year-old woman was admitted to a neighboring hospital presenting with severe anemia and increasing exertional dyspnea. Her hemoglobin level was found to be 6.1 g/dL. Thereafter, she had been receiving medical treatment for congestive heart failure due to severe AS and was receiving repeated blood transfusion for recurrent anemia. GI bleeding was considered as a possible cause of the severe anemia and she was referred to the Gastroenterology Department in our hospital. Upper and lower GI endoscopies revealed angiodysplasia in the transverse colon with visible acute bleeding. Endoscopic hemostasis was successfully performed using hemoclips.
During hospitalization echocardiography showed severe AS, with a peak aortic pressure gradient of 100 mmHg, and left ventricular ejection fraction of 70%. Although laboratory examinations confirmed mild anemia (hemoglobin level, 10.5 g/dL) after endoscopic hemostasis, a more subtle bleeding disorder could not be detected using global anticoagulation tests. The activity of vWF was normal (155%), but further analysis using gel electrophoresis revealed loss of large vWF multimers, which was a typical finding of acquired type 2A von Willebrand disease . The diagnosis of Heyde syndrome was established and aortic valve replacement was planned on an elective basis. A brain computed tomography (CT) performed as a routine preoperative examination 1 week preoperatively showed no abnormal findings except for mild global cortical atrophy. She also had no previous head injuries.
Under general anesthesia, the patient underwent surgery through a median sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with ascending aorta and bicaval cannulation. Anticoagulation during cardiopulmonary bypass was maintained with the use of heparin to a target activated clotting time (ACT) of 300 to 400 s. After aortic cross clamping, cardiac arrest was achieved with a cardioplegic solution. The aortic valve was tricuspid and severely calcified. The valve and the calcified nodule were excised, and a 21-mm SOLO SMART stent-less bovine pericardial valve (Sorin Group, Saluggia, Italy) was implanted. Weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass was uneventful and no abnormal high ACT was recognized. Continuous real-time monitoring of regional oxygen saturation in the brain revealed no abnormalities throughout the operation.
Postoperative hemodynamics were stable, but bilateral dilated pupils and loss of light reflex were noticed by an intensivist soon after intensive care unit admission. Her level of consciousness deteriorated to a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 3 and a Japan Coma Scale of III-300. An emergent brain CT revealed a large right subdural hematoma with severe midline shift . In spite of her poor clinical condition, the decision of immediate surgical drainage was made by the neurosurgeons. Despite prompt surgical evacuation of the hematoma, her neurological condition did not improve. The volume drained from the chest tube was not significant. Recurrent GI bleeding was not observed during the postoperative period. She did not regain consciousness at all and she died 31 days after the cardiac operation.