A 41-year-old Inuit female complaining of blurred vision in the left eye was referred to our eye department. The patient’s past medical history included diabetes mellitus type 2, arterial hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. The patient had no past ocular history and there was no sign of diabetic retinopathy during diabetic eye screening six months prior, although a possible area of neovascularization was found in the right eye that could not be attributed to diabetes. In retrospect, this area of possible neovascularization may have been an early sign of Eales’ disease: the patient had received antibiotic treatment for TB in 2010 following a positive QuantiFERON® test. Telemedical assessment including ultra wide-field fundus imaging could neither confirm nor deny a specific diagnosis, but images were suspicious for vitritis or vitreous hemorrhage in the right eye. Eales’ disease could not be ruled out, and the patient was flown from Greenland to Denmark for further evaluation, including investigation of the cause of her suspected vitreoretinopathy. Arrangements were made for the patient to stay at the Greenland patient hotel in Copenhagen for the duration of her treatment.

Results
On examination, visual acuity was 6/12 in the right eye and 6/36 in the left eye (Snellen). Fundoscopy revealed mild vitritis in the right eye, a vitreous hemorrhage in the left eye with neovascularization of the disc in the left eye and retinal neovascularization elsewhere in both eyes. Fundus fluorescein angiography showed vessel leakage and areas of non-perfusion in the retinal mid-peripheries. There was left epiretinal membrane with retinal thickening on macular optical coherence tomography.

Eales’ disease is an occlusive vasculitis involving the retinal mid-periphery that commonly presents with vitreous hemorrhage. It is further characterized by periphlebitis, vascular occlusion and subsequent retinal neovascularization. Based on the patient findings and history of TB infection in this case, a diagnosis of Eales’ disease was made. The patient’s epiretinal membrane was thought to be visually significant, leading to treatment of the left eye with pars plana vitrectomy with epiretinal membrane peeling, endodiathermy and endolaser. The right eye was treated in outpatients with sectoral laser photocoagulation. At seven weeks’ follow-up, the visual acuity had improved to 6/6 (right eye) and 6/7.5 (left eye). The patient had met with the visual acuity requirement for driving-licence vision in either eye and both eyes were deemed to be sufficiently treated.