A 45-year-old obese male with Stanford A DeBakey type-II aortic dissection, atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia, and atrial regurgitation was complaining of chest discomfort accompanied by palpitations, nausea, and cold sweats. Patient had a history of controlled hypertension with nebivolol 2 × 5 mg, as well as pericardial effusion and right bundle branch block 8–10 years prior. Previously, the patient was treated with anticoagulants and anti-arrhythmic medications. The patient was an ex-smoker for 16 years before quitting 6 years ago without any history of cardiac disease in the family. His vital signs on arrival were stable with normal jugular venous pressure, widened pulse pressure 99/59 mmHg similar in both arms, and soft diastolic aortic heart murmur. Laboratory findings were elevated for white blood cells, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, D-dimer, and cardiac marker. Plain chest X-ray showed aorta elongation with cardiomegaly and basal infiltrate on the right lung and middle segment of the left lung. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) evaluation revealed aortic root and ascending aorta aneurysm with mild atrial regurgitation secondary to dilated aortic root. Based on the assessments, the patient gave consent for Bentall procedure to replace the dissected aorta.
Ascending and hemiarch replacement Bentall procedure was conducted successfully despite severe adhesion between epicardium and pericardium layer along with resolved complication of sinus bradycardia. The tear started at the level of aortic valve commissure extending to the ascending aorta and middle arch without sign of rupture. Circulatory arrest time was 30 min. Post-intervention, patient was prescribed antibiotics and antifibrinolytic drugs. Anticoagulant medication warfarin for prosthetic valve maintenance was postponed due to concerns of high bleeding risk from aortic dissection and Bentall procedure.
7 days post-operation, the patient unintentionally strained himself while defecating causing sudden shortness of breath, right chest pain, Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) 5–7, and cold sweats with persistent hypotension (81/51 mmHg) and tachypnea (24 breaths/min), despite fluid support and vasoconstrictors. His electrocardiogram reading was normal. Laboratory tests showed insignificant erythrocyte reduction within predicted value (from 13.1 to 11.1 g/dL in 2 days), raised troponin-T marker (341 pg/mL), hypercoagulable state, and acute kidney injury (estimated glomerular filtration rate 65.9 mL/min/1.73 m2). Transthoracic echocardiography examination showed middle right ventricle free wall hypokinesis with apical sparing. Additionally, chest X-ray evaluation revealed right lung oligaemia and abrupt tapering of the pulmonary artery . All these findings were suggestive of PE for which the patient was prescribed anticoagulant heparin.
However, pulmonary computed tomography (CT) angiography showed an enlarged heart with fluid collection in the right anterolateral-superior pericardial space of density 50–60 Hounsfield unit (HU) pushing the heart laterally while compressing posterior part of superior vena cava, as well as bilateral pulmonary vein and left atrium stenosis due to extraluminal cause indicating cardiac tamponade. Location of the compression at the level of vena cava and pulmonary vein supposedly gave rise to the findings that mimic that of PE. Anticoagulant therapy was immediately ceased, and the patient was scheduled for a surgical pericardiotomy.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) evaluations were taken for comparison . Right upper pulmonary vein and pulmonary artery were narrowed due to an external compression compared with after release ( and ). The velocity–time integral (VTI) was also shown to be improved after the clot evacuation.
During the operation, active bleeding was found at the distal anastomosis of the ascending aorta with 600 mL of blood clots pressing against the right ventricle, right atrium, superior vena cava, and main pulmonary artery . After the procedure, his haemodynamics returned to normal and was eventually discharged the following week after close monitoring. At 2 month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic with improving exercise tolerance. Echocardiography revealed no sign of periaortic leakage from the repaired aorta.