A 78-year-old man developed acute low back pain, gait disturbance, and paresthesia in both legs; resting improved the paresthesia. Neurological examination revealed weakness with a Manual Muscle Testing (MMT) grade of 3 in the extensor hallucis longus and peroneus longus muscles of both legs. Bladder and bowel function were normal. He has had no past history and taken no medicine such as antiplatelet. His blood analysis showed C-reactive protein and complete blood count with differential were within normal limits, making an infectious process unlikely. Plain radiographs of the lumbar spine showed degenerative changes . MRI showed a mass located posteriorly and laterally to the left aspect of the dural sac at the L3 level, and contrast-enhanced MRI showed a lesion with a heterogeneous ring-like enhancement at the L3 level . We performed discography and disco-computed tomography (CT) to diagnose the dorsal epidural pathologies, expecting that the L3/4 discography would support a definitive diagnosis of lumbar disc herniation. Discography of the intervertebral disc at L3/4 level was performed using a standard posterolateral approach with a Hijikata discographic threehold needle (Tanaka Medical Instruments, Tokyo, Japan). For discography, the needle was inserted into the center of the disc under fluoroscopic control. Omnipaque 240 (3.0 mL; Daiichi Sankyo Company, Tokyo, Japan) was injected into the disc until contrast medium leaked out of the disc into the outside. After the injections were complete, the CT scan was performed to further analyze the L3/4 injected disc. However, the L3/4 discography and disco-CT clearly showed leakage of the contrast medium into the posterior dural space . Based on these findings, we diagnosed neurological deficit due to PEMLDF. We performed an L2/3/4 laminectomy and separated a 30-mm-wide mass, embedded in fibrous epidural tissue, from the posterolateral aspect of the dural sac . No adhesion was seen. The huge disc fragment had been extruded into the epidural space and wrapped around from the outside of the nerve root. After removing the mass piece by piece , we detected a rupture in the left side of the L3-4 disc at the posterior longitudinal ligament. The compression on dura and nerve roots was totally removed. Consistent with observations during the operation, histopathological analysis revealed liquefaction degeneration and granulation surrounding the sequestered disc fragment . The patient’s symptoms improved immediately after surgery. He recovered motor function to MMT 4–5 in both legs and was able to walk more smoothly. He identified the strength of the lower extremities improving and recovered fully after 3 months.