A 28-year-old man presented to the emergency room complaining of sudden-onset dyspnea, with no predisposing factors. The dyspnea lasted less than two hours and had almost resolved upon arrival at the emergency room, and there were no accompanying symptoms. He revealed no medical history other than two operations related to trauma, namely, a right anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction four years earlier, and nasal fracture reduction 13 years earlier. He denied any history of medication, and underlying diseases including connective tissue disease. The patient had never smoked, and drank a bottle of beer with 4.5% alcohol twice a week.
On admission, he did not complain of fever, cold sensation, diarrhea, or abdominal pain. His vital signs on presentation demonstrated a temperature of 36.2°C, a heart rate of 72 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 19 breaths per minute, a blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg, and an oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. He presented with a soft abdomen with normoactive bowel sounds, and no abdominal tenderness to palpation on physical examination. A plain chest and abdominal film showed subphrenic free air and an unremarkable bowel gas pattern . The laboratory tests presented the following results: serum total bilirubin, 1.67 mg/dL (normal, 0.3–1.2 mg/dL); alanine aminotransferase, 24 IU/L (normal, <50 U/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 25 IU/L (normal, <50 U/L); amylase, 47 U/L (normal, 28–100 U/L); and C-reactive protein, 0.48 mg/dL (normal, < 0.5 mg/dL). Given the free air finding on the chest X-ray, we were highly suspicious of bowel perforation. We therefore performed contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen.
A CT scan revealed a pneumoperitoneum in the right upper quadrant, pneumoretroperitoneum, and gas in the entire portal venous system, without bowel wall thickening, bowel dilatation, bowel perforation, intramural gas, or any abnormal findings in the mesenteric arteries . The diagnosis of HPVG accompanied by free air was made by CT scan; however, no underlying etiology was identified. The patient denied a recent history of trauma, endoscopic procedures, asphyxia, or heavy lifting activity, or any symptoms suggestive of an infectious disease.
Considering the stable vital signs and the lack of physical findings suggesting a surgical acute abdomen, the patient was conservatively managed with fluid resuscitation and antibiotics, including cefotaxime 2 g every 8 hours and metronidazole 500 mg every 8 hours, and was kept nil-per-os. On admission day 3, the follow-up simple erect abdominal X-ray revealed resolving free air , and no new symptoms appeared. Oral feeding was initiated, after confirming that there were no abnormalities on esophagogastroduodenoscopic examination . The patient was able to tolerate oral food intake without any complications, and was later discharged.
The follow-up CT scan, performed two weeks after discharge, showed that the diffuse air density in the portal venous system, the pneumoperitoneum, and the pneumoretroperitoneum had resolved, and the colonoscopy and the colonography protocol CT scan revealed no significant abnormalities . The patient has been on follow-up observation at an outpatient clinic for four years, and has experienced no recurrence of symptoms.