On October 8, 2020, a 52-year-old Chinese female was admitted to a local state hospital with cough and expectoration, and a chest CT scan revealed an oblique fissure effusion in the right lung , which was diagnosed as a pulmonary infection and treated empirically with levofloxacin at the local state hospital. After 1 week of treatment with this regimen, the patient developed shortness of breath, and the supervising physician adjusted the treatment regimen to levofloxacin combined with latamoxef sodium considering poor infection control. After another 1 week of anti-infective treatment, the patient felt that her symptoms were relieved and asked to be discharged from the hospital and stopped taking antibiotics on her own. After discharge, the patient’s shortness of breath gradually worsened, and she went to the local state hospital again on October 31, and a repeat CT scan showed a large thick-walled cavity in the right lung . Outpatient doctors suggested that the patient continue hospitalization. On November 1st, the patient suffered from sudden pain in the right chest and difficulty breathing during hospitalization, so she was transferred to our hospital in the emergency department. She used to have type 2 diabetes without a history of joint pain, heart valvular disease, lung surgery, and no family history of the tumor.
Once admitted, the patient underwent re-examination by CT that revealed right hydropneumothorax and extensive compression atelectasis , and then was diagnosed with pyothorax. Moreover, laboratory inspection including WWBC 6.5 × 109/L, PLT 298 × 109/L, IL-6955.2 pg/mL, PCT 0.99 ng/mL, CRP > 90 mg/L, ALB33.02 g/L, indicated infection and malnutrition, and empirical treatment of moxifloxacin were given in the emergency. On November 3, she was admitted to the intensive care unit. The ultrasonic examination showed that the localized anechoic area of 13.0 cm × 10.1 cm × 6.2 cm in the right thoracic cavity and she was given moxifloxacin plus thoracic puncture and drainage. The drainage was porridge-like, with a fishy smell, and the pus was sent for biochemical examination . Dyspnea was improved after drainage of 1300 ml pleural effusion for 2 days.
On November 6, she was transferred to the general ward and continued to be treated with broad-spectrum moxifloxacin. At the same time, fibrinolytic drugs were injected into the pleural cavity for 72 h. During the treatment, the symptoms of shortness of breath worsened again, and ultrasound re-examination showed that the localized anechoic area of 12.5c × 6.8 cm × 6.7 cm was in the right thoracic cavity. The drainage device was replaced by closed thoracic drainage and intermittent drainage of 1000 ml pleural effusion. The drainage fluid was sent to 2 groups of blood culture on different days (each group included an aerobic bottle and an anaerobic bottle). The equipment is a two-way blood culture bottle, consisting of peptone, beef paste, and other culture media, which is suitable for in vitro culture and detection of various aerobic or anaerobic bacteria in body fluids (blood, pleural fluid, etc.). The culture results showed that there were 3 strains of G.adiacens, 1 strain of Eikenella corrodens, and 1 strain of Staphylococcus aureus. G.adiacens were identified as the main pathogen due to its high detection rate, and the drug sensitivity test showed that it was sensitive to penicillin, erythromycin, vancomycin, cefotaxime, levofloxacin, and linezolid. According to the results of drug sensitivity, we continued to give moxifloxacin treatment (both moxifloxacin and levofloxacin belong to fluoroquinolone antibiotics, with similar antimicrobial spectra and stronger effect of moxifloxacin on cocci and anaerobic bacteria), and additively covered anaerobic bacteria with ornidazole. We also arranged echocardiography and electronic bronchoscopy for the patient. Echocardiography examination showed local calcification of the aortic valve without valvular insufficiency and vegetation, which ruled out endocardial infection. Bronchoscopy examination showed external compressive stenosis of the right middle bronchus . Besides, minced meat-like tissue of the lower lobe of the right lung was found in the bronchoscopy, and pathological examination revealed adenocarcinoma . On November 18, CT re-examination showed right pleural thickening, pleural effusion, multiple cord shadows in the middle and lower lobe bottom consolidation . After multidisciplinary consultation, it is suggested that surgical intervention should be carried out after the control of pulmonary infection. On November 19, the patient went home with a drainage device and was given oral moxifloxacin and ornidazole as discharge drugs. At the same time, nutritional support lasted throughout the medication period. The patient was revisited On December 7, WBCC and CRP were in the normal range, CT showed right pleural thickening, obvious absorption of multiple cords in the middle and lower lobe of the right lung, and slightly reduced consolidation range of the lower lobe . During the telephone follow-up on December 16, we learned that the patient had successfully removed the closed thoracic drainage tube and was receiving further antineoplastic therapy.