The patient is a 2-year-4-month-old boy, who is the first child of his nonconsanguineous Chinese parents, a 26-year-old mother and a 27-year-old father, both of them are healthy. Following an uneventful pregnancy, he was born at 38 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 3.15 kg. Feeding difficulties and poor suck had been noticed since birth. Hypotonia was apparent at age of 4 months. He showed severe developmental delay. He could not raise his head until 4 months old, sit unsupported till 11 months. At 2-year-4-month-old, he could not walk and speak any meaningful words. Eye contact and social smiling were enabling. He had recurrent respiratory tract infections, and hospitalized for severe pneumonia for several times. At 12 months old, his head circumference was 47 cm, weight was 11 kg. The boy had mild dysmorphism with flat nasal bridge, anteverted nares, small mouth, high-arched palate, low-set ears and cryptorchidism of the right side. Hand stereotypes including hand wringing and hand shaking presented at 8 months. He had no chronic constipation, no seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at age 1 year was unremarkable. Karyotype analysis was normal. Serum amino acid and urine organic acid screen were unremarkable.
Family history: The boy’s mother had two younger brothers. Both of them had severe developmental delay. The elder one could not walk or speak before he died at age of 5. The best motor function was sitting unaided. His brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed generalized cerebral atrophy. The younger one had a history of recurrent infections, died of a sever pneumonia at the age of 1y. He could not sit or walk alone during his life, speak no meaningful words yet. Both the mother and the grandmother were asymptomatic, they did not have any symptoms of depression, anxiety and compulsions. Figure showed the pedigrees of the family, the proband was showed by an arrow.
Genomic DNAs from the peripheral blood leukocytes of the patient, his parents and the maternal grandmother were extracted using standard methods. MLPA (SALSA MLPA kit P015 MECP2, MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Holland) was performed to detect large deletions or duplications of MECP2 gene as previously described . MLPA products were separated and analyzed using the ABI Prism 3100 Genetic Analyzer and Genescan software according to manufacturer’s recommendations.
In order to determine the precise size of the duplication, aCGH was performed on the mother’ DNA, using Affymetrix GeneChip System 3000Dx v.2 (by Tianjin kingmed center for clinical laboratory, Shanghai, China).
FISH test was performed to interrogate the MECP2 copy number and to identify the location of the duplicated MECP2 gene in chromosome (done by Beijing Ahngook Pharm. Co., Ltd, Beijing, China).
The patterns of XCI of female carriers were analyzed according to the procedure described by Allen et al. . Inactivation was considered to be non- random if the ratio was > 70:30.