25-year-old nulliparous woman with no routine gynecological check-ups. She presented with a one-month history of a clinical picture characterized by acne-like lesions on the face, neck, chest, facial oedema and blurred vision. She initially went to another facility where hypertensive readings, hypokalaemia and an ultrasound scan showed multiple lesions in the liver consistent with neoproliferative disease. She subsequently developed delirium, incoherent speech and suicidal ideation, and was brought to our hospital by relatives. On admission, she was hypertensive (160/112 mmHg), disoriented, aggressive and delirious. She had acne-like lesions on the face and chest, marked hirsutism on the face, chest and back, a full moon face, dorsal hump, supraclavicular pads and generalised muscle weakness. Her laboratory test on admission showed hyperglycaemia, hypokalaemia, hyper-transaminasaemia and metabolic alkalosis. An ultrasound scan and a magnetic resonance scan of the brain showed no significant findings. With suspicion of encephalitis, a lumbar puncture was performed with the only relevant finding being hyperproteinaemia. She was admitted for study and treatment, and was interpreted as having a severe Cushing's syndrome with significant general impairment and rapid onset. Confirmatory biochemical tests were performed: Nugent test with cortisol 8 am > 60 ug/dL (positive > 1.8 ug/dL), inhibition test with dexamethasone 8 mg at 23 h: cortisol > 60 ug/dL, night salivary cortisol of 1610.2 ug/dL (VN < 7). ACTH dependence was found with frankly elevated values. The severity and rapidity of the onset of the clinical picture led to studies to detect a primary tumour responsible for ectopic ACTH secretion. An ultrasound scan was performed that showed bilateral, smaller than 3 mm, nodular opacities in the thorax, hyperplastic adrenal glands, lesions in the liver and vertebral bodies of the sacral region, L3 and dorsal, suggestive of secondary disease. When the patient was re-examined, she commented that she had presented postcoital bleeding weeks before the onset of the clinical picture. An ultrasound scan of the uterus was performed that showed an enlarged uterine cervix, after which a speculum was used to examine the cervix and a pathological characteristic was observed and a biopsy was taken. An ultrasound-guided biopsy of liver lesions was also performed. Other studies performed: fundus of eye that showed a serous central macular oedema in the left eye.

During his admission, he developed severe hypokalaemia that persisted despite replacement. He received spironolactone and ketoconazole at increasing doses up to 1200 mg/day. Mifepristone was added, but had to be discontinued after 7 days due to severe hypokalaemia. Histopathological examination showed liver parenchyma and exocervical mucosa infiltrated by neoplastic proliferation composed of small cells with scant cytoplasm, fine and granular chromatin nuclei, with positivity for cytokeratin, chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD56, p16, with a proliferation index Ki 67 greater than 75%. With these findings, the diagnosis of neuroendocrine carcinoma of small cells was reached. He initiated chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide, developed a septic shock secondary to febrile neutropenia and died after 6 days.
