A 20 years old woman was referred to Gazi University Department of Prosthodontics with a chief complaint of tooth discoloration, diastema, unsatisfactory esthetics and slight tooth sensitivity. The medical and dental history revealed that the patient’s family was not affected by AI. A renal ultrasound scan was normal, and it showed no evidence of nephrocalcinosis. Laboratory findings, including serum electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, urea, creatinine, alkaline phosphatase and parathormone levels were all normal. Clinical examination of the patient showed the insufficient enamel thickness, and the patient’s anterior and posterior teeth were discolored . The panoramic radiography also showed that the thin enamel layer could not be distinguished from the underlying dentin . There were no anterior open bite and missing teeth. However, short crowns, multiple diastema, occlusal wear with exposed dentin in the posterior areas, poor contact points and dental caries are the additional clinical findings . The roots showed normal length and form. The pulp chambers were regular in size. Her oral hygiene was acceptable with no signs of gingivitis .
The maxillary and mandibular left third molar teeth were extracted to perform SEM and histologic analyzes. These teeth were totally covered by mucosa . Therefore, they were selected for SEM and histologic analyzes by the purpose of examining the tooth structure of the patient which had not been exposed to the oral environment. SEM and histologic analyzes were performed on the extracted mandibular and maxillary third molar teeth . One of the third molar teeth was fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde. The tooth was then cut longitudinally, and the sections were coated with gold (Sputter Coater SC7620, Polaron, VG Microtech, England). The analysis was done via SEM (JEOL, JSM-6060LV, Tokyo, Japan). SEM analysis showed that there was an insufficient enamel layer . Additionally, the other third molar tooth was demineralized with 10% formaldehyde for 3 weeks. The tooth was then cut longitudinally, and it was stained with hematoxylin-eosin stain. Histological findings revealed that dentin structure was intact and there was no irregularity in tubular structure. These findings confirmed that there was no defect related to dentin .
Diagnostic casts were attached on a semi-adjustable articulator (Stratos 200; Ivoclar Vivadent Ag, Pforzeim, Germany) in centric occlusion. The occlusal vertical dimension was determined by the Niswonger method and verified with the closest speaking space method. The interocclusal distance at the physiologic rest position was 6 mm. In order to ensure proper vertical dimension and to create enough space for a restorative reconstruction, the bite was opened 5 mm in the anterior region. Furthermore, to predict the last appearance of the restoration, diagnostic wax-up was prepared at the determined vertical dimension , and expected treatment outcome was performed with the digital smile design software (Romexis 4.5, Planmeca USA, Inc).
Under local anesthesia, all teeth were prepared with chamfer margins. The crown length of maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth was insufficient for crown retention. In addition, there was an asymmetry of the gingival contours in the anterior maxillary teeth . After periodontal evaluation, because of insufficient crown length, ostectomy procedure was performed for maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth. In addition, gingivectomy was applied for maxillary anterior teeth. All periodontal surgery procedures were performed by the periodontologist. The impressions for provisional casts were made with a condensation silicone impression material (Zetaflow; Zhermack, Italy). Then, an interocclusal record was prepared with a hard addition-type A-silicon material (Imprint™ Bite, 3M ESPE) at the increased vertical dimension (5 mm in anterior region) which was determined in diagnostic wax-up stage. The autopolymerizing acrylic resin (ALIKETM; GC America, Alsip, IL, USA) provisional crowns were fabricated at the determined vertical dimension extraorally by an indirect method, then they were cemented with temporary cement (Temp Bond NETM; Kerr) . These restorations were assessed in terms of esthetic and phonetics. 1, 2 and 3 month regular checkups were performed. The speech, swallowing, anterior and posterior speaking space, muscle sensitivity, mastication, TMJ discomfort, were assessed during this period. The patient was asymptomatic. The criteria of the success for increased vertical dimension were the absence of pain, no sensitivity in facial and masticatory muscles, phonetic and swallowing satisfaction. At the end of the 3 months follow up period, definitive impressions were made with a condensation silicone impression material (Zetaflow; Zhermack, Italy). Occlusal registration was obtained with a hard addition-type A-silicon material (Imprint™ Bite, 3M ESPE) with a slightly reduced vertical dimension from the provisional restoration. After that, the working casts were obtained and mounted on the semi-adjustable articulator (Stratos 200) using a face-bow transfer (Facebow UTS-3D, Ivoclar Vivadent) .
The patient was rehabilitated with metal alloy (Mıcrolit Isı, Schütz Dental Group) - ceramic (Cerabien ZR Noritake) fixed partial dentures in the posterior regions. In order to achieve better esthetic appearance and to camouflage the AI affected tooth color, zirconia ceramic (Katana, Kuraray Noritake Dental Inc) based crowns were used in the anterior regions of low and upper jaws . With this prosthodontic rehabilitation, maximum interdigitation and a canine guidance could be achieved. Metal-ceramic fixed partial dentures were cemented with zinc polycarboxylate cement (Adhesor® Carbofine; Kerr) and zirconia ceramic crowns cemented with self-etch dual cured resin cement (Maxcem Elite, MXE; Kerr). Following cementation, a maxillary protective occlusal splint was manufactured to protect the restorations from chipping or fracture due to the bruxism. The patient was instructed about oral hygiene maintenance.