A 79 year old male with history of atrial fibrillation (previously on apixaban and switched to aspirin only), type II diabetes mellitus, asthma (well controlled on home inhalers), hypertension, and tested positive for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) on April 7th, 2021 and fully vaccinated with Moderna presented to the emergency department with progressive worsening of bilateral lower extremity edema and dyspnea over one month. Patient had a chronic two-pillow orthopnea, and at baseline performed all activities of daily living independently. In addition, this work has been reported in accordance with SCARE .
At presentation, the patient denied chest pain, fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dysuria, travel, trauma, drug use, and cough. Vital signs were all within normal limits on admission. Physical exam was notable for bibasilar crackles in the lungs, bilateral lower extremity 2+ pitting edema, and jugular venous distention up to 9 cm. Labs were notable for a pro B-type natriuretic peptide of 8458 pg/mL (reference range 1–450 pg/mL), a significant increase from 3301 pg/mL during a previous admission. In addition, the D-dimer was unremarkable. A chest radiograph obtained during admission showed bilateral ground glass opacities from prior COVID-19, pulmonary congestion, and interposition of the right hepatic flexure of the colon between subdiaphragmatic space and the right dome of the liver (Chilaiditi's sign) . The comparison was made from a prior chest radiograph that showed normal anatomy of the right subdiaphragmatic space . Electrocardiogram demonstrated atrial fibrillation with low voltage and no acute ischemic features. Echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 40%, reduced from 70% only a year ago, with normal right ventricular (RV) size, reduced RV contractility, and a dilated right atrium. In addition, the patient did not have any prior COVID-19 complications including intubation, development of pulmonary embolism or requiring supplemental oxygen. A negative D-dimer and CT chest without contrast showed no evidence of embolism, effectively ruling out acute pulmonary embolism.
The patient was subsequently admitted for congestive heart failure exacerbation, for which he was started on furosemide 40 mg IV twice a day with daily weight trend and strict intake and output documentation. Patient had an excellent response to diuretics with a net negative urine output of 6.8 L over 48 hours since admission. His home medications were resumed, including Losartan 25 mg daily, carvedilol 3.125 mg twice daily, atorvastatin 40 mg, aspirin 81mg, albuterol inhaler as needed every 6 hours and montelukast 10 mg daily. He was diuresed for 3 days, successfully achieving euvolemic status, resolution of bilateral leg edema, and improvement of jugular venous distention. Cardiology was consulted for a new reduction in ejection fraction to rule out acute coronary syndrome. Given an electrocardiogram showing no ischemic features and negative troponin on three separate assessments, it was concluded that the patient did not have acute coronary syndrome. Patient received coronary angiography and was found to have non-obstructive coronary artery disease. Patient continued to have persistent dyspnea with some mild pleuritic chest pain on the right subcostal region without any need for supplemental oxygen. The aforementioned medications were continued for a total of 5 days. Community or hospital acquired pneumonia was ruled out given normal cultures, absence of inflammatory response, no fevers, normal procalcitonin, and no imaging findings concerning pneumonia. Computed tomography scan of the chest without contrast was repeated to rule out other causes of dyspnea and pleurisy, and subsequently showed colonic interposition between the diaphragm and right lobe of the liver . Given the patient's dyspnea and pleurisy due to diaphragmatic irritation, as well as the imaging findings, surgery was consulted for potential Chilaiditi syndrome. Despite this, the patient refused to undergo any surgery and preferred to be discharged from the hospital. The patient was discharged with guidelines for long-term medical treatment for heart failure (Lasix 40mg by mouth twice daily, carvedilol 3.125 mg twice daily, Losartan 25mg daily), atrial fibrillation (carvedilol 3.125 twice daily, aspirin 81mg), hypertension (carvedilol 3.125 mg twice daily, Losartan 25mg daily) and asthma (albuterol inhaler as needed, montelukast 10mg daily).