A 47-year-old woman was transferred to our hospital complaining of abdominal pain. The pain was severe and accompanied by a loss of consciousness. She was known with chronic kidney disease and was on regular hemodialysis. On arrival at the hospital, her blood pressure was 93/67 mmHg, pulse 78 beats per minute, body temperature 36.7 °C, and Glasgow Coma Scale score of 13/15 (E3V4M6), with loss of consciousness. She had severe tenderness over the entire abdomen without rebound or guarding. An arterial blood gas analysis on room air showed a pH of 7.535, pCO2 of 28.1 mmHg, pO2 of 107 mmHg, HCO3 of 23.6 mmHg, base excess of − 5.1, and lactate of 10 mg/dl. Blood tests showed a mildly elevated white blood cell count of 10,950/μl, urea of 27.9 mg/dl, and creatinine of 5.59 g/dl, which was high for a dialysis patient, creatine kinase of 67 U/L, and C-reactive protein of 0.38 which was almost normal. Computed tomography (CT) revealed extensive portal vein gas and intestinal emphysema in the ileum and ascending colon. . The patient was diagnosed with NOMI and underwent emergency surgery. There was no intestinal fluid contamination in the abdominal cavity, but there was a moderate accumulation of serous ascites. The serosa of the ascending colon to cecum [Fig. A(a)] and terminal ileum [Fig. B(a)] were red in areas, but there was no obvious necrosis. Intraoperative ICG imaging with 5 mg intravenous ICG administration showed a granular distribution of the fluorescent dye (fine granular pattern) in the ascending colon to cecum [Fig. A(b)] and a poorly fluorescent lesion except around blood vessels (perivascular pattern) in the terminal ileum [Fig. B(b)] . Because the serosal side of the intestine was not grossly necrotic, we decided to manage the patient conservatively and only perform a second-look surgery if there were clinical, blood, and CT findings suggestive of necrosis the next day, and so bowel resection was not performed. Postoperatively, prostaglandin E1 was injected intravenously at 0.05 ug/kg/min. A contrast-enhanced CT performed the day after the surgery showed good blood flow in the ascending colon and ileum, and abdominal findings and blood tests had not worsened; therefore, a second-look surgery was not performed. Intraoperatively, the intestinal emphysema disappeared and the serous membrane color tended to improve, so postoperative open abdomen management was not performed and the abdomen was closed by conventionally. The acute postoperative course was uneventful; however, the patient required prolonged hospitalization for diabetes control. On POD 24, the patient suddenly passed a large quantity of bloody stool. An emergency colonoscopy revealed a longitudinal ulcer in the ascending colon to cecum , and a deep ulcer, with exposed blood vessels, in the terminal ileum . However, since there was no active bleeding, we decided to treat the patient conservatively with red blood cell transfusion alone, without emergency endoscopic treatment or surgery. On POD25, a large amount of blood was again found in her stool, and she went into shock. She received a massive blood transfusion and underwent an emergency laparotomy. The patient was in a state of shock and required urgent treatment. Although intravenous radiology was a treatment option, hemostasis by laparotomy was chosen, because the CT and endoscopy of the previous day showed that the bleeding site was in the terminal ileum, hemostasis by surgery was easy, and the patient was ready for surgery quickly. A large amount of blood in the colon and small intestine was seen through the serous membrane, suggesting a severe bleed. The terminal ileum wall 25 cm from the ileocecal valve was firm and thickened, but there were no obvious changes on the serous surface of the rest of the small intestine [Fig. B (a)]. The thickened terminal ileum was the most likely site of bleeding, and the mesenteric vessels in the area were first ligated to stop bleeding. Next, an incision was made in the terminal ileum, and intraoperative endoscopy was performed . This confirmed the presence of a deep longitudinal ulcer in the terminal ileum, where the origin of the bleeding was expected to be located [Fig. B(b)]. The extent of intestinal resection was determined after confirming that ulceration was present only in the terminal ileum and ascending colon to the cecum, with no ulcerative lesions on the oral side from the deep longitudinal ulcer in the terminal ileum . Right hemicolectomy including the terminal ileum of the bleeding ulcer lesion was performed and an ileo-transverse colon anastomosis was performed by hand. The resected specimen showed extensive mucosal erosion of the ascending colon to cecum and a deep longitudinal ulcer with exposed vessels in the terminal ileum . Thirty cm of the terminal ileum and 20 cm of the ascending colon to cecum was resected . Her postoperative course after the second surgery was uneventful, and she was discharged on the 28th day after the second surgery. One year after the surgery, NOMI, and intestinal bleeding had not recurred.