A 65-year-old, right-handed Caucasian man was initially admitted to another hospital after a motor vehicle accident. Prior to the accident, he was an independent truck driver who lived with his wife. He was an ex-smoker of 50 pack-years, and had a significant family history in first-degree relatives of lung, brain, and cervical cancer. Other medical conditions included hypertension, psoriasis, and diverticular disease requiring bowel resection.
The patient was driving a truck alone when he crashed. When paramedics attended, the patient was found in the passenger seat, conscious but confused and combative. At this time, pulse and blood pressure were unmeasurable. Primary and secondary surveys in hospital showed no evidence of chest trauma, and the patient suffered only minor soft tissue injuries. In hospital telemetry revealed paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response, which was without symptoms and managed only with metoprolol – to the best of our knowledge, no other antiarrhythmic agents were used. Occasional 5-second sinus pauses were also noted, with preceding seizure activity and post-ictal altered level of consciousness for several minutes. Between events, electrocardiography (ECG) was otherwise unremarkable, with no evidence of ischemic changes or other conduction abnormalities. On the fourth day of admission, he became bradycardic and progressed to asystolic arrest requiring 4 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Spontaneous circulation returned in the form of rapid atrial fibrillation. The patient was intubated, and had a temporary pacing wire inserted until a permanent pacemaker was inserted the next day. Cardiac workup, including troponin and electrolyte levels were within normal range. Echocardiography showed a mildly dilated left atrium of 25 cm2, with no other valvular, structural or wall motion abnormalities noted. There was no evidence of right heart strain on echocardiogram or ECG suggestive of pulmonary embolus. A diagnosis of sick sinus syndrome was made, and he was commenced on metoprolol and apixaban. His behavior remained impulsive after extubation, demanding to leave the hospital, and he was discharged several days later. All other investigations at this time, including chest X-ray, electroencephalogram (EEG) and a computed tomography (CT) brain scan, were unremarkable.
One week after discharge, he presented to our hospital with his first observed generalized tonic-clonic seizure (GTCS) lasting 3 minutes, with urinary incontinence and prolonged post-ictal confusion. Repeat EEG and CT brain were reported as normal. This episode was thought to be secondary to hypoxic brain injury after asystolic arrest. He was discharged on levetiracetam 1 g twice daily. Two weeks later he presented with another GTCS, and was discharged once stable from Emergency. His third seizure occurred 6 days later, at which time he was admitted and commenced on sodium valproate 500 mg twice daily in addition to levetiracetam. His EEG and CT brain scan were again normal. Two weeks later, his fourth GTCS prompted addition of carbamazepine 200 mg controlled release twice daily. An outpatient magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scan showed no abnormality at this time.
He had three further seizures in 3 weeks, and tolerated several antiepileptic drugs poorly. He was admitted to our hospital 10 weeks after his first seizure due to confusion. Retrospectively, there was significant deterioration in his confusion, agitation, and impulsivity since his initial presentation, in addition to more frequent seizures. Of note, his wife also reported progressive slurring of his speech, difficulty walking, and ongoing back pain over the preceding weeks. Medications at this point were lacosamide 100 mg twice daily, and sodium valproate 1 g twice daily. He suffered no further seizures, but became agitated and aggressive, requiring one-to-one nursing, regular olanzapine, and four-point limb restraints.
His refractory and progressive symptoms prompted further investigation. EEG was again normal. Lumbar puncture showed normal opening pressures, with CSF findings as follows: leukocytes 2 × 106/L, mononuclear cells 2 × 106/L, protein 0.61 mg/dL, glucose 3.2 mmol/L. ANNA-1 (Hu) antibodies, GABAB-R antibodies and unmatched oligoclonal bands were also present. Serum was also positive for GABAB-R antibodies but not for anti-Hu antibodies. A chest CT scan revealed a spiculated mass in the right lung and perihilar lymphadenopathy. A biopsy was obtained via endobronchial ultrasound, which revealed small cell neuroendocrine tumor. A subsequent MRI spine scan revealed diffuse vertebral metastases.
He was commenced on etoposide and carboplatin, as well as a trial of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg). Although suffering chemotherapy-related side effects including febrile neutropenia from staphylococcal septicemia, he showed some improvement with this therapy. He remained seizure free, was able to hold a conversation and mobilise independently. His modified Rankin scale (mRS) was 4 prior to treatment, and improved to a mRS of 2 with IVIg and chemotherapy. At 12 weeks follow-up, our patient had only mild short-term memory deficits, but was otherwise at his premorbid level of function.