A 30-year-old Korean woman was diagnosed with suspicious papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) by fine needle aspiration (FNA) at a local medical clinic. She was referred to our hospital for operation. She has no personal or family history of thyroid dysfunction and no specific medication history. Physical examination of neck revealed a diffusely enlarged and non-tender thyroid gland. There were no palpable cervical lymph nodes. US was carried out using a real time linear array 10-MHz transducer. The thyroid US demonstrated a diffusely enlarged thyroid gland with a 0.4×0.3cm sized hypoechoic nodule in the left thyroid . She wanted to diagnose the thyroid nodule again in our hospital. US-guided FNA was performed again on that nodule, and FNA cytology was diagnosed as suspicious PTC. We also examined for BRAF V600E mutation using FNA cytology materials. BRAF V600E mutation was identified by multiplex real time polymerase chain reaction assay using Anyplex™ BRAF V600E Real Time Detection (V2.0) (Seegene, Inc., Seoul, Korea), which allows for simultaneous amplification of total nucleic acid of V600E mutation of BRAF and internal control (human β globin gene). Computed tomography scan using contrast agent was done three weeks before operation. No abnormal finding was noted. The patient had no thyrotoxic symptoms during one month of the preoperative period. She underwent a left thyroid lobectomy by endoscopic thyroidectomy via a transaxillary approach for the thyroid tumor. The right thyroid was not manipulated during operation. Pathologic finding revealed a papillary carcinoma, and other portions of the thyroid parenchyma revealed lymphocytic patches predominantly in peripheral portions. There were rarely lymphoid follicles with germinal center .
On laboratory examination, the preoperative laboratory test was performed one month before operation was within normal limits. The serial change of thyroid function tests and the titer of autoantibodies were summarized in Table . On postoperative day (POD) 1, she didn’t definitive complain. A thyroid function test (TFT) showed hyperthyroid with Antithyroglobulin antibody and thyroglobulin (Tg) . On POD 8, the patient was consulted by the department of endocrinology. On physical examination, blood pressure was 120/80mmHg, and heart rate was 119beat/min and regular. Neck examination revealed no sign of tenderness and redness. TFT was still increased but Tg level was normalized . Tc-99m scintigraphy showed faint visualization of the right thyroid lobes, and 24-hour radioactive uptake of 131I was 0.7% , which suggested destructive thyroiditis. On POD 48, thyroid function tests revealed euthyroid. On POD 86, she complained of fatigue and weakness. A TFT revealed hypothyroidism . The patient was treated with levothyroxine for her symptoms of hypothyroidism. On POD 140, follow-up TFT revealed mild hyperthyroidism . The patient was treated with levothyroxine.