We present the case of a female patient, 60 years old, which was admitted in May 2019, in the Dermatological Clinic of Emergency Hospital of Craiova after the onset of a new episode, consisting in the appearance of violaceous erythematous-oedematous infiltrated plaques, located on the face, neck, upper limbs , trunk and knees .
The onset of the cutaneous manifestations had occurred 2 months prior this presentation, accompanied by pain, chills, flares of fever and arthralgia.
A written informed consent of the patient was obtained, agreeing with publishing these data.
Personal medical history: Umbilical hernia, treated by surgery 2 months prior.
Relevant behavior: does not smoke, does not drink alcohol.
Analysis of the case history revealed that the patient was first diagnosed with Sweet syndrome in 2014, during the hospitalization in another clinic. Based on the case history available from the patient, the results of the histopathological examination of the skin lesions at the time of initial diagnosis described:
-polymorphous inflammatory infiltrate, relatively dense, located at the level of the superficial and middle reticular dermis, comprised of neutrophils and neutrophilic nuclear dust, intricated with mononuclear cells with immature appearance, lymphocytes, and some eosinophils;
-inflammatory infiltrate with lymphocytes and some eosinophils with superficial perivascular location;
-important oedema at the level of the papillary dermis.
At that moment, in 2014, immunohistochemistry was also performed on the surgical specimen, resulting data showing: CD3-positive frequent small lymphocytes, CD20-positive rare small lymphocytes, CD30-negative infiltrate, CD-68 positive histiocytes and mononuclear histiocytoid cells, MPO-positive segmented granulocytes and mononuclear histiocytoid cells (immature granulocytes), and CD33-positive segmented and immature granulocytes.
Based on the clinical, histopathological, and immunohistochemical profile, the diagnosis of histiocytoid Sweet syndrome was made.
She followed a treatment with 32mg/day methylprednisolone, with positive response, but had many relapses after the discontinuation of the treatment.
In 2017, due to a new episode, the histopathological examination was repeated and revealed the following features: tegument fragment showing minimal surface parakeratosis, marked inflammatory lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with a large number of perivascular neutrophils and areas of leukocytoclasis with periadnexal and interstitial location in the reticular and deep dermis, dilated blood vessels lined by endothelial cells with intraluminal bulging.
She received treatment with Disulone (which she did not tolerate) and Colchicine. She had not been administered any treatment throughout the previous year.
The onset of the current episode (2019) occurred following the treatment she received for umbilical hernia.
At clinical examination, we noticed a phototype II, normal weight female patient, having pains and crackling in the joints of knees and fingers on both hands.
Laboratory blood tests showed: leukocytes 12.5x1000/microL, neutrophils 72,5%, ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) 32mm/1h, HBsAg negative, Anti-HCV antibodies-negativ, anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies-normal; complements C3 1.55g/L normal and C4 57mg/dl (10-40) elevated, anti-DNA antibody 5.4UI/ml (<25), CIC (circulating immune complexes) <2U/ml (2-20), glycaemia 111mg/dL (65-110), GOT 12UI/l, GPT 17UI/L, GGT 34UI/L (7-32), CK (creatin kinase) 38U/L (<145U/L), FR (rheumatoid factor) 8.2IU/ml (<14IU/ml).
Urinalysis findings: relatively frequent flat epithelial cells, relatively frequent leukocytes.
Faecal parasitology findings: normal.
Chest X-ray: heart within limits, without progressing pleural-pulmonary lesions.
Ultrasound examination of the abdomen and pelvis regions revealed liver with steatosis, left lobe measuring 71mm, right lobe 152mm.
Gallbladder reduces in size, two hyperechogenic images measuring 9 and 6mm respectively, suggesting the presence of stones, VP 7mm, main biliary duct 3mm, pancreas with infiltrate. Homogenous spleen, measuring 100mm along the long axis. Kidneys with normal size, without dilatations. Urinary bladder with soft walls. Uterus measuring approximately 46/38mm, homogenous structure, without fluid in the peritoneal cavity.
Under local anesthesia induces by 1% Lidocaine biopsies were performed from representative lesions located on the forearm and right arm.
The surgical specimen was fixed in 10% buffered formalin, processed for routinely paraffin embedding, sectioning and Hematoxylin-Eosin (HE) staining) in the Pathology Department of the same hospital.
The histopathological examination showed:
-abundant lymphoid cells, rare eosinophils and PMN with leukocytoclasis ,
-inflammatory infiltrate in the dermis around the capillaries with turgescent endothelial cells .
-tegument with orthokeratosis and inflammatory infiltrate in the dermis .
Based on the case history, on the objective clinical examination, and on the histopathological and immunohistochemical findings the diagnosis of was supported.
We initiated the treatment with 32mg methylprednisolone 1 tablet/day in the morning, topical Clobetasol ointment, 10mg Rupatadine-1 tablet/morning, 1mg Ketotifen-1 tablet/evening, with positive response.