The proband of this family is a 5-year-old boy from Zhejiang province in China. He developed thickening nails and oral leukokeratosis at birth , and began developing palmoplantar keratoderma at 2 years old. His sister had similar clinical manifestation characterized with thickening nail and discoloration . No abnormalities in the teeth and eyes were noted in the two affected children. There were no unaffected siblings, And the phenotypic features of PC were not found in any other family members including their parents.
After informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood lymphocytes of this family. DNA was also extracted from hair bulbs, buccal smears and sperm cells of the proband’s father and hair bulbs and buccal smears of his mother using a QIAGEN QIAamp Blood Mini kit. This study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine and conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
KRT6A, KRT6B, KRT6C, KRT16 and KRT17 genes of this family were analyzed by direct sequencing using primers and reaction conditions as previously described. In addition, samples from 100 unrelated population-matched controls were sequenced to exclude the possibility that the variant was a polymorphism in the KRT6A gene (GenBank accession number: NM_005554.3).
The exome capture were performed using Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon Kits (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing was performed on a HiSeq 2000 platform with read lengths of 100 bp. The mean coverage depth for each sample is 100 × . The sequencing reads were described according to NCBI human reference sequence.
The entire coding and flanking intronic sequences of KRT6A, KRT6B, KRT6C, KRT16 and KRT17 genes were screened for mutations in the two affected children and unaffected parents. A previously reported heterozygous mutation, p.Ile462Asn, was identified in KRT6A in the proband and his sister . This change was not detected in 100 unrelated, healthy Chinese control individuals (200 alleles). Sequence analysis of the four other keratin genes failed to detect sequence variants in either affected or unaffected individuals of the family . This mutation was not identified in the parents, in DNA derived from peripheral blood, hair bulbs or buccal smears . The sperm cells from proband’s father were also wildtype . Since the two affected children harbored the same pathogenic mutation, we postulated that one of the parents was mosaic for this variant WES was performed on the two affected children and their parents. Approximately 5 billion bases were sequenced with coverage of 100 × . Consequently, the variant was detected in one sequencing read from 86 sequencing reads from DNA derived from the mother’s blood . The mutation was not identified in DNA derived from the father’s blood by whole exome sequencing. The frequency of reads was 47% and 49% in proband and his sister, respectively. The results indicated that the mutation in KRT6A may be from maternal mosaicism in this family.
To confirm the question of somatic mosaicism in the mother, the analysis was performed to quantify the proportion of cells carrying the KRT6A mutation by using SNaPshot (ABI Prism SNaPShot multiplex kit; Applied Biosystems) on an ABI PRISM 3730 genetic analyser according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The proportion of normal and mutant DNA was quantified using GeneMapper software (v4.0; Applied Biosystems). To get mutation ratios of 50%, 25%, 12.5%, 6.25%, 3.13%, and 1.56%, a genomic DNA sample of a heterozygous proband was serially diluted with a sample of a wild-type family member. All experiments were repeated three times.
SNaPshot analysis revealed substantial mutation-level variation in the two affected children and their parents. SNaPshot sequencing revealed mosaicism at level of 2.5% and 4.7% in DNA from the mother’s blood and hair bulbs . No mosaicism was identified in DNA from buccal smears from mother. A non-mosaic wild-type state was found in the healthy father (Data not shown).
Besides, we also performed HiSeq deep sequencing. Firstly, We diluted the DNA from the patient’s blood with the DNA from the normal by 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32, 1/64, 1/128 based on gradient dilution method. Making a standard curve. Then, We designed primer detection mutation site KRT6A (NM_005554.3) c.1385T > A; p.Ile462Asn. (F:TTCCTCTTCCAGTGCGCCAA; R:AGCTGTTGAAGGAGKT CGTGT) And synthesizing fusion primer. (F1:ACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTT TCCTCTTCCAGTGCGCCAA; R1:TTCCTTGGCACCCGAGAATTCCAAGCTG TTGAAGGAGKTCGTGT) Next step, We carried out the first round PCR. (3min96°C; 15 cycles of 30 s 96 °C; 30 s 60 °C; 30 s 72 °C. End with 5 min incubation at 72 °C; pause at 10 °C.) And the second round were carried out after screened and purified. (NNNNNN was used to distinguish between different samples. F2:AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCTTTCCCTACA CGACGCTCTTCCGATCT; R2-x:CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATNNN NNNGTGACTGGAGTTCCTTGGCAC CCGAGAAT) (3min96°C; 10 cycles of 15 s 96 °C; 30 s 60 °C; 30 s 72 °C. End with 5 min incubation at 72 °C; pause at 10 °C.) In the end, Sequencing the PCR products from last step after purified by Illumina Hiseq. And analyzing the number of T and A at the site to be tested in the total read length of each sample.
We sequencing the DNA sample from patient’s younger sister and parents in the same method. Calculating by Y = 1.0007x − 0.0036 as Table .