The patient was a 66-year-old man who underwent rectal resection and postoperative chemotherapy for rectal cancer. Bile duct obstruction due to a liver metastasis caused obstructive jaundice and acute cholangitis, which resulted in emergency hospitalization. On magnetic resonance imaging , a 3.5 cm mass in the biliary hilum caused type IV biliary obstruction according to the Bismuth-Corlette classification of hilar cholangiocarcinoma. Despite several attempts at biliary drainage (branch of B3 and B2, B5, B7) via ERCP, obstructive jaundice was not improved. The patient was emergently hospitalized again because of acute cholangitis with a 39 °C fever and epigastric pain, although bile duct plastic stents (PS) had been placed in the left intrahepatic bile duct (branch of B3 and B2) and right intrahepatic bile duct (B5 and B7) . Repeated ERCP and biliary drainage were performed, had no effect as shown on the CT . In this case, many of biliary branches were divided by the obstruction at hilar biliary. Only by 2D image, it was hard to identify the relation between dilated biliary branches and drainage tube placed. Given that selective bile duct drainage had proven extremely difficult with the conventional procedures, 3D images were created from preoperative CT image data using a 3D image reconstruction system (SYNAPSE VINCENT version 5, FUJIFILM Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). We used the 3D images for preoperative planning and performed biliary drainage using them as an intraoperative reference.
Residual dilation was observed in the left intrahepatic bile duct (B3). Although the PS was allowing slight decompression of the left intrahepatic bile duct (B2), marked biliary dilation persisted; thus, the PS was deemed ineffective for B3, while no biliary dilation was found around the PSs placed in B5 and B7, so these were deemed to be effective. Marked dilation of B6 and B8 was noted, and drainage was deemed necessary . On the basis of the above findings, we planned preoperatively that an additional PS would be placed in the deep part of B3 and several other PSs would be replaced (B6 and B8). The entire ERCP procedure was performed under the combination of fluoroscopic images of a standard side-view duodenoscope (EDT-580, FUJIFILM, Tokyo, Japan) and the 3D images. This procedure was performed using a multipurpose imaging system incorporating a C-arm (VersiFlex Apla, HITACHI corporation Tokyo, Japan). During the actual ERCP procedure, endoscopists could see the endoscope video (a), the 3D image of the bile ducts that rotate freely (b), and the 2D fluoroscopic image (c) at the same time . With the 3D images for preoperative planning and intraoperative reference, biliary drainage was successfully performed without complications . Postoperatively, the patient had no further cholangitis or need for stent replacement up to his death.