The patient was a 16-month-old girl. No prenatal abnormalities were noted. She visited a nearby doctor on a remote island for fever and was treated with antibiotic therapy as an outpatient. She gradually developed clouding of consciousness and dyspnea. She was transferred to our hospital on the 13th day after the onset of symptoms due to a huge dilated common bile duct that was detected on imaging at the previous hospital.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed dilation of the common bile duct (maximum diameter: 5 cm) , suggesting CBD. However, her laboratory data on admission showed severe liver disfunction (AST, 79 IU/L; ALT, 43 IU/L; γ-GTP, 491 mg/dl; D-bil, 0.3 mg/dl; Alb 2.5 mg/dl; CHE, 90 IU/L; NH3, 123 μg/dl) . The Child-Pugh classification was equivalent to Grade A–B when combined with the fact that she had consciousness disturbance, a history of vitamin K treatment, and her laboratory findings at the time of admission. We initially performed laparoscopic exploration and bile drainage via the gallbladder, noting severe hepatic fibrosis resembling end-stage liver cirrhosis . A 5-mm 30° laparoscope was inserted through an umbilical incision along with a 5 mm trocar with a multichannel port device (E.Z Access/LAP-PROTECTOR minimini; Hakko Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Since the view of the lower liver space could not be obtained, a 3-mm port was additionally inserted through the EZ Access to secure the view. The liver had many hoop-like notches on both lobes, which is a finding of liver sclerosis. A 3-mm port was additionally inserted into the right upper abdomen and the gallbladder was pulled out from the port wound. A double purse suture was applied with 4–0 PDS outside the body and an incision was made, and then an 8-Fr balloon catheter was inserted, and the tip was placed in the common bile duct. After placing a drainage tube in the gallbladder, cholangiography was performed. We confirmed continuity between dilation of the intrahepatic bile ducts and the common bile duct, and it consistent with findings of biliary dilatation. There was no gallbladder atrophy, which is seen in I cyst-type biliary atresia . Cholangiography revealed Todani type IVa CBD with pancreaticobiliary maljunction. Then, the patient received liver-supporting therapy and nutritional support for 7 weeks before definitive surgery.
Following the improvement of the hepatic synthetic capacity (Alb, 4.0 mg/dl; AST, 82 IU/L; ALT, 78 IU/L; γ-GTP, 157 mg/dl; D-bil, 0.2 mg/dl; CHE, 232 IU/L; NH3, 75 μg/dl) , we performed extrahepatic bile duct excision and hepaticojejunostomy laparoscopically . Laparoscopic choledochal cyst excision was performed using five ports. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the broad base position, and the operator stand to the right side of the patient. A 10-mm 30° laparoscope was inserted through an umbilical incision along with a trocar with a multichannel port device (E.Z Access/LAP-PROTECTOR minimini; Hakko Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Pneumoperitoneum was established with 8-mm Hg CO2 insufflation. Three additional trocars and a 2.4-mm needle-type grasper (Teleflex, Morrisville, NC, USA) were inserted into the right upper abdomen (operator's left hand, 3.5 mm) and at the right side of the umbilicus (operator's right hand, 5 mm), the left lateral abdomen (assistant's left hand, 3.5 mm), and the left upper abdomen (assistant's right hand, 2.4 mm). The dilated CBD was dissected and then taping was performed. After imaging the lower bile duct and confirming that the bile duct on the side of the pancreas was sufficiently detached, the lower bile duct was clipped and transected. Subsequently, after dissection and transection of the cystic duct, the hepatic duct just above the dilated common hepatic duct was transected. The jejunum was then extracted from the umbilical wound, and Roux-en Y jejunojejunostomy was performed. The mucosa and serosa of the opened hole was approximated using 6–0 absorbable sutures to secure hepaticojejunostomy. The jejunum was pulled up through the retro-colic route. Both the posterior and anterior walls were approximated using interrupted intracorporeal knot-tying with 5–0 absorbable sutures. Laparoscopic surgery was successfully performed along with liver biopsy. Histopathologically, the liver specimen showed chronic hepatitis and fibrosis (F3A2) based on the new Inuyama classification . F4 is defined as liver cirrhosis, but it presents clinical findings as disturbed consciousness with hyperammonemia and intraoperative findings as advanced liver fibrosis, and we clinically diagnosed to be almost equivalent to liver cirrhosis in the compensation stage. Biliary scintigraphy showed good bile excretion on postoperative day 15 . The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 23rd day after surgery.
At 6 months after laparoscopic extrahepatic bile duct resection and hepaticojejunostomy, she was readmitted and underwent needle liver biopsy to confirm the morphological improvement after surgery. After discharge from the hospital, her hepatic function normalized, and her cholinesterase level, which was low before surgery, showed a tendency toward improvement; however, her NH3 level remained above the normal range . A histopathological examination showed mild improvement of chronic hepatitis and fibrosis (F2-3A1) . The patient was regularly followed at the outpatient clinic.