A 63-year-old man was referred to our clinic for primary open glaucoma in both eyes, with an intraocular pressure of 25 mmHg in the right eye despite topic medications (Dorzolamide, Timolol, Travoprost). At the initial visit the anterior segment of the pseudophakic right eye was normal and the best corrected visual acuity was 20/200. The fundus examination showed peripapillary atrophy, glaucomatous neuroretinal rim loss (cup/disk ratio 0,7) and a full thickness macular hole in his right eye. The patient underwent an ab-interno gel stent implantation in the upper nasal quadrant (Xen45, Allergan) after a subconjunctival injection of mitomycin-C (0,1 ml 0,02%). After hydrating the incisions, 0.1 ml of 1% cefuroxime was injected in the anterior chamber and 4 mg/1 ml of dexamethasone phosphate subtenon (Decadron®, Farmaceutici Caber SpA, Italy). Post-surgery care included antibiotic prophylaxis and topical corticoids in decreasing dosage during 1 month. The IOP was 6 mmHg and 10 mmHg in post-operative day 1 and post-operative day 15, respectively. One month after the implantation, the patient underwent retinal surgery in his right eye. The macular hole was successfully closed with a 25-G pars plana vitrectomy (Constellation vitrectomy machine, Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, TX, USA), using the inverted ILM flap technique .
The surgery was uneventful and subconjunctival dexamethasone was used to minimize inflammation. Topical medication with combined antibiotic and steroid drops was prescribed for 1 week.
Six days after vitreous surgery the IOP spiked to 25 mmHg, and the anterior segment examination (Takagi TD10 Eye Cam on a Takagi 700GL Slit lamp) showed a flattening of the conjunctival bleb and a translucent clot covering the internal ostium of the XEN. At the AS-OCT (AngioVue®, Optovue, Fremont, CA, USA) the conjunctival bleb appeared flat and non-functional, and the clot stood out as hyperreflective material which we presumed to be fibrin, occluding the internal end of the stent .
Lysis of the fibrin clot was attempted with YAG-laser (1,1 mJ of power), but the tube remained occluded and the IOP elevated. Therefore, an ab interno revision of the gel stent was performed.
A surgical procedure was performed according to the following steps after obtaining written informed consent from the patient.After application of topical anesthesia with the usual sterile conditions in the operating room, one paracentesis site was created at 90° with respect to the tube (approx. at 10 o’clock) by using a 15° Knife (Stab 15° Safety Knife, Surgistar, California) Trypan blue (Vision Blue, DORC international, BV Zuidland, Netherlands) was injected into the anterior chamber to stain the clot and to verify the extension of tube occlusion. Viscoelastic was introduced in the anterior chamber and a careful fibrin clot removal was attempted with a 25-gauge inner limiting membrane (ILM) forceps (Revolution DSP 25+ Serrated Forceps, Alcon-Grieshaber, Fribourg, Switzerland); however, the clot was strongly adherent to the tube end, and it did not clear. A second paracentesis site was created at 90° with respect to the Xen tube position (approx.at 4 o’clock), and a 25 G straight vitreous scissors (Revolution DSP 25G Curved Scissors, Alcon-Grieshaber, Fribourg, Switzerland) was inserted to snip the proximal end of the Xen tube (a small segment of about 0,5 mm length), flush to the ILM forceps grabbing distally the tube. The flexible nature of the stent required a two-handed technique in order to both immobilize and truncate the end of the stent. The viscoelastic and the excised tube fragment were then removed, and the AC was irrigated with balanced salt solution (BSS) to induce subconjunctival bleb formation. The drainage efficiency was further verified by trypan blue injection into the AC. Finally, the corneal incisions were closed by hydrosuture.
In the postoperative day 1, the IOP was 8 mmHg; the anterior segment examination showed an open diffuse filtering bleb, a normal appearing new internal ostium, and a sustained blue staining of the stent . The AS-OCT confirmed a functional, layered, filtering bleb, and the normal appearance and patency of the stent. No side effects from the intervention were observed.
Topical medication with combined antibiotic and steroid drops was prescribed for 2 weeks. One month after surgery the patient showed IOP =12 mmHg, a visual acuity of 20/40, a patent internal ostium, and an open diffuse filtering bleb.