We present the case of a 51-year-old woman with a history of fibromyalgia and anorexia-bulimia of more than 30 years of evolution, without toxic habits. She comes to the emergency room presenting a picture of expectoration of a yellowish appearance, with scarse cough and without fever, of five months of evolution.

The blood test did not detect significant alterations. However, the chest X-ray showed extensive consolidation predominantly affecting the middle lobe and the upper left lobe, so the patient was admitted for study.

Microbiological and serological determinations were negative (human immunodeficiency virus and SARS-CoV-2), except for the isolation of Serratia marcescens in moderate growth in the sputum.

A chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, which reported confluent opacities including areas of ground glass opacities and consolidation, bilateral and diffuse distribution, and greater extent in the upper left lobe, the lingula, the middle lobe and the lower left lobe. Empirical antibiotic treatment (ceftriaxone 2 g/24 h and azithromycin 500 mg/24 h) and corticosteroid (methylprednisolone 40 mg/12 h) were initiated for seven days.

A flexible fibrobronchoscopy was performed in which no alterations were observed in the tracheobronchial tree. A bronchoalveolar lavage was performed in the middle lobe from which a turbid and yellowish liquid was obtained. Shortly after its obtaining, the liquid obtained was separated into two phases, leaving a supernatant of a foamy, yellowish appearance in the upper part, which was sent to the services of Pathological Anatomy and Microbiology. During the bronchoscopy, biopsy with clamp was performed in the mucosa of the bronchus of the lower left lobe.

The cytology of the bronchoalveolar lavage was negative for malignancy with a differential count of 90% macrophages, 7% lymphocytes and 3% polymorphonuclear cells. As for the microbiological study, no bacterial or fungal growth was observed, no acid-fast bacilli were observed, the mycobacterial culture was negative after 42 days of incubation, and no Legionella spp. was isolated.

Biopsies reported lung parenchyma with preserved architecture, no specific lesions or evidence of deposits, with occasional macrophages with microvacuolated cytoplasm.

Pulmonary function tests were performed with no significant abnormalities.

Due to the absence of clinical changes, and the patient remaining in good general condition at all times, it was decided to proceed with hospital discharge, pending a pulmonary cryobiopsy. This biopsy was performed two months later in the lower left lobe. According to the anatomopathological report, the samples obtained showed areas of occupation of the air spaces by abundant macrophages with intracytoplasmic vacuoles of varying sizes, characteristic of exogenous lipoid pneumonia. Also, large extracellular vacuoles were recognized, surrounded by macrophages with occasional multinucleated elements.

The presence of macrophages with intracytoplasmic vacuoles is characteristic of exogenous lipoid pneumonia. In light of these findings, the final diagnosis was exogenous lipoid pneumonia in probable relation to the patient's purgative behavior, who is currently in the process of recovery and changing habits, without cough or expectoration.
