A 29-year-old female, gravida 3 para 2, was referred to our hospital at 13 weeks of gestation for suspected fetal abdominal wall anomaly. Ultrasound scanning revealed cauliflower-like intestinal loops floating freely in the amniotic fluid, suggesting gastroschisis. There was neither polyhydramnios nor bowel dilatation of the fetus. At 36 weeks’ gestation, a premature male baby weighing 1600 g was born by vaginal delivery with an Apgar score of 8 and 8 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The baby was immediately referred to our neonatal intensive care unit due to evisceration of the stomach and small bowel through a paramedian full-thickness abdominal wall defect . As severe intestinal edema prohibited primary abdominal wall closure, the baby underwent a staged closure of the abdomen using a silo. Then, the Applied Alexis wound protector and retractor system (Applied Medical Resources Corp, USA) was used for wrapping and reducing the eviscerated bowel .
On the 10th postnatal day, the silo was removed and definitive fascial closure was completed by suturing after placing the eviscerated organs into the abdominal cavity.
After abdominal closure, mechanical ventilation was ceased the following day, and enteral feeding was started on the 7th postoperative day. The pace of enteral feeding increase appeared slow, and the baby showed frequent vomiting with increases in feeding dosage. Upper gastrointestinal series performed on day 51 revealed a sliding hiatal hernia, accompanied by marked GER , and hiatal sliding hernia was also confirmed by computed tomography . The baby was managed by gradual increase in oral intake and postcibal positional therapy, and anti-acid drugs. On the 81st postnatal day, the baby was discharged, with a weight of 3040 g, and the ability to tolerate an oral diet.
In spite of continuous conservative management, he began to show frequent vomiting, a failure to thrive, and hematemesis at the age of 8 months. Esophageal pH monitoring of the distal esophagus revealed frequent GER. The percentage of total time with pH less than 4 was 58.2%. A laparoscopic fundoplication was done on the 290th postnatal day, when patient’s body weight was 6500 g.
The first trocar was inserted in the left upper abdomen using Hasson’s method. A laparoscopic view showed a moderate space in the upper abdominal cavity with dozens of fibrous bands connecting the stomach, bowels, liver, and abdominal wall to each other . No adhesion was seen beneath the umbilicus. The second trocar was inserted at the umbilicus, and 3 other ports were added in the usual manner by dissecting several adhesive bands. The herniated upper portion of the stomach and abdominal esophagus could be easily reduced back into the abdomen using forceps with no remarkable tension. After the dissection of the moderately thickened phrenoesophageal ligament, the right and left crus of the diaphragm were cleared. The large hiatal opening, about 3 cm in diameter , was closed around the esophagus with 3 interrupted 3–0 braided polyester sutures . Thereafter, a short and floppy 360° fundic wrap was constructed . The wrap on the stomach was hitched to the bilateral cupolas of the diaphragm. The operation time was 308 min including umbilical reconstruction, and there was little blood loss. The patient’s postoperative recovery was uneventful, and he was discharged without incident on postoperative day 7. Postoperatively, vomiting ceased and an upper gatrointestinal examination revealed no signs of GER. He is now 8 years old and has remained asymptomatic.