A 48-year-old man presented to the orthopedic oncology outpatient department with multiple large soft-tissue swellings over the dorsum of hands, extensor aspects of his elbows, knees, and feet . The swellings were also present over his heels overlying the Achilles tendons. The swellings started when the patient was 26 years of age and gradually kept on increasing in size to their present-day form. These swellings varied in size from 2 cm × 2 cm of few swellings over the dorsum of hands to 12 cm × 10 cm over the dorsum of feet. On examination, these swellings were firm, non-tender, mobile, and few swellings had developed overlying skin changes in the form of reddish-yellow discoloration and stretched-out appearance. The family history was unremarkable. Blood investigations (hemogram, serum electrolytes, liver enzymes, renal function, and blood glucose) and chest radiographs which the patient was carrying were completely normal. A dermatology consult was sought and based on the clinical history and appearance of the swellings; a provisional diagnosis of Multiple Xanthomas was considered. The lipid profile of the patient was got done and it revealed very high serum cholesterol and serum LDL (Low-density lipoproteins) levels. His lipid profile was as follows: Total cholesterol: 476 mg/dL; low-density lipoprotein (LDL): 361 mg/dL; triglyceride (TG): 103 mg/dL; very LDL (VLDL): 24 mg/dL; and high-density lipoprotein (HDL): 50 mg/dL. The lipid profile derangement pattern was suggestive of Type IIa FH.
Since, the patient had extremely large swellings at certain regions, due to which he experienced trouble in kneeling and walking, a surgical plan to excise the symptomatic swellings – over the elbow, over the patellar region, and over the heel was made. The excised swellings were sent for histopathological examination. The gross cut surface of the swellings was reported to be firm with yellowish to orangish nodular appearance. On microscopy, all soft-tissue swellings had a similar morphological appearance consisting of nodules composed of sheets of foamy histiocytes, numerous cholesterol clefts, and giant cells in dermis and subcutis . The final histopathological report was consistent with a diagnosis of xanthomas. The patient recovered uneventfully following the surgery.
Since the patient was diagnosed with hypercholesterolemia, the patient was started on lipid-lowering medications including high dose statins with niacin. He also underwent a cardiac evaluation to see for systemic manifestations of hypercholesterolemia including atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. The patient was strongly positive for exercise-induced ischemia on treadmill exercise stress test and subsequently started on appropriate cardiac medications. At the last follow-up with us, the patient reported improvement in his lipid profile and a generalized global reduction of the size of the remaining xanthomas, with no development of any new lesions.