An 85-years old woman was referred because of worsening asthenia, lumbar pain, generalized myalgia and arthralgia. The patient had a history of toxic multinodular goiter, hypertension, atrial fibrillation treated with metimazole, irbesartan and dabigratan, respectively. An accurate cardiological evaluation, including electrocardiogram and echocardiography, excluded that the impairment of the symptoms was due to the cardiovascular alterations. Moreover, general hematologic tests, as well as the thyroid function resulted normal.
Clinical picture was negative, except for NYHA class II, whereas chest x-ray showed the presence of a very small nodule in the middle lobe of the right lung. However, a computed tomography (CT) scan did not confirm the x-ray picture, whereas evidenced two large bilateral adrenal masses (85 × 75x62 mm on the right, and 62 × 59x24 mm on the left side), with positive contrast enhancement and reduced washout on delayed images. The masses displayed a right extension to the aorto-caval space, incorporating the renal vessels and imprinting the inferior vena cava . These radiological features were highly suspicious for primary adrenal tumor. Normal values of the urinary metanephrines ruled out the hypothesis of pheochromocytoma. Moreover, the diagnosis of adrenal carcinoma was unlikely, since circulating levels of androgens (testosterone, Dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate, Delta4 androstenedione) were low or normal, except for an increase of 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP). This finding was confirmed through two repeated measurements (2.88 mcg/L and 2.79; normal value between 0.13 and 0.51). The 17-OHP levels were assayed by radioimmunoassay. Assay sensitivity was 0.01 ng/dL, whereas intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation were both 9.0%). The remaining hormonal assessment revealed very low levels of morning plasma cortisol and the 24-h urinary free cortisol in the lower range of normality, elevated ACTH levels with low plasma concentration of aldosterone, pointing to the diagnosis of PAI .
Radiological assessment ruled out the presence of adrenal haemorrhages that may occur during chronic anticoagulant therapy, particularly during dabigratan treatment. Although previously described , this is a very rare, difficult to diagnose and potentially fatal condition if not recognized and promptly treated.
After diagnosis of PAI our patient started glucocorticoid and mineralcorticoid replacement therapy (cortisone acetate and fludrocortisone) with a partial clinical benefit. In order to further characterize the adrenal lesions, adrenal biopsy, initially refused by the patient, was performed 4 months later, when a second CT scan depicted a significant increase of the two adrenal masses (the right resulted 150 × 110x120 and the left 110 × 95x44 mm) . The histology revealed a high grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma with an immunophenotype consistent with intermediate aspects between diffuse large B-cell and Burkitt lymphoma, with a high proliferation index (KI-67 > 90%) .
Due to the complex clinical presentation, as well as the atypical classification, the patient received chemotherapy with epirubicin, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab (anti CD20 monoclonal antibody), associated with methylprednisolone that resulted in a complete clinical and radiological remission within one year . After 2 years from the diagnosis and a total of 6 cycles of rituximab, the patient is in very good clinical condition and is currently taking only the replacement therapy for the adrenal insufficiency.
Considering the high levels of 17-OHP at diagnosis we hypothesized a partial 21-hydroxylase deficiency, that could have led, together with the mass effect, to the onset of PAI. However, after two years ACTH test evidenced a normal 21-hydroxylase activity (baseline and stimulated 17-OHP were 0.34 and 0.46 mcg/L, respectively).