A 22-year-old woman, G3P1, was admitted in August 2021 after being referred from a local hospital for amenorrhea of 23 weeks and 5 days duration.
Before referral, an ultrasound scan in the seventh week of her pregnancy showed she had a congenital uterine malformation suspicious of a bicornuate uterus. The scan also revealed an intrauterine pregnancy in one cavity, a live embryo, a small amount of fluid around the pregnancy sac, and what appeared to be some fluid in the other uterus. Her previous pregnancy, five years earlier, culminated in an emergency cesarean section for intrauterine fetal distress. She claimed to have a bicornuate uterus.
After admission, an ultrasound scan showed a live fetus in the abdominal cavity with the placenta on the right side of the abdominal cavity instead of in the endometrium. We diagnosed the woman with a case of abdominal pregnancy.
In September 2021, during the 29th week of her pregnancy, the patient experienced intermittent abdominal pain for 3 h. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an abdominal pregnancy and rupture of the fetal membranes. We performed an emergency laparotomy and found part of the omentum adherent to the anterior abdominal wall and a live fetus of the same gestational age on the left side of the abdominal cavity.
During the surgery, we performed procedures such as transurethral ureteroscopy, double J-stent placement, transabdominal fetal removal, placentectomy , right uterine cornual repair, and pelvic adhesiolysis. We found that the amniotic membrane had ruptured, but there were no clear ascites or amniotic fluid in the abdominal and pelvic cavities. In the right pelvic cavity, an amniotic sac covered the placenta, which was attached to the right uterine horn. The placental implantation site was approximately 2 cm × 3 cm, the placental size was approximately 15 cm × 10 cm, and the fetal membrane was wrapped around it. The uterus was enlarged, equivalent to the size of a 60-day gestation, soft, and showed no abnormalities in the appearance of the bilateral appendages. The right fallopian tube and the ovarian ligament were approximately 1 cm from the implantation site. We separated the adhesions between the omentum and the anterior abdominal wall, carefully explored the pelvic and abdominal cavities, and found the placenta implanted in the right uterine horn with no evidence of pelvic, abdominal organ, or large vessel involvement.
We delivered a live male infant in the left sacro-anterior position (LSA) weighing 1200 g, with a body length of 38 cm and a head circumference of 27 cm. The APGAR scores at 1 min and 5 min after birth were 10 and 10, respectively. The placenta weighed approximately 500 g.
The placenta was attached to the right uterine horn, and the left uterine horn was normal. The fetus and placenta entered the abdominal cavity by rupturing the right uterine horn. The placenta was attached to the right uterine horn, sealing the rupture. The surgeon repaired the right uterine horn after delivering the placenta.
The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged eight days after surgery. The discharge diagnosis was rudimentary uterine horn pregnancy and secondary abdominal pregnancy. Immediately after birth, the newborn was transferred to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) for further management. He was diagnosed with bronchopulmonary dysplasia, neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, intrauterine infectious pneumonia, premature encephalopathy, jaundice of premature infants, anemia of premature infants (moderate), sclerema neonatorum (mild), hyperthermia, and fetal growth restriction. He also had hypoalbuminemia, hyperkalemia, and vitamin D deficiency. Eventually, he was discharged from the hospital after 41 days of NICU management. A follow-up was scheduled for this patient, but she did not have regular follow-up.