A 37-year-old Indonesian woman was brought to the emergency department (ED) at 36 weeks gestation in her second pregnancy with shortness of breath that worsened 1 day before admission. She had a fever and bloody phlegm cough within the last 2 days, accompanied by painful swallowing and hoarseness for 2 months. She also had worsening gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) without medication, as well as a history of thyroidectomy due to malignancy 2 years ago.
Upon arrival, she had a respiratory rate of 26–30 breaths per minute, SpO2 of 98% on nasal oxygen supplementation, pulse rate of 110–120 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 172/92 mmHg. The pregnancy ultrasound showed a single live intrauterine fetus with a normal fetal heart rate [estimated fetal weight (EFW) 2184 g], corresponding to 36 weeks of gestation, and no cervical dilation. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis of 17,000/µL and proteinuria. Other tests such as albumin, electrolytes, and coagulation profile were within normal range. A preliminary diagnosis of pneumonia or heart failure was made in the ED. The patient was initially treated with ceftizoxime 1 g injection t.i.d. and furosemide 20 mg injection, and was planned to be admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). However, later the chest X-ray showed neither signs of infiltrates nor pulmonary edema, and echocardiography showed normal left and right heart function.
We suspected laryngeal edema in the ICU due to the patient’s preeclamptic condition and stridor, which was initially treated with an empirical methylprednisolone injection of 125 mg t.i.d. and nebulized epinephrine. Pantoprazole 40 mg injection b.i.d. was also administered to overcome GERD.
A total of 16 hours after admission to the ICU, her condition deteriorated, with worsened tachypnea, decreased oxygen saturation, and an inability to talk, so we decided to perform intubation. Mask ventilation was used for preoxygenation, and no difficulty was encountered. Intubation was facilitated by administering propofol (1.5 mg/kg BW) and fentanyl (1 μg/kg BW). We could only use 6.0-sized endotracheal tube (ETT) because of the edematous larynx. We stopped giving sedation after the patient could tolerate the use of ETT. Pressure support ventilator mode and spontaneous breathing with T-tube were used, taking turns.
The following days, a fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed uneven granular vocal cords with multiple white plaques and a swollen red appearance due to laryngeal edema . Due to a suspicion of fungal infection based on bronchoscopy findings, methylprednisolone was stopped and additional treatment of fluconazole 800 mg, then 400 mg q.d., was given.
The use of a small-sized ETT was expected to be short-lived, so she was considered for tracheostomy. Nevertheless, we decided to perform a cesarean section first after lung maturation because it would be safer for the fetus, and laryngeal edema usually improves after delivery.
Despite the fact that the patient was still using ETT, she was utterly cooperative, so spinal anesthesia was given instead of general anesthesia . Hyperbaric bupivacaine 10 mg with fentanyl 25 μg was administered from the L4/L5 interspace. There were no intraoperative problems. She was readmitted to the ICU after surgery with no significant complaints, and 48 hours after delivery, her clinical and vital signs were stable.
Extubation was performed after a positive result from the leakage test. Stridor was no longer audible, breathing pattern was within normal limits, and vital signs were stable, although the patient still could not talk. She was transferred to the ward for postpartum care. A laryngeal lavage fluid sample was taken during the bronchoscopy for culture, and a week later, the result came back with Enterobacter aerogenes.
After 2 days of treatment in the ward, the patient was discharged from the hospital. She returned to our hospital 2 weeks later for a post-discharge follow-up, and her condition improved. The baby was also in good health. Table presents a timeline of the case history.