On 15 March 2020, a 70 year-old man was admitted to a peripheral hospital in South Tyrol (Italy) because of fever (up to 39 °C) and a slightly dry cough. He presented with a history of arterial hypertension, a status post resection of a caecal tubular adenoma in 2018 and a nicotine abuse of 30 pack years until 2010. Nevertheless, the patient was in a good state of health, having run a half marathon two weeks prior to the admission. The performed SARS-CoV-2 test (RT-PCR) showed a positive result. On admission an empiric antimicrobial therapy was initiated with ceftriaxon 2g i.v. once daily and after two days escalated to levofloxacin 750 mg i.v. once daily and amoxicilline-clavulate 2.2 g i.v. tid. As an antiviral therapy the patient received hydroxychloroquine 200 mg p.o. for 8 days and darunavir 800 mg p.o. in combination with ritonavir 100 mg p.o. for 7 days. Remdesivir had been neither available nor recommended by the local treatment protocol at that time in Italy.
The following week, the patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly, and on 23 March 2020, intubation and mechanical ventilation with the transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU) were inevitable. For gaining antimicrobial probes the antibiotic therapy was discontinued for 1 day and reinitiated with piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g i.v. tid, which was administrated for 11 days. Due to rapidly increasing inflammatory parameters the antibiotic therapy was switched to meropenem and linezolid. Despite, the patient developed an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and ventilationtherapy required a FiO2 max of 1.0 for two days, a Pinsp between 20 and 30 mbar and a positive end-expiratory pressure level between 8 and 14 mbar. The patient underwent a total of 12 cycles of pronation with mostly a good response and an overall median increase of the pO2 of 50 mmHg. An extubation attempt two weeks later failed. Consecutively, due to the pronounced radiological findings and the expected prolonged weaning time, a tracheostomy was performed on 18 May 2020. Of note, because of the lack of experience and evidence no initial corticoid therapy had been started. In the further course the patient received twice a steroid cycle therapy, the first on 9 April 2020 after the failed extubation attempt in the 4th week of his hospitalisation, the second was started on 27 April 2020, in the 7th week . Firstly, due to a sepsis 200 mg hydrocortisone were administered which was then switched to methylprednisolone for tapering and secondly, 300 mg hydrocortisone was given for 3 days, with consecutive 240 mg methylprednisolone i.v. for 5 days as a rescue therapy because of the poor clinical improvement, which was again tapered for 4 days. Upon the methylprednisolone therapy the patient improved gradually. After approximately 6 weeks of intubation, the weaning phase was successfully concluded on 6 May 2020 and the patient was able to breath spontaneously without any mechanical support.
Overall, the laboratory findings confirmed a status of hyper-inflammation with increased interleukin 6, ferritin, C-reactive protein and pro-calcitonin levels . The microbiological investigations revealed a moderate growth of Candida albicans in the bronchial aspirate without treatment indication from probes that were gained at a timepoint in April, at which the patient was in a stable clinical health status.
Fatefully, in addition to COVID-19, an incidental pulmonary nodule of about 2.5 cm was detected in the right upper lobe in the former smoker. After the patient’s recovery and pulmonary rehabilitation, further clinical diagnostics of the pulmonary nodule revealed the diagnosis of a pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Astonishingly, six months post COVID-19, the 70 year-old man presented with normal spirometry findings, a VO2max of 26 ml/min/kg and a normal lung perfusion scintigraphy. Thus, a video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) lobectomy of the right upper lobe could be performed on 1 October 2020.
The histopathological evaluation of the tumor-distant-lung parenchyma (craniolateral, Fig. F) revealed neither residual signs of late-stage diffuse alveolar damage, nor microvascular alterations, nor signs of interstitial lung disease.
In particular, we were interested in a potential histological correlation to the residual ground-glass opacities and sub-pleural lines . In this context, some discrete sub-pleural septal thickening and peri-bronchiolar fibrosis were described histopathologically. Furthermore, electron microscopy confirmed sub-pleural braid-like islands of fibrosis, but otherwise no inter-alveolar septal fibrosis . According to the pathologists, peri-bronchiolar fibrosis was rather seen as a smoking-associated sequelae. In consideration of the patient’s good general condition, these changes did not appear to be linked to clinically significant functional impairment.