A 51-year-old man had previously undergone a vertebral body resection, bone grafting and internal fixation surgery due to eosinophilic granuloma of the 9th thoracic vertebra in Dec 2014. In June 2015, the patient presented to our hospital with symptoms of chest tightness and lower back discomfort. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a pseudoaneurysm of the thoracic aorta and recommended surgical intervention. However, the patient declined the surgery because he considered the risk, especially paraplegia, to be high. Six months later, follow-up CT examination revealed no improvement in the condition of the pseudoaneurysm, leading to the decision to seek further treatment at our hospital in Jan 2016.
Preoperative X-rays showed an abnormal bulging shadow in the descending aorta and a slightly enlarged aortic arch. CT scans revealed that a screw used in spinal surgery penetrated the wall of the descending aorta and locally formed a pseudoaneurysm, with the size of 27*42 mm, in the mid-segment of the descending aorta, with a significant amount of intraluminal thrombus and shell-like calcifications. The proximal landing diameter is approximately 23 mm, and the distal landing diameter is approximately 22 mm.
Under general anesthesia, the right femoral artery was accessed, and angiography confirmed the pseudoaneurysm in the mid-segment of the descending aorta, just located at the level of the spinal column fixation instruments. No significant AKA was identified during the procedure, and several pairs of intercostal arteries of similar sizes were visible. A 28–80 mm stent graft (Lifetech, Shenzhen, China) was placed via the right common femoral artery to seal the lesion. Subsequent angiography showed slight type Ia endoleak. Considering the risk of endoleak and the potential durability problems caused by friction between the stent graft and the screw, we decided to implant a second stent graft. Subsequently, a 28–140 mm stent graft (COOK, Bloomington, USA) was deployed just inside the first one. The second stent graft lengthened the proximal landing zone and strengthened the local abrasion resistance. The final angiography revealed complete exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm with no endoleak . Due to the orthopedic consultation determining that the removal would pose significant risks and the patient’s refusal of further open surgery, the screws were not extracted. Extubation was carried out in the operating room under general anesthesia, and assessment of lower limb function was performed. The operation was successful, the patient recovered well and was discharged from hospital 5 days later. There were no complications such as paraplegia, paresis or infection. Postoperative CT scans showed excellent apposition of the two stent grafts with no evidence of endoleak.
During a follow-up period of nearly 8 years, CT scans indicated that the descending aortic stent grafts keep patency, and the lesion became smaller year by year and gradually absorbed. He recovered well and remained asymptomatic. The quality of life has not been affected in any way.