An 84-year-old woman was diagnosed with a simple liver cyst during a medical checkup. One year later, she was referred to our hospital for the evaluation of an enlarging distinct mural nodule in the liver cyst. No specific symptoms were present, and physical examinations did not reveal any abnormalities. The blood tests showed normal liver function and were negative for both hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibody. However, the levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (5.0 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen (CA19-9; 43.5 U/mL) were slightly elevated. On contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), a well-defined, low-attenuation lesion without a septum was observed. The maximal diameter of the lesion had increased from 41 to 47 mm in one year . No dilation of the bile duct was observed. Enhanced ultrasonography showed an enhanced nodule with a distinct artery into the nodule . A 14 mm mural nodule with gradual enhancement was confirmed. MRI revealed a homogenous water intensity cystic lesion accompanied by a mural nodule, which exhibited peripheral low intensity and central high intensity on heavily T2-weighted image . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) did not show increased fluorodeoxyglucose activity at the mural nodule . The cystic tumor was considered potentially malignant because the mural nodule was growing in size and had apparent blood flow inside, so we offered the patient two options: surgical resection or careful watching. Finally, she decided to have surgery, and partial liver resection with sufficient margins was performed. We never perform aspiration of intracystic fluid to avoid tumor cell spillage. Macroscopically, the cut surface of the resected specimen displayed a thin-walled liver cyst with a mural nodule and included denatured liquid content. Pathological examination revealed a cystic lesion with a thin whitish fibrous wall, and a black-colored 5-mm nodule was located in the cyst wall over the normal liver tissue. The cyst wall was lined by an inner layer of cytokeratin 19-positive columnar epithelium, and the black-colored nodule was composed of dilated vessels lined with CD31- and CD34-positive endothelial cells . The final diagnosis was cavernous hemangioma in a simple liver cyst. She was discharged on the 9th day after surgery without any complications and was doing well after three months.