The patient was a 74-year-old male who underwent heart transplantation in 2016 and presented to our facility as a direct transfer for headaches, acute renal injury, and tremors. Four months prior to admission, he had a routine echocardiogram and coronary angiogram for post-transplant surveillance, with no focal abnormalities reported. For transplant immunosuppression, he was taking tacrolimus 1 mg twice daily and mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg twice daily. The patient was not taking any antibiotic or antifungal medications.
He was diagnosed with COVID via rapid testing 7 days prior to admission and was prescribed Paxlovid nirmatrelvir 300–ritonavir 100 mg twice daily by an outside, non-transplant provider for a 5-day course. During that time, the patient noticed worsening headaches, vertigo-like symptoms, and a metallic taste in his mouth. The headaches did not relieve with acetaminophen therapy. During that time while he was taking Paxlovid, he continued to take his home dose of tacrolimus (1 mg twice daily). There was no collected serum creatinine, tacrolimus trough level, or random tacrolimus level at the time he was prescribed with Paxlovid. His last creatinine was one month prior to Paxlovid and was 1.2 mg/dL (normal ≤ 1.2 mg/dL) with a blood urea nitrogen of 19 mg/dL (normal ≤20 mg/dL). His last trough was 5.1 ng/mL (goal 4–6 ng/mL) four months prior to admission. The patient initially went to his local facility with these symptoms. Given his history of heart transplant and established relationship with our transplant program, he was transferred here for further management .
On examination, the patient was alert and oriented. He endorsed headaches but did not have limb weakness, numbness, tingling, or dysphagia. He did endorse mild tremors (hand tremors noted bilaterally) but denied chest pain, trouble breathing, or fluid retention. On admission, his vitals were recorded. He was afebrile with a temperature of 36.3°C, and the blood pressure was elevated with a reading of 149/86 mm Hg. He maintained a normal oxygen saturation of 96% on ambient air. The cardiovascular examination revealed a regular rate and rhythm without any concerning murmurs, rubs, or gallops. At that point, the differential for his constellation of symptoms included dehydration, atypical migraine, and accelerated hypertension with symptoms.
Serum chemistry, complete blood count, and a tacrolimus morning trough level were obtained. His serum chemistry noted a mildly elevated creatinine level of 1.31 mg/dL with a blood urea nitrogen of 31 mg/dL. Complete blood count was unremarkable. His serum tacrolimus level was recorded as >60 ng/mL (an exact measurement could not be obtained as the value exceeded this laboratory limit). A non-contrasted computerized tomography scan was obtained of the head, which revealed no acute intracranial abnormalities.
The tacrolimus was held during his hospitalization. He was started on intravenous hydration with lactated ringers at 100 mL/h for 10 h initially on Day 0 of the hospital stay. He received intravenous 0.9% normal saline at 100 mL/h for 10 h daily for three additional doses. No additional therapies were used to address the supra-therapeutic tacrolimus level. There were no specific therapies required for management of patient’s COVID-19. His oxygen saturation was normal, and he was not in respiratory distress. The patient’s headache improved. Standard strength acetaminophen was used on a parenteral basis to treat the headache. Daily labs showed a decline in his trough levels. The hand tremor persisted but was mild in severity. Both the serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels also normalized. The patient still had an elevated level of tacrolimus, 15 ng/dL, on the day of discharge, but he was asymptomatic and instructed to resume the tacrolimus at his home dosing. He was scheduled to return to the clinic in 1 week and repeat a trough level. The patient did return to clinic 1 week after discharge, and his trough level, obtained 10 days post-discharge, was 4.7. He did not report any further adverse events and that the headaches and tremors had resolved.