A 61-year-old woman with PD for 17 months because of end-stage kidney disease caused by immunoglobin A nephropathy visited our hospital regularly with no major issues. The abrupt elevation of transaminase levels in blood test results was observed during a routine outpatient session. That day was designated as day 0. The patient was awake, with a blood pressure of 158/88 mmHg and a body temperature of 36.8 degrees Celsius. She showed no signs of fatigue, nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or jaundice. The effluent of PD was not cloudy and ultrafiltration was not impaired. Blood test results revealed elevations of liver enzymes such as aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase. On a computer tomography examination, we found a slightly enlarged liver suspected of liver injury. We did not perform a liver biopsy or ultrasound imaging. Since day −49, the patient has been receiving tolvaptan 7.5 mg/day for volume control as the only new medication. Although her liver function was normal as of day −49 and the next session on day −28, we suspected tolvaptan-induced liver injury. We immediately discontinued tolvaptan administration and consulted the Gastroenterology Department of our hospital. To further investigate the cause of liver injury, the blood screening test was positive for HEV-IgA, and the patient was diagnosed with HEV infection; other blood test results suggesting hepatic failure caused by viral and autoimmune hepatitis were negative.

Patient comorbidities included hypertension, renal and iron deficiency anemia, insomnia, and restless legs syndrome. The patient had no experience with blood transfusion, and the patient’s family did not have any history of liver injury. She did not consume any apparent contaminated water or raw meat such as swine, deer, and wild boar. The patient had not visited any countries with a known risk of developing HEV infection. In terms of medications, the patient was taking tolvaptan 7.5 mg/day, furosemide 160 mg/day, trichlormethiazide 4 mg/day, pramipexole 0.25 mg/day, amlodipine 7.5 mg/day, telmisartan 80 mg/day, zolpidem 5 mg/day, lansoprazole 15 mg/day, epinastine 20 mg/day, lanthanum carbonate hydrate 1500 mg/day, evocalcet 2 mg/day, sodium ferrous citrate 50 mg/day, and Clostridium butyricum MIYAIRI. We did not treat her HEV infection because lowering transaminase levels were already observed when we diagnosed the HEV infection with positive HEV-IgA on day 14, with no new symptoms. Additionally, we did not resume the usage of tolvaptan after the development of HEV infection as tolvaptan did not increase the urinary volume. The patient’s hepatic failure has not relapsed as of day 91.