The case is of a 3.7-kg, 1-month-old male patient who presented at day 24 of life with severe aortic stenosis (AS) and coarctation of the aorta (CoA). He was born at term following an uncomplicated pregnancy. On day 5 of life, he was noted to be jaundiced and have a murmur. His jaundice resolved, and he was discharged home with cardiac follow-up. He then had progressive increase in his work of breathing and was not gaining weight. He had an echocardiogram on day 24 of life which showed a thickened and dysplastic bicuspid aortic valve with doming of the valve leaflets. The flow across the valve was measured on continuous wave doppler at 4 m/s. He was also found to have a discrete juxta ductal coarctation of the aorta with continuous doppler flow of 2.5 m/s with diastolic tail. His ventricular function remained preserved. He was started on intravenous prostaglandin and urgent surgery was scheduled.
Due to the complexity of the case and the need for both aortic valve and aortic arch intervention, it was felt the best course of action would be a hybrid approach with surgical end-to-end anastomosis of the aortic arch via a thoracotomy followed by surgical carotid cut down for AoVP. This plan was made to avoid the need for a sternotomy on bypass to alleviate the aortic valve stenosis. The patient was taken to the hybrid catheter laboratory theater, where he was placed in the left lateral position, prepped and draped. He underwent the surgical end-to-end anastomosis via the thoracotomy via the third intercostal space, as planned. The arch, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and descending aorta were then dissected out. Clamps were applied to the arch and descending aorta. The coarctation segment was resected and PDA ligated. After this, an end to side anastomosis was performed between the aortic arch and the descending aorta. The pleura and chest were closed in layers.
At this point the patient was assessed and felt to be stable to proceed with the planned aortic balloon. The patient was turned from the lateral position to his back and the surgeon performed a carotid cutdown on the right common carotid artery. A 5/0 purse string suture was applied to the vessel, and through that a 4-Fr sheath was inserted in the right common carotid artery. Using a 4-Fr pigtail catheter, ascending aortic pressure was measured at 61/42 mmHg. An aortic angiogram was then performed and the aortic valve annulus measured 7.5 mm. The pigtail catheter was then replaced with a 4-Fr Judkins Right Coronary Catheter (JR). Using a Terumo 0.035″ guide wire the JR catheter was placed into the left ventricle (LV). The pressure in the LV was recorded at 110/13 mmHg, giving a peak to peak gradient of 49 mmHg. A 0.014 ChoICE PT extra support coronary wire (Boston Scientific) was then placed in the LV and the JR catheter removed. Next a NuMED Tyshak II 6 mm × 2 cm percutaneous transluminal valvuloplasty balloon catheter was chosen and delivered over the ChoICE wire to the aortic valve. The balloon was inflated to burst pressure of 4 atmospheres (atm) with waist seen within the balloon and dewaisting occurred. The balloon catheter was removed and the JR catheter re-introduced. The pressure was measured at 100/10 mmHg. Repeat angiogram at the aortic root at this stage did not demonstrate any significant aortic incompetence. The JR catheter and the Terumo wire were again used to recross the valve, and a 7 mm × 2 cm NuMED Tyshak II percutaneous transluminal valvuloplasty balloon catheter was chosen and delivered over the coronary guidewire in position. The balloon was inflated to 4 atm, a waist was again seen and dewaisting occurred. The balloon catheter was removed, and the JR catheter placed back into the LV. Pressure within the LV was now 90/10 mmHg with pullback peak to peak gradient between the LV and ascending aorta measuring 30 mmHg. The catheter and sheath were removed, the vessel was repaired by tightening the pursestring suture and the skin closed in layers.
An echocardiogram performed post procedure showed qualitatively normal ventricular function with no pericardial effusion. The arch was unobstructed with doppler flow velocity of 1.6 m/s. The aortic valve was bicuspid and obviously dysplastic. There was mild flow acceleration across the valve using continuous wave doppler of 3 m/s with mean doppler gradient of 15 mmHg. There was no obvious aortic incompetency seen.
The patient was transferred from the hybrid catheter laboratory to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). He remained cardiovascularly stable during his PICU admission. He was extubated but had to be reintubated within a few hours due to upper airway issues which prolonged his PICU stay. He was successfully extubated on day 3 post procedure and was transferred to the cardiac ward. His admission on the ward was uncomplicated and he was discharged on day 6 post intervention.
At 4 months of age, he was reviewed in the outpatient clinic. He was clinically asymptomatic with steady growth. His echocardiogram demonstrated qualitatively normal ventricular function, the aortic valve stenosis was mild to moderate with flow of 3.7 m/s on continuous wave doppler with mean gradient of 30 mmHg. There was evidence of mild aortic incompetence, his aortic arch remained unobstructed with flow velocity of 1.4 m/s. His most recent follow-up was at 8 months of age. He remained asymptomatic and well with his weight increasing to 9 kg. His echocardiogram again demonstrated qualitatively normal ventricular function, bicuspid aortic valve with flow of 3.2 m/s across the valve. There was mild aortic incompetence and the aortic arch remained unobstructed. There were no issues with his carotid artery access and there were no ongoing neurological issues.