In 2015, a then 52-year-old man was referred to our radiation oncology department for evaluation of hemostatic treatment. He presented with chest pain, dyspnea, fatigue, loss of appetite, weight loss, recurrent respiratory infections, and episodes of significant hemoptysis. Medical history included pulmonary TB in 1995 , which was adequately treated with antitubercular medications for 6 months, resulting in a residual cavity in the left lower lobe. Hemoptysis first occurred a couple of years after initial TB treatment and symptoms had become aggravated since then. In 2007, the patient presented with a new episode of hemoptysis. His medical history and a CT scan of the chest lead to the differential diagnosis of pulmonary aspergillosis. The patient was hemodynamically stable and a hemoglobin of 155 g/L (reference value 135–168 g/L) was measured. Since bronchoscopy confirmed endobronchial bleeding from the segments where the lesion was located, partial resection of the left inferior lobe was performed in the same year. Aspergilloma was confirmed by histopathological examination of the resected lung tissue. A post-interventional CT scan of the chest, however, showed persistence of the aspergilloma. In addition, persistence was suggested microbiologically by positive Aspergillus cultures from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and sputum at different timepoints. In the following years, three attempts at endovascular embolization of pulmonary arteries, the first in 2008, were performed due to recurring hemoptysis, without achieving lasting hemostasis. Therefore, long-term antifungal therapy with itraconazole was initiated in 2009 and continued for 2.5 years. In addition to the aspergillosis, the patient was diagnosed with a pulmonary actinomycosis in 2015, a rare opportunistic bacterial infection of the lung. Actinomyces were also isolated from a bronchoscopic biopsy in the left lower lobe. Although Aspergillus cultures and Aspergillus precipitin could not reaffirm aspergilloma persistence at that time, these results did not definitely rule out a concomitant fungal and bacterial infection. The patient’s pulmonary function was further reduced after suffering multiple pulmonary emboli. The last complete pulmonary function testing prior to radiotherapy was performed in 2013. It revealed a vital capacity (VC) of 2.15 L (44% of reference value), forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 1.55 L (41%), and a diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 7.4 mmol/min/kPa (71%), so that the patient was considered unfit for further surgical interventions. During the first consultation in our clinic, the patient reported recurrent episodes of hemoptysis causing blood loss of more than 100 ml per day. A CT of the chest showed a persistent, spiculated, partly cavernous lesion in the left lower lobe with a diameter of approximately 5 cm . Treatment planning also included an 18F‑FDG-PET/CT scan to localize the fungal manifestation and identified the metabolically active inflamed vascular lining of the cavity as the most likely cause of bleeding . SBRT with a total dose of 16 Gy was applied in two fractions of 8 Gy on consecutive days with a robotic arm-mounted linear accelerator equipped with an iris collimator (CyberKnife®, Accuray Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA; Fig. b). Dose was prescribed to the 80% isodose line and the ray-tracing algorithm was used for dose calculation. After acquisition of a 4D-planning CT to account for respiratory motion, the planning target volume (PTV) was generated from an internal target volume (ITV), adding a 2-mm margin. Despite an irregularly shaped PTV, the chosen irradiation technique allowed us to achieve a conformal dose distribution of the target volume and tolerable doses for relevant organs at risk (OAR) as shown in the dose–volume histogram (DVH; Fig. c). The treatment was well tolerated, and no side effects were reported by the patient. During the 6 years of follow-up at our department, the patient has reported a significant decrease in hemoptysis frequency and volume, and no new long-term medication or invasive treatments have been necessary since then. When he presented at the hospital’s emergency unit with dyspnea and small-volume hemoptysis in 2016, there were no signs of an active or older bleeding evident in CT or bronchoscopy. Hemoglobin level remained stable at around 140 g/L over the years and fell below 120 g/L only once during an episode of community-acquired pneumonia in 2016 not accompanied by hemoptysis. Regular CT scans of the chest confirmed a stable size of the pulmonary lesion after an initial pseudoprogression, which is often observed after SBRT for large target volumes .