A 71-year-old Chinese man presented with urinary hesitancy, dribbling urination, and prolonged urination and was diagnosed as benign prostatic hyperplasia at out-patient one year ago. The serum creatinine was 101 μmol/L (normal range 53~140 μmol/L) at that moment. He was prescribed with epristeride and tamsulosin. Nine months ago, the patient stopped the oral medication because of loss of appetite. The symptoms of urinary hesitancy, dribbling and prolonged urination worsened gradually and therefore he was admitted to our hospital for surgery. On admission, the renal function test revealed a serum creatinine level of 291.0 μmol/L. The post-void residual was normal. The ultrasonic examination revealed that both kidneys were normal in structure and size (left 11.6 cm × 6.3 cm,right 10.7 cm × 4.4 cm). Obstructive nephropathy was thus excluded and the surgery was canceled for renal dysfunction. The patient was transferred to renal division of internal medicine department where additional tests were performed in order to establish the etiology of his documented renal failure. The results of routine peripheral blood test were as follows: hemoglobin 89 g/L (normal range 130~175 g/L), white blood cells 5.21 × 109/L (normal range 3.5~9.55.21 × 109/L), and platelets 204 × 109/L (normal range 100~300 × 109/L). Urinalysis was positive for 1+ protein. Red blood cells and white blood cells were negative in urine sediment microscopic examination. The 24 h urinary protein determination was 0.67 g. Fecal occult blood testing was positive. In addition, the serum creatinine level increased to 415 μmol/L. The immunology tests revealed the following: anti-nuclear antibody + 1:100, rheumatoid factor 149 IU/ml (normal range < 20 IU/ml), IgG 23 g/L (normal range 8~15.5 g/L), serum IgG4 13.9 g/L (normal range 0.035~1.5 g/L), IgE 288.7 IU/ml (normal range 0.1~150 IU/ml), C3 0.4310 g/L (normal range 0.785~1.520 g/L), C4 0.0362 g/L (normal range 0.145~0.360 g/L). The direct Coomb’s test was negative. The anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody were both negative. The abdominal ultrasonography revealed multiple solid nodules in the liver. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed multiple liver parenchymal round shaped long T1 and long T2 signal nodules, with a diameter of between 0.6 and 16 cm. The nodules revealed mild enhancement during arterial enhancement phase with some of them showed a decline of enhancement during portal enhancement period. Since the patient has gastrointestinal symptoms in combination with positive fecal occult blood test and moderate anemia, a gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed and It showed a circular cauliflower shaped, ulcerative mass at the middle section of the transverse colon. Biopsies of the mass revealed adenocarcinoma .
For evaluation of renal dysfunction, a renal biopsy was performed. The pathological findings in light microscopy demonstrated glomerular sclerosis in two of twelve glomeruli whereas the other glomeruli demonstrated only mild lesions. The periodic acid-silver metheramine and Masson’s trichrome stainings showed 75% interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy in the tubulointerstitial area. In the fibrotic interstitial compartment, collagen fibers exhibited a storiform pattern, with massive lymphocyte and plasma cells infiltration. Immunohistochemical staining showed more than 30 IgG4-positive plasma cells per high-power field . Immunofluorescence testing was negative for IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4, C1q, κ chain, and λ chains in glomeruli. A diagnosis of IgG4-related tubulointerstitial nephritis (IgG4-TIN) was thus made.
As previously established, both IgG4-related disease and metastasis of gastrointestinal tumor could cause hepatic occupying lesions. In that sense, liver nodules in the current case could be secondary to either IgG4-related tubulointerstitial nephritis or remote metastasis from colon adenocarcinoma. Prednisone of 1 mg/kg daily was initiated with the objective to treat IgG4-TIN. On the one hand, the treatment might improve renal function, the improvement of renal function would then create better conditions for chemotherapy or surgery of adenocarcinoma treatment. On the other hand, the imaging response of hepatic nodules to glucocorticoid administration might suggest whether the nodules were malignancy or IgG4-related pseudo-tumor. One and a half month later, the serum creatinine had decreased from 415 to 246 μmol/L, and the serum IgG4 level dropped from 13.9 g/L to 5.3 g/L. However, the repeat MRI revealed no diminution of hepatic nodules. A liver biopsy was performed and atypical glands were founded in the specimen . Based on the findings of immunohistochemistry of the specimen and clinical data, a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma with hepatic metastasis was made. Chemotherapy was recommended by the Oncology team although impaired renal function was a contraindication. Prednisone was continued to improve kidney function in order to propitiate conditions for chemotherapy administration. Prednisone was gradually tapered and 14 weeks later, the serum creatinine level was 207 μmol/L and the serum IgG4 level was 1.41 g/L . Unfortunately, five months later, the patient’s general condition deteriorated quickly. The patient suffered from anorexia and poor mental state. During the last follow-up, occurring half-year later, the patient experienced shortness of breath but refused to be admitted and died two days later. The last serum creatinine level tested was 176 μmol/L.