A 10-year-old Ethiopian boy presented to Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, with a sudden onset of weakness over his lower extremities. It had started 10 days earlier, accompanied by incontinence of urine and feces. He also had long-standing epigastric pain. He had no fever, diarrhea, cough, unconsciousness, abnormal body movements, or trauma. He had no close contact with a chronic cougher. He had received all scheduled vaccines during infancy, including four doses of oral polio vaccine, except hepatitis B vaccine, because he was born 1 year earlier than the incorporation of a routine three-dose series of hepatitis B vaccines into the national vaccination schedule. (He presented to our center in 2016.) Upon examination, he had an axillary temperature of 38.0 °C and tachycardia (115 beats per minute). He had a hard and tender hepatomegaly of 16-cm total span (10 cm below the right costal margin). Neurologic examination revealed a sensory level at T10, power of 0/5 of bilateral lower extremities, areflexia, and hypotonic anal tone.
Investigations confirmed a normal complete blood count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 25 mm/hr. The patient’s liver enzymes were elevated: alanine aminotransferase 160 U/L and aspartate aminotransferase 136 U/L. Alkaline phosphatase was 761 U/L, and serum albumin was 3.4 mg/dl. His coagulation profile, renal function, serum electrolytes, blood and urine cultures, and human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C serologies were negative. His hepatitis B surface antigen was positive. Additional serologic testing to identify the state of his hepatitis B infection was not accessible.
Thoracolumbar magnetic resonance imaging outlined a T9 vertebral body collapse with marrow signal change showing T1 isointensity and T2 heterogeneous hyperintensity. An epidural and paravertebral soft tissue swelling extending from T7 to T11 with postcontrast enhancement was seen to significantly compress the spinal cord. Differential diagnoses of tuberculosis spondylitis and metastases were considered.
Workup for a primary malignancy showed elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase (599 U/L) but normal serum uric acid, chest x-ray, and abdominal ultrasound. Computed tomography of the abdomen revealed multiple well-defined, different-sized, solid hepatic masses with invasion and thrombosis of the right portal vein branch. The liver had a heterogeneous attenuation. The thoracic vertebral body had collapsed with an adjacent soft tissue mass extending into the spinal canal and prevertebral space.
Serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) was greater than 40,000 IU/L, and an ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirate showed moderately pleomorphic polygonal cells with round nuclei and ample granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. Thus, a diagnosis of HCC with vertebral metastases was confirmed. The boy’s parents were counseled on the prognosis of the illness, following which they decided against further medical care and opted for home palliative care.