A 78-year-old male presented at our hospital in April 2005 with a history of bronchial asthma and pulmonary emphysema first diagnosed at age 66 years. He had been an office worker for 40 years and had never been involved in agriculture. He had therefore had no obvious opportunity for exposure to the citrus pathogen in his work environment or in and around his house. His asthma was of the non-atopic type and moderate, as defined by the Global Initiative for Asthma Guidelines 2002. The patient was an ex-smoker with a Brinkman Index of 1590. He was being treated with inhaled corticosteroids and theophylline. On first presentation in April 2005 to our hospital, he did not have asthma exacerbation or increased sputum production, but his dyspnoea on effort was graded 2 on the Hugh–Jones scale. In April 2005, when the patient was 78 years old, an abnormal shadow representing a cavity was found in the left upper lung on chest X ray at his yearly medical check-up. At the time the patient did not have increased sputum production, but chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a thin-walled cavity about 4 cm across and containing a fungus ball in the left upper lobe (S1 + 2); a CT scan taken 2 years previously had revealed only a small cavity indicative of emphysematous change (Figures a,
b). There were no inflammatory changes in the peripheral blood (leukocyte count, 7950 cells/μL; C-reactive protein, 0.23 mg/dL; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 10 mm/h; Aspergillus antigen, negative; β-D glucan, negative), but antigen-specific precipitating antibodies to Aspergillus flavus and P. digitatum were confirmed in the patient’s serum and pleural fluid by Ouchterlony double immunodiffusion testing
. No A. flavus or P. digitatum and no bacteria or tubercle bacilli were detected in cultures of sputum or bronchial lavage fluids. We diagnosed the patient with lung aspergilloma and treated with itraconazole (100 mg/day) for 3 months. However, the cavity became larger and thicker-walled (Figure c, July 2005), and the patient developed back pain. He was admitted to our hospital on 25 July 2005 and was treated for 3 months with an increased dose of itraconazole (200 mg/day) with added micafungin (300 mg/day). The patient’s vital capacity (VC) of 2.64 L, percentage VC of 85.7%, forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 1.09 L, and percentage FEV1 of 50.9% in August 2005 was lower than his VC of 3.01 L,%VC of 95.6%, FEV1 of 1.12 L,%FEV1 of 49.6% in 2003. The patient was unable to undergo further lung function tests because of his progressive respiratory failure.
The cavity continued to enlarge further. Its fluid content increased, and consolidation appeared around it (Figure d, October 2005). The patient’s medication regimen was changed to voriconazole (400 mg/day), amphotericin B (10 mg/day), and fluconazole (400 mg/day), in addition to itraconazole (200 mg/day) and antibacterials. Treatment with this broad range of antimycotics and antibiotics did not slow the growth of the cavity: its fluid content continued to increase, and invasive consolidation and pleural effusion developed (Figure e, December 2005; 1f, January 2006). The pleural effusion increased, and the patient began producing purulent sputum. He died in February 2006 from progressive renal failure. Sputum samples yielded a single fungus, which was isolated repeatedly on potato-dextrose agar in large quantities. It was identified as P. digitatum and had the form of a spreading organism with a mealy, grey-green colour that turned olive green in culture. The abundance of the organism’s elliptical spores was greater in the patient’s sputum culture (Figure ) than in cultured reference colonies
. This fungus was confirmed to be P. digitatum by molecular identification. Partial sequences of the β-tubulin gene determined by using the primers Bt2a and Bt2b underwent BLAST analysis at the National Centre for Biotechnology Information.
We found antigen-specific precipitating antibodies to A. flavus and P. digitatum in the patient’s serum (Figure a) at April 2005.and pleural effusion at November 2005 by using Ouchterlony double immunodiffusion testing with A. flavus and P. digitatum antigens (HollisterStier, Spokane, WA, USA). We confirmed the presence of antigen-specific precipitating antibodies to P digitatum by using antigen derived from the patient’s sputum culture fluid or extracted directly from his sputum (Figure b).
To extract the antigen from the sputum culture, we added 1.5 mL of Glass Beads (Biospec Product, OK, USA) to the patient’s sputum and crushed the mixture with a Mini-Beadbeater (Biospec Product, OK, USA). It was then incubated with 0.125 mol of NH4CO3 overnight at 4°C and the antigen extracted after freeze-drying of the filtrate. We diagnosed invasive pulmonary penicilliosis due to P. digitatum.