A white, 33-year-old, previously healthy Finnish man came to the ED of our hospital in Finland because of intense abdominal pain. He was a nonsmoker and had no history of alcohol abuse. Our patient had had no previous medication and he denied any acute drug usage. He had undergone appendectomy 15 years previously. He had no history of traffic accident-related or other abdominal trauma. The acute pain was located on the left side of his abdomen, running down to the left inguinal area. He rated the pain as maximal, numerically 10 on a 1–10 scale. On clinical examination his abdomen was soft on palpation with no abdominal guarding, but our patient was struggling with pain. Peripheral pulses were palpable and there was no tenderness on palpation of the kidneys. The symptoms supported a diagnosis of urolithiasis.
Our patient was treated with intravenous oxycodone and his pain was relieved. A helical CT scan showed no sign of urolithiasis and his kidneys were normal . Laboratory analysis showed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count of 13.4 × 109/L. However, his serum concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) was normal, as were other laboratory test results . Next morning, our patient was feeling well and had no abdominal pain. His WBC count had decreased to 10.0 × 109/L. Otherwise the results were still normal. Our patient was discharged and advised to return should the pain reoccur. He returned to the ED the next evening because of rapid-onset intense abdominal pain located in the lower left quadrant of his abdomen, radiating to the left testicle. A urologist was consulted because of the possibility of testicular torsion, but our patient's clinical findings did not support this. The provisional diagnosis was still urolithiasis. Owing to the intense pain, explorative surgery was planned in order to assess the testicles and kidneys. Before any definite decision, contrast-enhanced abdominal CT was carried out. This revealed renal infarction of the left kidney . The renal artery was open. After consultation, our patient was admitted to the nephrology ward.
Our patient was started on enoxaparin, 100 mg twice daily, and examined for the possible source of emboli or a thrombophilic state. An electrocardiogram (ECG), transthoracic echocardiography and 48-hour continuous ECG monitoring did not indicate cardiac disease, arrhythmia or any other reason for suspected emboli. The results of laboratory tests for anticardiolipin antibodies and other markers of thrombophilic states including antithrombin III, protein C, protein S, lupus anticoagulant, beta 2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies, factor V Leiden, and factor II prothrombin were negative. There were no systemic clinical symptoms in our patient’s medical history such as fatigue, weight loss, arthralgia, hemoptysis, epistaxis, or persistent nasal crusting that would have suggested possible vasculitis. No palpable purpura or other skin manifestations were found either. Neither were there any abnormalities in the usual laboratory tests for identifying vasculitis such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies against either protease 3 or myeloperoxidase, serum complement levels C3 and C4, and antiglomerular basement membrane antibodies. A biopsy examination of the involved tissue was not feasible. There was a typical increase of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). His intense abdominal pain was treated with intravenous oxycodone delivered via a patient-controlled analgesia pump, and epidural bupivacaine anesthesia. Anti-factor Xa levels were measured to adjust the enoxaparin dosage and enoxaparin was paused during removal of the epidural catheter.
On the seventh day of hospitalization, our patient had a fever of 38.4 °C, an elevated WBC count and his CRP level had increased to 301 mg/L . There appeared to be no focus of infection, but intravenous ceftriaxone was started because of possible secondary infection of the affected tissue. Invasive angiography of the left renal artery was performed on the fifth day of hospitalization. At first, the performing radiologist interpreted the finding as 10-mm-long stenosis of a segmental branch of the inferior renal artery, followed by 20 mm of poststenotic dilatation and obvious thrombosis . The diameter of the stenotic part was approximately 1.7 mm. Our patient’s kidney function remained stable and normal, so invasive evaluation of a potential pressure gradient (which might have been difficult) was not found necessary at that time. Another theory arose when the findings were reevaluated at the next radiology meeting: the segmental branch of the inferior renal artery was evaluated as being aneurysmatic, and it was thought to have been a possible source of emboli.
Our patient was discharged on the tenth day of hospitalization. He was feeling well and the fever had subsided. Serum levels of CRP had decreased to 80 mg/L. Oral antibiotics (cephalexin), proton pump inhibitor, and 100 mg of enoxaparin once a day were prescribed for 1 week. Diuresis was normal. There was a slight rise in creatinine levels but his glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was normal (100 mL/min/1.73 m2). His clinical status was normal, with blood pressure (BP) of 136/80 mmHg.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was carried out 15 months after the infarction to check for possible progression of changes in the left renal artery. There were slight changes of caliber in the arteries of his left kidney. Similar changes were also noticeable in the common hepatic artery and superior mesenteric artery. The arteries of his right kidney were normal. The findings were evaluated as being a consequence of fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) and our patient was started on acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), 100 mg once a day. A carotid ultrasound was performed and there were slight irregularities in the wall of his right common carotid artery, a finding which was suggestive of FMD. Doppler findings were normal and the carotid arteries were otherwise normal. A follow-up visit took place a year after the MRA examination. His BP measured by a nurse was 149/79 and his GFR was still normal. Our patient was instructed to perform home blood pressure monitoring and he later reported that his BP was 130–140/70–80. There appeared to be no problems during follow-up and our patient continued in his normal work.