A 43-year-old man, with blunt neck trauma after being hardly hit by a crane lifting hook , was referred to the Shahid Beheshti Hospital Emergency Department (affiliated to Yasuj University of Medical Sciences, Yasuj, Iran). At the initial visit, the cervical collar was fixed first. The patient was evaluated in the primary survey and findings were as below: A: The airway system was open without any tracheal deviation, and the respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min with the oxygen saturation value of 98% estimated by pulse oximetry, while oxygen was administered at a rate of 3 L/min. B: Breathing was spontaneous without decreased breathing sound in bilateral auscultation of the lungs (no pneumothorax), but there was stridor, and the chest had bilateral symmetrical expansion, and there was no or subcutaneous emphysema. C: His blood pressure and pulse rate were 100/70 mm Hg and 92 beats/min respectively. Carotid pulses were present bilaterally. There was no ecchymosis, bruising, hematoma, and external bleeding in the trauma site at the neck . D: The patient was alert with the Glasgow Coma Scale/Score (GCS) of 15/15, and there was no cervical spine pain and tenderness, while the cervical collar was fixed. E: The patient was exposed while kept warm, and there were no other findings in the physical examinations. There was no abnormality in the simple radiography of the cervical spine. Color Doppler sonography (CDS) of the carotid and vertebral arteries and jugular vein showed normal flow velocity and spectral waveforms in the common carotid artery (CCA), internal carotid artery (ICA), external carotid artery (ECA), and vertebral arteries, and there was normal flow in both internal jugular veins. While the patient’s hoarseness and dyspnea got worse with time, neck and chest CT scans were performed to rule out laryngeal and other chest trauma. The CT scans showed no pathology in the chest but comminuted fracture of the left anterior arch of the cricoid cartilage with left-sided mucosal thickening, inflammation, and edema which was extended to the glottis, causing a narrowing of the airway (transverse inner diameter of the cricoid = 3.7 mm) .
The cervical spine had no fracture. Direct fiber-optic laryngoscopy revealed swelling and congestion in the epiglottis and swelling at the level of the left vocal cord. The arterial oxygen saturation value was sustained at > 98% by administration of oxygen at a rate of 3–5 L/min with the use of a mask. As the patient’s vital sign was stable, and the arterial oxygen saturation value through the pulse oximetry did not decrease with time, orotracheal intubation and tracheotomy were not performed. The patient tolerated the treatment and had good intervention adherence. There were no adverse and unanticipated events during the study.
Dysphonia and dyspnea alleviated gradually, and on the 4th day after the admission, the patient was discharged. The patient visited again on the 7th day after the discharge, and there was no dyspnea but very mild and fading dysphonia (clinically improved). The patient was optimistic about his well-being and coming back to his work again in the future. One of the limitations of this study was that we could not follow the patient with the next-up laryngoscopy.