A 27-year-old man from Bogotá, a car parts salesman, was diagnosed with high-risk CD20+ common-type B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. He received two cycles of HyperCVAD and consulted the National Cancer Institute for a relapse and five-day polyarthralgia, for which he was initiated into the protocol established in 2003 by the Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Research Group (GRAALL-2003).

The patient subsequently developed febrile neutropenia, cellulitis of the left hand without abscess, and methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Cefapime and oxacillin were administered and the bacteremia resolved.

On day 21 of hospitalization, the patient presented lesions on the back of the left hand, of the type erythematoedematosa plaque, with mild and fine desquamation on the surface and central blood crust, as well as lesions in the right scapular and infra-scapular region with presence of 3 mm non-follicular papules, grouped, some erythematous and others erythemoparous, without epidermal change. The lesions were assessed by the Dermatology Service and given the characteristics of those on the back of the hand, a skin biopsy was taken for histopathological study. The results were inconclusive for the diagnosis of mycosis and no culture was done for fungi of the biopsy.

Due to the persistence of the febrile neutropenia and the appearance of the skin lesions, an invasive fungal infection was suspected, and caspofungin was initiated. The chest and sinus computed tomography (CT) scans as well as the serum galactomannan detection were negative for invasive aspergillosis.

However, despite antimicrobial and antifungal treatment, the patient did not show significant improvement, as he persisted with a fever of up to 40 °C, without other localized symptoms. The patient continued in a regular general state, sleepy, with mild mucocutaneous pallor and with 1 cm nodules, soft, depressible, painless and in the previous sites of venipuncture, without other important findings.

It was decided to take new samples for blood culture and another biopsy of the skin lesions was requested. The blood count showed a profound neutropenia (20 white blood cells per µl) and persistent lymphopenia; the C reactive protein was 6.15 mg/dl, the albumin was 1.94 g/dl and the creatinine and transaminases were normal. The control CT scan of the paranasal sinuses showed incipient chronic inflammatory changes in the right maxillary sinus; the chest CT scan was normal, but the abdomen scan documented hepatosplenomegaly.

The three blood cultures and the urine culture from day 28 of hospitalization showed yeast-like structures that were not identified in the automated panel Yeast ID (BD Phoenix™ 100). Arthroconidia were observed by microscopy and colonies compatible with Geotrichum spp. were documented, a diagnosis confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry.

Treatment with amphotericin B deoxycholate was given at a daily dose of 1 mg/kg for 14 days and 400 mg/day of voriconazole for four weeks. Clinical symptoms resolved and the patient recovered from neutropenia on day 24 of the combined antifungal treatment. The patient was discharged on day 101 of hospitalisation due to clinical improvement.
