A 60-year-old Caucasian man was transferred from a regional hospital to a tertiary referral centre for the emergency management of hypercalcaemic hyperparathyroid crisis. He initially presented with a two-week history of weakness and lethargy and a one-week history of vomiting, polyuria and polydipsia. He became acutely confused in the 24 hours prior to his admission to our hospital and registered 12 on the Glasgow Coma Scale. On examination he was normotensive with a regular pulse of 70 beats per minute. There was a left-sided mass in the anterior triangle of his neck measuring 3 × 3 cm. The mass was firm, regular, non-tender and mobile. See Figure and Table for results of the initial laboratory investigations.
An ultrasonography of his neck showed a 4 × 3 cm large cyst in the left lobe of his thyroid gland. His parathyroid glands were not visualised. A 99 mTc-sestamibi scintigraphy scan was performed, and no evidence of a parathyroid adenoma was found. An electrocardiogram revealed acute changes with ST depression in leads II, III, aVF and V2 to V6. An echocardiogram showed good left ventricular failure (LVF) with an ejection fraction of 63%.
Initial management included aggressive fluid resuscitation, cardiac monitoring and the administration of intravenous bisphosphonates. A left thyroid lobectomy and left lower parathyroidectomy were performed. At the time of operation, a haemorrhagic cyst with a parathyroid gland within it was visualised. A biopsy was taken from the left upper parathyroid gland. Histology revealed a 4 cm parathyroid carcinoma within the cyst which was fully excised. The cyst had a macroscopic measurement of 6 × 6 × 5 cm. The wall of the cyst contained a well-circumscribed, unencapsulated soft tissue mass measuring 4 × 2.5 × 0.7 cm. It was light yellow-tan in colour and firm in consistency. There was a small amount of normal thyroid parenchyma within the specimen. The biopsy of the left upper parathyroid gland revealed normal parathyroid parenchyma without diagnostic abnormality.
Our patient remained intubated and ventilated overnight in the intensive care unit. His metabolic laboratory profile resolved quickly following the surgery [Figure , Figure , Figure ]. A lower respiratory tract infection delayed his initial recovery. He was discharged home on oral calcium supplementation 24 days after surgery. He has been followed up for 6 months so far without any complications or disease recurrence.