In this case report, the patient gave informed consent to participate and to publish. A 59-year-old married female of Sundanese ethnicity who worked as a housewife. Upon admission to the high-care unit, a diagnosis of post-sympathectomy, namely Incessant Ventricular Tachycardia caused by Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy dd IDCM (Ischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy), and Chronic Heart Failure, NYHA FC II, was established. The patient had a history of palpitations for the last year and had been receiving tablet therapy at a local clinic, however the patient did not know the name of the medicine he was taking, according to him, he forgot and there were many kinds of medicine he was taking. Despite the intake of regular medication, the symptoms experienced remained persistent. In the two months preceding admission, the condition worsened, manifesting as increased palpitations, irregular heartbeats, shortness of breath, dizziness, and fainting. Consequently, the patient was referred to a specialized hospital and underwent sympathectomy with thoracic sympathetic nerve ablation (T1-T3) using Video Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery (VATS).

According to the patient, the symptoms experienced in the past two months were caused by emotional distress, characterized by sadness and anxiousness. This was because the eldest child of the patient, who was already married, went through a divorce and developed a mental disorder after the separation. The child’s erratic behavior, wandering around the neighbors’ houses and damaging properties, induced anxiousness, leading to increased palpitations. Examination showed a history of low blood pressure, but no history of hypertension or diabetes mellitus. Furthermore, in the family health history, there were no instances of heart disease or premature death due to heart attack.

During the assessment on the first day after the surgery, there were complaints of shortness of breath, pain in the left chest where the operation was performed, and a general feeling of weakness. Observation showed a blood pressure of 98/61 mmHg, with 22 breath per minute respiratory rate (RR), 61 beats per minute heart rate (HR), 36.5°C temperature, 98% oxygen saturation (SPO2), and 106 mmHg mean arterial pressure (MAP). Furthermore, the pain level was rated as 2 on Numeric Rating Scale (NRS). The patient was conscious and alert, for neurological status using Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of E = 4 M = 6 V = 5. The conjunctiva was not anemic, the sclera was not jaundiced, jugular venous pressure (JVP) was 5+2 cm, the shape and movement of the chest appeared symmetrical, heart sounds S1 and S2 were regular, with no S3 or S4 sounds, murmurs, rales, or wheezing. The abdomen was distended, with bowel sounds heard at 10 times per minute. Acral extremities were warm, capillary refill time (CRT) was less than 2 minutes, and there was no edema. The examination showed the presence of a wound on the chest with chest tube thoracostomy (CTT) measuring 5 cm × 2 cm. The fall risk assessment using the Morse scale showed a high-risk level.

Electrocardiography (ECG) played a crucial role in the pre- and post-operative assessment. ECG showed a monomorphic Ventricular Tachycardia pattern before the procedure. After the operation, ECG showed sinus rhythm with a prolonged QTc (458ms). Chest X-ray before the operation showed cardiomegaly with no pulmonary congestion. Results before the procedure showed a dilated left ventricle (LV), eccentric left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) with reduced LV systolic function (LVEF 33%), regional wall abnormalities, and regional right ventricular (RV) wall akinesia. LV diastolic dysfunction was classified as grade I, with normal anatomy and function of all valves. Furthermore, there was a low probability of ventricular hypertrophy (VH) and reduced RV systolic function with regional wall motion abnormalities, meeting the echo major criteria of PADUA score for arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. Angiography before the operation showed severely reduced LV systolic function (LVEF 27%). Laboratory results for ion calcium, magnesium, and troponin T before the surgery were within normal limits.

The patient received intravenous treatment with 0.9% NaCl fluid at a rate of 1500 cc per 24 hours, Paracetamol 1 × 1 gram, Omeprazole 2 × 1 gram, oral Cefixime antibiotics 2 × 200 mg, intravenous Vitamin K 3 × 10mg, intravenous Tranexamic Acid 3 × 500mg, and heart medication for arrhythmia, namely Bisoprolol tablet 1 × 2.5 mg (given when HR > 65 beats per minute), and Spironolactone tablet 1 × 25mg (given when mean arterial pressure is between 70 and 100 mmHg).

In terms of Nursing Diagnoses based on North American Nursing Diagnosis Association (NANDA), the priorities identified included 1). Decreased Cardiac Output related to changes in heart rhythm, 2). Impaired Gas Exchange related to an imbalance in ventilation-perfusion, and 3). Activity intolerance related to an imbalance between oxygen supply and demand.12

The selected nursing interventions based on NIC (Nursing Interventions Classification) and NOC (Nursing Outcomes Classification) for the first nursing problem, which was a decrease in cardiac output, emphasized cardiac care management and collaborative administration of medications, such as propranolol and spironolactone. This also comprised the evaluation of chest pain, monitoring fluid balance, changes in blood pressure, mean arterial pressure (MAP), and respiratory status, as well as assisting in reducing anxiety through deep breathing relaxation techniques. Vital sign management was also carried out including monitoring blood pressure, respiratory rate, heart rate, and temperature. The procedures also comprised recording blood pressure changes and monitoring heart sounds.

For the second nursing problem, which was the gas exchange issue, airway management was conducted. This included auscultating breath sounds, recording any additional sounds, and monitoring respiration, oxygen status, CTT hose as well as undulations, and fluid from CTT. The third nursing problem, namely patient activity intolerance, was managed through activity therapy. Continuous evaluation was carried out, and a follow-up was accomplished through a video call. The results showed that with planned nursing care, complications that often occurred after the surgery could be prevented. On the second day post-surgery, there was no complaint of shortness of breath and palpitations. This led to the removal of the chest tube and discharge. Mobilization and activities were performed gradually in this case. Upon discharge, the patient was able to stand and walk around the bed area, with enhanced adaptation to the pain. For the follow-up care evaluation with tele-nursing, a video call was conducted to provide guidance on maintaining activities according to the heart capacity. The patient was pleased to be contacted, had no shortness of breath complaints, and activities had started gradually.