A 28-year-old male was admitted to hospital with a one-month history of nausea, vomiting, the epigastric pain increased blood pressure and worsening of renal function with hypercalcemia. He was diagnosed in the outpatient setting as having gastroesophageal reflux disease with biliary regurgitation and, therefore, was given high doses of calcium containing antacids. A therapy with calcium antagonists was also initiated because of increased levels of blood pressure.
Upon admission, he was well oriented, with slightly yellowish skin color, his blood pressure was 160/100 mmHg, his heart rate was 96/min. The rest of the physical examination was normal. He was a non-smoker and his past medical history was normal. The following initial analyzes have been performed:
The patient had severe hypercalcemia and anemia, renal insufficiency, metabolic alkalosis. Serum parathyroid hormone was almost undetectable. His lipids were normal, too and urine culture negative. All the available tumor markers were normal (CEA, AFP, CA 19-9, NSE, CYFRA 21-1, PSA, Ferritin). He was hepatitis B, C and HIV negative. Renal ultrasound was normal. Ultrasound of the parathyroid glands was normal. Computerized tomography of the abdomen showed normal findings. Bone biopsy showed osteoporosis and scattered zones with osteonecrosis. Renal biopsy showed tubulointerstitial lesions with calcium deposits in the interstitial tissue. Chest X-ray was also normal. Endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract while hospitalized showed no pathologic changes. Beta-2 microglobulin, acid phosphatase, kappa and lambda light chains were normal. Coombs test and immunoelectrophoresis of proteins were negative. The calculated creatinine clearance at admission was 42 ml/min. The whole body Tc99m MDP bone scan was normal, as well as the parathyroid glands Tc99m MIBI scan. Cranial X-ray, as well as radiographs of hands and feet, was normal. He had mild metabolic alkalosis, and his ECG showed signs of hypercalcemia (shortened QT interval of 0.32 sec and abnormal ST morphology in V2, V3 and V4) .
The patient was hydrated with intravenous fluid, treated with bisphosphonates, corticosteroids and calcium antagonists for his elevated blood pressure. Antacids were stopped promptly after admission. He was also given vitamin B12 and folic acid upon the recommendation of a hematologist. The serum level of calcium decreased slowly to 2.6 mmol/l at the 43rd day after admission, and serum creatinine decreased to 154 μmol/l (calculated creatinine clearance 63.5 ml/min).
After ruling out the differential diagnosis of multiple myelomas, other malignancies, primary hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism or hypothyro-idism, it seemed plausible that the cause of hypercalcemia might be the ingestion of calcium containing antacids prescribed by his primary physician for his gastroesophageal reflux disease. He was discharged from hospital after 45 days of hospitalization.