We present a 22 year old male patient who presented with abdominal distension and vomiting of ingested matter of two to three episodes per day of one month duration. He has significant weight loss. He is a known schizophrenic patient for the past three years and has followed up at a nearby hospital, after which he has been off his medication for the past two months. He swallowed metallic nails in an attempt to kill himself. On presentation his vital signs were, blood pressure 110/70, pulse rate 128, respiratory rate 20, axillary temperature 36.5 and oxygen saturation 92%. On abdominal examination there was distension, epigastric tenderness and no signs of fluid collection. On admission his blood tests were, white blood count 15,000, hemoglobin 14 gm/dl, platelet 138,000 and granulocytes 77%. Serum electrolytes, random blood sugar and organ function tests (liver and renal) were in normal range. On the other hand, his plain abdominal x-ray showed multiple radiopaque foreign body namely nail in the stomach. Similarly, abdominal ultrasound showed thickened gastric wall and multiple linear foreign bodies in the stomach.

Eventually, with the impression of complete gastric outlet obstruction secondary to foreign body in the stomach, laparotomy plus gastrotomy plus foreign body removal and repair were done under general anesthesia. Intraoperative findings were dilated stomach, palpable mass on distal stomach and first part of duodenum, and adhesion between stomach, abdominal wall and liver. Subsequently, gastrotomy was made proximal to the foreign body area. Foreign bodies consisting of sixty curved, and straight nails of various sizes, needle and wire were removed with sponge forceps. Gastrotomy incision was repaired with two layers. Abdominal cavity was washed with warm normal saline. The abdominal incision was closed with two layers. The patient was then transferred to surgical ward with stable vital signs and put on antibiotics. Postoperative hematocrit was 36%. The patient was discharged after four days of hospital stay and linked to psychiatric department for further evaluation.