A 57-year-old male presented with painful swelling in the left orbit that had occurred for 11 months. The medical history showed no chronic systemic disease, sinus infection, mucocele, previous trauma, previous eye surgery or irradiation.
We performed a complete ophthalmic examination. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/25 OD and 20/70 OS. Examination of the left eye revealed a 3 mm proptosis and maximal restriction of extraocular movements in all gazes. Funduscopic examination revealed diffuse choroidal fold in the left eye . Right eye examination was unremarkable.
Computed tomography (CT) of the orbit revealed an atypical, well-circumscribed homogeneous calcified mass attached to the posterior globe of the left orbit . Orbital magnetic resonance imaging showed a mixed heterogeneous mass with hypo and hyperintense regions . The mass was measured 1.77 × 1.41 × 2.42 cm in size in the left orbit and was located within the muscle cone.
The patient underwent an anterior inferior orbitotomy, and complete excision of the mass. Intraoperatively, the tumour was attached to the sclera but not attached to any of the orbital structures. The tumour wraps the inferior oblique, lateral rectus, and part of the inferior rectus muscle. The sclera was intact and the surface was slightly rough. The tumour caused indentation of the globe but did not enter the globe. Gross examination revealed an atypical, well-encapsulated grey-brown bony mass with several small, separate, nodules. The cut surface was grey-white, lobulated and bony hard in consistency. Microscopic examination revealed malignant spindle cells with abundant neoplastic bone and cartilage formation . Immunohistochemical examination was positive for vimentin and S-100 and negative for desmin, CD99 and EMA. The patient underwent PET-CT examination before surgery and found no distant metastases from this lesion or for occult primary lesions that may have led to a metastatic lesion within the orbit.
The 13-month follow-up included CT scans every 3 months and subsequently every 6 months. The patient encountered recurrence of the tumour. A complete ophthalmic examination was performed. Visual acuity was 20/25 OD and 20/200 OS. Examination of the left eye revealed a 1 mm proptosis and restriction of extraocular movements in all gazes. Funduscopic examination revealed diffuse choroidal fold in the left eye. Right eye examination was unremarkable. The latest orbital CT showed an irregular shape of the soft tissue in the muscle cone of the left eyeball. The lesions showed irregular massive calcification, and the tumour was close to the posterior pole, which was compressed and deformed. The boundary between the mass and the medial rectus muscle and the inferior rectus muscle was unclear, which revealed that the muscle was probably attached. The CT value of the soft tissue lesions was 52 ± 7.62 HU, while that of calcification was 319.09 ± 84.31HU. Considering the patient’s medical history, due to the invasive nature of the tumour, the patient then underwent orbital exenteration of the left orbit. The tumour was confirmed after surgery. Pathological examination showed a recurrence of extraskeletal osteosarcoma outside the orbit, and the lesion was extensively invaded by the soft tissue and the posterior sclera.
The pathological diagnosis was recurrent orbital extraskeletal osteosarcoma.