A 69-year-old Caucasian male was observed in our diabetic retina department with bilateral diabetic macular edema. His medical history included diabetes mellitus (diagnosed ten years earlier), arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Additionally, his ophthalmologic history included left eye (OS) cataract surgery the previous year. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 4/10 in the right eye (OD) and 5/10 in the left eye (OS). On biomicroscopy, he presented a nuclear sclerosis OD and intraocular lens OS. Intraocular pressure was 16 mmHg in both eyes (OU). For macular edema, he had previously been treated with bevacizumab (5 injections; 1.25 mg) and aflibercept (5 injections; 2 mg) with an incomplete anatomical response (<20% reduction in central macular thickness (CMT)). Fluorescein angiography revealed no ischemia in the peripheral retina OU. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed a CMT of 371 µm in the OD and 475 µm in the OS. After discussing the risks and benefits of intravitreal dexamethasone injection (Ozurdex® - dexamethasone intravitreal implant (0.7 mg)), the patient agreed to proceed . The injections were performed in both eyes three days apart under a surgical microscope in the operating room. The injections were administered by an experienced attending, under local anesthesia with topical oxybuprocaine (4 mg/mL) and after disinfection of the periocular skin with 10% povidone-iodine solution and the ocular surface with 5% povidone-iodine. Local anesthesia was supplemented with a subconjunctival injection of 2% lidocaine. The injection site was marked on the inferotemporal sclera, 4.0 mm OD (phakic eye) and 3.5 mm OS (pseudophakic eye) from the limbus. Paracentesis was not required to reduce intraocular pressure. After the injection, topical 5% povidone-iodine was reapplied to the conjunctival cul-de-sac. The procedures were uneventful, except for an extensive conjunctival hemorrhage OD. An appointment was scheduled fifteen days later to assess his intraocular pressure, but the patient missed it.

Four months later, at the rescheduled appointment, the patient referred OD vision loss (from 4/10 to 2/10), which occurred a few days after the injection. On the slit-lamp observation, under pharmacological mydriasis, the implant was found in the right crystalline lens, in the pupillary area. The cataract was more advanced around the implant. The cornea remained transparent, with no inflammation observed in the anterior chamber, and the intraocular pressure was normal. The retinal OCT showed an improvement of macular edema in the OD, but not in the OS. An AS-OCT (Spectralis Heidelberg Engineering) was performed to better understand the location of the implant, its entry point and the non-integrity of the posterior capsule.

Due to decreased visual acuity (VA), caused by the cataract progression and the implant’s position in the visual axis, the patient was scheduled for surgery. One week later, a phacoemulsification surgery with a three-piece hydrophobic intraocular lens (Alcon AcrySof® MA60AC) implantation in the sulcus, associated with anterior vitrectomy was completed. No lens fragments dropped during surgery. Hydro-dissection and hydro-delamination were avoided to prevent exacerbation of the suspected posterior capsular rupture. The repositioning of the implant into the vitreous cavity was unsuccessful, as the implant was friable and subsequently could not be grasped. As a result, the implant was aspirated during surgery.

The patient had an uncomplicated post-operative recovery. One month after the surgery his OD BCVA was 9/10 and the OCT demonstrated the same CMT as before surgery.