A 32-year-old healthy male presented to the outpatient clinic with a history of pain and swelling in the Right foot for 10 months after alleged history of sustaining a grinder (heavy machine) injury to the medial aspect of the right foot 10 months ago. At the time of injury, the patient sustained a contused lacerated wound approximately 3 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm in size over the medial aspect of the right foot and visited the emergency department at a local hospital. Anteroposterior and oblique radiographs of the right foot and anteroposterior, lateral, and mortise radiographs of the right ankle suggested no fractures or skeletal abnormalities.
The CLW was sutured, and dressing was done, and the patient was managed conservatively with analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and compression bandaging. One month following the injury, the patient started experiencing a dull aching persistent, non-radiating pain in the right foot which was insidious in onset; aggravated on weight bearing, and relieved on taking rest.
A magnetic resource imaging (MRI) of the right foot was advised after no relief of symptoms with conservative management. The MRI showed a high-grade tear of the distal TPT from the level of medial malleolus to its insertion and was planned for operative management of TPT tear.
After anesthetic workup, patient was posted for surgery and operated with open repair of TPT using suture anchor.
After administration of spinal anesthesia, a 5 cm incision was taken over the right foot beginning from the tip of the medial malleolus extending distally and curved anteriorly till the navicular bone.
Superficial dissection was carried out and the fibers of TP were identified , alternate sliding tenotomy, and lengthening carried out for the proximal end of the TPT.
A 2.5 mm suture anchor was fixed in the navicular bone and fibers of TPT were sutured using a running whip stitch . There were no complications in the intraoperative or post-operative period. Patient was given a below knee slab with the foot in inversion postoperatively.
After removal of sutures, the slab was revised into a below knee cast with the foot in inversion for 6 weeks.
The patient’s assessment was carried out based on Modified Olerud and Molander Score.
Six-week post-operative follow-up, cast was removed, and physiotherapy was started for the patient that included active ankle ROM and gait training, patient had a Modified Olerud and Molander Score of 45/100 at 6 weeks.
At 6-month post-operative follow-up, patient was relieved of chronic pain and was able walk and stand on his toes without pain and showed significant improvement in gait with Modified Olerud and Molander Score 90/100 .