4-year-old male patient with a full vaccination schedule for his age, eutrophic and with no previous pathological antecedents, was admitted with a clinical picture of 4 days of evolution consisting of rapidly progressive edema and ptosis of the left upper eyelid, associated in the last 2 days with the appearance of a painful mass in the upper bulbar conjunctiva, without any other associated symptomatology. On admission, left ptosis of 3 mm was observed with occupation of the superior orbito-palpebral sulcus, presence of a mass of 10 mm in diameter depending on the superior bulbar conjunctiva, elevated and salmon-coloured, extending to the superior fundus of the sac, associated with multiple bilateral cervical and inguinal adenopathies. In the directed ophthalmological evaluation, visual acuity, ocular movements and pupillary reflexes were preserved, and the biomicroscopy and fundoscopy were without alterations.

In conjunction with paediatric lymphoproliferative disease, extension studies were performed and a computed tomography (CT) of orbits was found to show thickening of the upper left eyelid with peripheral enhancement, diameter of 12 mm and thickness of 0.9 mm; a CT of the face showed multiple cervical adenopathies between 4-8 mm with a tendency to form conglomerates in the cervical ganglion stations Va, Vb and IV; a CT of the thorax showed a single nodule of 2.8 mm in the lateral segment of the middle lobe; a CT of the abdomen showed a liver size at the upper limit of normal (112 mm) and splenomegaly, splenic index 177 mm (mean 124 mm).

Laboratory tests showed a relative lymphocytosis of 50% with a normal leukocyte count for the age (14,100) and atypical lymphocytes of 17% without anaemia or thrombocytopenia. Renal function and electrolytes within normal limits. Lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) elevated 453 U/L [150-300 U/L). Peripheral blood smear showed increased white blood cells and some atypical lymphocytes. Bone marrow aspirate showed a granulocytic predominance with mainly CD8 positive T lymphocytes and increased gamma delta T lymphocytes, without significant increase in CD34 precursors. In conjunctival flow cytometry immunoproliferative study, a lymphoid CD8 positive phenotype was predominant. Indirect negative human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) study.

In view of the findings and results, the paediatric haemato-oncologist suggested a possible viral process (Epstein Barr or cytomegalovirus), an immune disorder or, less likely, a lymphoproliferative neoplasia. An excisional biopsy of the conjunctival lesion was performed, which showed a diffuse pattern of large cells with Reed-Stemberg-like popcorn-like morphology, reactive to CD45, CD20, MUM1, BCL-2, CD30, PAX-5, weak nuclear, Oct-2 positive, BOB-1 negative. Associated with this was a large population of T lymphocytes with a usual morphology that expressed CD2, CD3, CD5, CD7, CD43 and Granzyme, with a predominance of CD8 positive cytotoxic T lymphocytes and a lower number of CD4 positive helper T lymphocytes. In addition, a lower number of B lymphocytes reactive to CD79a, reactive histiocytes reactive to CD68 and lysozyme and a positive reaction to EBV RNA in immunoblastic B cells were observed. The final report was that the morphological and immunophenotypical findings were consistent with a chronic EBV infection. Antibodies were detected for Epstein Barr IgM positive 15.13 IU/ml (positive greater than 11 IU/ml) and IgG 10.85 IU/ml (indeterminate 9 - 10 IU/ml), cytomegalovirus infection was ruled out.

In the evaluation by paediatric infectology, symptomatic management and follow-up were recommended. In the controls, complete resolution of conjunctival lesion with adequate healing after excisional biopsy, complete resolution of ptosis and a decrease in serological antibodies for Epstein Barr IgM 4.54 IU/ml and elevation of IgG 12.66 IU/ml, studies of cellular immunity with CD3, CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes in the normal range for age were observed. After 15 months of follow-up, he remains asymptomatic.
