A 32-year-old male presented at our institution with a history of pain over the lateral aspect of the left foot for 2 years of insidious onset. He complained of pins and needle sensation over plantar aspect of the left foot. There was no significant history of trauma. He noticed swelling behind the left knee in the past 6 months which was initially peanut shaped and gradually progressed to the present size.
On examination, there was an oval mass of 2 × 3 × 1 cm, firm, non-pulsatile, non- fluctuant, non-transilluminating in the left popliteal fossa which was mobile in both directions. Skin over the swelling was pinchable. The patient was neurologically stable except with decreased sensation over lateral aspect (plantar region) of the left foot. Notably, the left popliteal and dorsalis pedis pulses were felt.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left popliteal fossa revealed encapsulated round to oval shaped, eccentrically placed lesion seen within the intermuscular space in the posterior aspect of knee joint. Lesion shows homogenous isointense on T1 and heterogeneous hyperintense signal on T2. There are hypointense foci seen within the hyperintense area on T2 which is suggestive of fascicular sign. The sagittal image showed continuity of mass lesion with the tibia nerve displaying fat split sign, lesion measuring 2 × 3 × 1 cm (, , ).
Under spinal anesthesia, the patient underwent neurolysis of tibial nerve and excision biopsy of tumorous lesion (, ) by incising the epineurium of tibial nerve since the tumorous lesion was eccentrically placed. As there was no disruption of tibial nerve continuity, no nerve repair was done. Gross resected specimen of tumorous mass of 2 × 3 × 1 cm and the cut specimen showing areas of hemorrhage, necrosis, and cystic spaces interspersed along the tumorous lesion (, ). Histopathological examination (×40) of the lesion showed biphasic tumor consisting of compact hypercellular Antoni A areas and myxoid hypocellular Antoni B areas and nuclear palisading around fibrillary process of Verocay bodies without any neural elements seen . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of the resected lesion revealed strong positivity for S-100 staining .
The patient was regularly followed up at timely intervals for 9 months since the excision of the lesion. The follow-up period was uneventful. The patient had improved sensation over lateral aspect (plantar region) of the left foot and without any recurrence of tumorous lesion during the follow-up period.