An 86-year-old woman with a history of chronic HF due to obstructive HCM and AS was transferred to our hospital complaining of persistent dyspnea (New York Heart Association class IV). She was on multiple medications for management of chronic HF, including torasemide (8 mg/day), spironolactone (25 mg/day), metoprolol (120 mg/day), losartan (50 mg/day), and disopyramide (300 mg/day). On admission, her blood pressure was 98/74 mmHg and her heart rate was 54 beats/min. Echocardiography revealed a left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 68% with LV hypertrophy (maximum LV wall thickness of 20 mm), a peak left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) gradient of 144 mmHg at rest due to systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve, and moderate to severe mitral regurgitation. In addition, echocardiography demonstrated severe AS (peak aortic valve velocity of 5.7 m/s and mean aortic valve gradient of 48 mmHg). We could distinguish between obstructive HCM and severe AS (i.e., dynamic vs. fixed obstruction) by the shape of the continuous-wave Doppler velocity curve. A chest radiograph revealed moderate pulmonary congestion and bilateral pleural effusions. Based on these findings, she was diagnosed as having ADHF with a preserved EF due to obstructive HCM and severe AS. Laboratory tests showed that blood urea nitrogen was 33.2 mg/dl, serum creatinine was 0.60 mg/dl, serum sodium was 142 mEq/l, serum potassium was 4.2 mEq/l, and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 5857 pg/ml. Oxygen saturation was below 90% on room air. She was not considered to be a candidate for implantation of a permanent pacemaker, septal ablation with ethanol, or surgical therapy because of her advanced age and insufficient motivation. Therefore, intravenous administration of furosemide (40 mg/day) was added from day 1 after hospital admission, and low-dose tolvaptan (7.5 mg/day) was added from day 4 to keep the serum sodium concentration within the normal range. Over a 4-day period after admission, a total urine output of 1000 to 1200 ml/day was transiently maintained with coadministration of furosemide (bolus infusion of 40 to 60 mg/day), spironolactone (50 mg/day), and low-dose tolvaptan (7.5 mg/day), but the patient’s orthopnea and oxygen saturation showed little improvement. Accordingly, dose escalation was performed for both tolvaptan (increased from 7.5 to 15.0 mg/day) and furosemide (bolus infusion was increased from 60 to 80 mg/day), but there was no significant improvement of ADHF by hospital day 19. In addition, her urine output gradually decreased despite up-titration of tolvaptan to 15.0 mg/day. However, soon after up-titration of spironolactone (from 50 to 100 mg/day) was added to tolvaptan at 15.0 mg/day, total urine output exceeded 1500 ml/day and was maintained at this level during hospitalization, despite tapering and discontinuation of furosemide. Her dyspnea was also markedly alleviated and she improved from New York Heart Association class IV to class III. Chest radiographs obtained on hospital day 25 showed very little pulmonary congestion or residual pleural effusion. Since discharge from hospital, she has remained on the same medications and has been followed up at our outpatient department for 18 months without adverse changes of serum electrolytes or readmission for exacerbation of HF.