A 47-year-old male patient suffering from mild abdominal pain for 2 months was admitted to our hospital in February 2018. He was diagnosed with “acute pancreatitis” first before transferring to our department. The ultrasound (US) and computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a pancreatic space-occupying lesion and pancreatic duct dilatation . The serum amylase and lipase levels were slightly elevated (231 and 546 U/L, respectively; normal range: 25–125 and 13–60 IU/L, respectively). the preoperative serum CA 19–9 level was 34.82 U/ml. Then, the patient underwent exploratory laparotomy. Intraoperative examination identified a hard mass in the body (approximately 4.0 cm × 3.0 cm) and tail of the pancreas, varicose veins around the spleen, a mass in the diaphragm (1.5 cm diameter), and three light masses on the surface of the liver. One mass was taken for pathological examination of the intraoperative rapid frozen section, and the result showed adenocarcinoma in the mass. The patient underwent radical distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, diaphragm, and liver mass resection. The patient manifested with obstructive jaundice after surgery and gradually increased level of bilirubin. The total bilirubin increased from 65.4 μmol/L to 105.6 μmol/L and then to 140.1 μmol/L, and the direct bilirubin increased from 53.8 μmol/L to 81.0 μmol/L and then to 118.1 μmol/L. Subsequently, the patient underwent cholangiojejunostomy, and the pathological report revealed resected masses from the pancreas, liver, and diaphragm, indicating PTC metastases . Immunohistochemical studies showed positive stanning of TG(+), PAX-8(+), TTF-1(+), CK19(+), HBME-1(+), Galectin-3(+), P53(+), WT(+), DPC4(+), CA19–9(luminal surface+), MUC1(+), with negative staining of MUC5AC(−), MUC6(−), MUC2(−). Then, the patient had a thyroid US, which showed multiple hypoechoic masses in the left thyroid gland and an endoscopic US-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy of the thyroid mass. Pathology also revealed papillary cancer. After the patient had recovered in the pancreatic department, he was transferred to the thyroid department. A CT scan was taken, and the result showed large masses in the isthmus and left lobes of the thyroid, multiple enlarged lymph nodes, and multiple masses in the bilateral parotid and submandibular gland . Then, the patient received an FNA biopsy of the parotid and submandibular mass, and the result showed PTC metastases. Immunohistochemical studies showed TTF-1(+), TG (−), CK19(+), HBME-1(+), Galectin-3(+), Villin(−), CDX-2(−). In July 2018, he received complete thyroidectomy, cervical lymphadenectomy, bilateral parotidectomy, bilateral submandibular gland and left recurrent laryngeal nerve resection. Intraoperative examination showed a huge irregular mass (approximately 10.0 cm × 7.0 cm × 5.0 cm) in the left and isthmus of the thyroid gland with calcification. The mass invaded the left recurrent laryngeal nerve and adhered to the surface of the trachea, and enlarged lymph nodes (3.5 and 2.5 cm in diameter) were found in the bilateral parotid. Multiple small enlarged lymph nodes (diameter ranging from 0.3 cm to 1.5 cm) were also noted in the bilateral submandibular gland. Intraoperative rapid frozen biopsy showed papillary cancer. The final histopathology revealed bilateral thyroid and isthmic papillary carcinoma and cervical lymph node metastasis, and papillary cancer in the left parotid and bilateral submandibular glands but not in the right parotid gland. Immunohistochemical studies showed CK19(+), HBME-1(+), Galectin-3(+), TG (partial+), TTF-1(+), P53(partial+), NapsinA (−), PD-L1(+, approximately 10%). The gene test showed activated mutation detected in the exon 15 of the BRAF gene (V600E) and the promoter 228 of TERT. After surgery, the patient was given radioiodine-131 therapy. He recovered well and was discharged from the hospital with oral Euthyrox therapy. The patient still survives at present.