An 84-year-old woman was diagnosed with G3 (pT>2) bladder cancer and underwent robot-assisted RC and ileal conduit diversion. She developed POP 4 months after the operation and tried a ring pessary, but it did not improve her symptoms. Eleven months after RC, she was referred to our hospital for POP repair.
On the examination, she presented with a midline enterocele descending from the anterior vaginal side prior to the uterus with atrophic ulcerated vaginal skin . Considering the thinness of the vaginal wall and the large defect of the vaginal wall muscle layer, we chose TVM surgery. Figure shows a schematic diagram of the anterior wall TVM using mesh for pelvic floor repair. There are four anchoring points on the mesh: strong tissue around the bilateral ischial spines, the midline of the distal vaginal wall, and cervical tissue.
The patient underwent TVM surgery 13 months after RC. We made a vertical incision in the center of the vaginal wall with a scalpel and peeled off the vaginal wall sharply from the midline to the side. However, adhesion between the peritoneum and vaginal wall was so severe that the omentum was exposed. We changed the dissection layer laterally at the turned edge of the vaginal wall and proceeded to dissect sharply and bluntly toward the ischial spine. We made a small skin incision approximately 5 mm in length bilaterally, 5.5 cm laterally, and 2 cm dorsally from the clitoris base and penetrated the firm tissue (e.g., tendinous structures of muscles originating from the ischial spine) around the ischial spine using a weakly curved needle . Then, we used nylon loops to guide the mesh arm.
After delamination, we used a non-absorbable thread for mesh fixation over the midline of the distal vaginal wall and the cervix. As the repair should be performed within the abdominal cavity, we decided to use a monofilament polypropylene mesh (Ventralight™ ST; Bard Inc., Murray Hill, NJ, USA), which is used for abdominal wall hernia repair and designed to reduce adhesion to the intestinal tract on the ventral side .
And the mesh arm was guided outside through the skin with a nylon loop. Then the mesh was placed tension-free. Finally we excised only the erosion site and performed a continuous suture to the vaginal wall with 3–0 Monokryl . The operation time was 1 h and 45 min, and the amount of bleeding was 45 g.
At 1-year follow-up, neither recurrence nor complications, such as atrophic ulcerated vaginal skin related to the mesh and chronic pain were observed.