A 48-year-old fit and healthy gentleman fell from a mountain bike following a sudden deceleration impact against a tree. He confirmed landing on the left wrist first and sustained injury to both the thumbs at the same time. He attended the emergency department immediately but the injuries were missed due to significant swelling and pain which made clinical examination difficult. As the radiographs revealed no bony injury he was referred to the hand clinic. He presented with pain and swelling of both the thumbs with painful grip on the right and inability to extend the thumb on the left side. Clinically, there was tenderness along the ulnar aspect of the MCPJ of the right thumb and positive stress test for UCL injury. This was confirmed by stress radiographs of the MCPJ joint of the thumb. The ultra sound scan confirmed complete rupture of UCL at insertion with Stener’s lesion. On the left side, he was unable to extend the interphalangeal joint of the thumb actively. The ultrasound scan confirmed rupture of EPL with the distal stump of the tendon located just distal to the extensor retinaculum. He underwent sequential exploration of both the thumbs in one anaesthetic. On the right side, complete rupture of UCL at the insertion with adductor pollicisaponeurosis interposed (Stener’s lesion) and rupture of dorso-ulnar capsule of MPJ was noted. The capsule was repaired with absorbable sutures and the ruptured UCL was repaired with absorbable anchor suture . On the left side, the distal stump of the EPL tendon was located just distal to the extensor retinaculum The proximal stump of EPL could not be located as it had probably retracted deep in the forearm. Hence, EIP tendon was transferred to EPL . Right thumb was immobilised for six weeks and mobilised thereafter. The left thumb was mobilised after two weeks in a custom made thermoplastic dynamic splint. He was followed up at six weeks, three months, five months and one year after surgery. At the end of five months, he regained full range of movements of both the thumbs and satisfactory grip strength as measured with Jamar Dynamometer.