A 66-year-old man underwent high anterior resection for rectal cancer 11 years ago. He had also been diagnosed with an esophageal tumor 15 cm in size at the same time, based on the symptom of mild dysphagia, but had left the tumor untreated. Recently, he presented to our hospital with progressive dysphagia and appetite loss, which had gradually worsened over the course of the previous year. He had no history of smoking or drinking alcohol. His tumor markers were not increased (carcinoembryonic antigen: 2.0 ng/mL, squamous cell cancer antigen: 0.9 ng/mL). Upper gastrointestinal imaging (UGI) and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed a large tumor with a thick stalk arising from the esophageal entrance, extending to the gastroesophageal junction, with a normal surface mucosa . Since we could not identify details of this submucosal tumor (SMT), we considered it a so-called fibrovascular polyp. Furthermore, a localized erythematous lesion and type B1 vessels according to the Japan Esophageal Society classification were identified on the tumor surface, 30 cm from the incisor teeth . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a large tumor hanging from the cervical esophagus, extending to the gastroesophageal junction . The inside of the tumor was heterogeneously contrasted with a mixture of fatty, fibrous and vascular components. The length of the tumor was about 30 cm, indicating that it had doubled in size over the last 10 years. There were no findings suggesting lymph node or distant metastasis. Three-dimensional CT (3D-CT) revealed that the tumor was an intraluminal polypoid tumor . Our preoperative diagnosis was a so-called giant fibrovascular polyp with superficial carcinoma of the esophagus. From the above findings, we determined that it was possible to achieve radical en bloc resection of the tumor through the cervical approach as a minimally invasive procedure, without lymph node dissection. With the patient under general anesthesia, we made a 7-cm skin incision on the left side of the neck. We cut the lateral side of the anterior cervical muscles, but preserved the sternocleidomastoid muscle and entered the inner side of the common carotid artery. After that, we reached the wall of the esophagus and taped it. After directly incising the esophageal wall at the opposite side of tumor peduncle and encircling the stalk of the tumor, the giant tumor was directly grasped and could be carefully pulled out of the esophageal lumen . We transected the stalk of the tumor arising from the posterior wall and extracted it . The basal mucosal layer of the esophagus was closed using continuous 4–0 absorbable sutures, and the muscle layer was closed with nodal sutures using 3–0 absorbable sutures. The surgical duration was 2 h and 22 min, and blood loss was minimal. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course without any complications, and was discharged on postoperative day 14 without dysphagia.
The excised specimen consisted of a 23.0 × 8.5 cm polypoid mass and superficial esophageal carcinoma located on it . Histological examination showed proliferation of squamous cell carcinoma in the epithelium and invasion of the stroma in some areas, although there was no lamina muscularis mucosa. The depth of invasion was 930 μm from the surface of mucosa , and there was no vascular or lymphatic invasion. On the other hand, most of the submucosal tumor was composed of adipocytes and spindle cells with atypical nuclei . Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the adipocytes were weakly positive for murine double minute-2 (MDM2) and positive for cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and p16 . The final pathological diagnosis was well-differentiated esophageal liposarcoma together with squamous cell carcinoma. The surgical margin of the tumor was microscopically negative. The patient did not undergo any postoperative adjuvant therapy and gained 10 kg in weight within 3 months postoperatively.