A 76-year-old female patient with exertional dyspnea was referred to our department with an enlarged calcified mass in the right PA. She had a history of multiple primary cancers and had undergone several surgeries: mastectomy for metachronous bilateral breast cancer (right at age 49, left at age 66), pulmonary resection (right S9 wedge resection and left S3a segmentectomy at age 56) for simultaneous bilateral lung cancer, and left nephrectomy for left renal cancer at age 65. She also underwent surgery for melanoma of the right finger at the age of 66. Chest computed tomography (CT) performed as a periodic examination 10 years after the surgery for renal cancer revealed a calcified nodule in the right PA . The calcified nodule showed slow enlargement over the previous two years, retrospectively and was 25 mm in diameter, located just peripheral of the superior trunk of the right PA and the beginning of the A6 branch. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT (FDG PET/CT) showed that the calcified area of the nodule did not take up FDG, but the area of soft tissue density on CT showed uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value max of 2.16 . Preoperative echocardiography revealed severe mitral valve regurgitation (MR) with P2 prolapse and moderate tricuspid valve regurgitation (TR) with an ejection fraction of 81%. Regarding laboratory data, the creatinine level was 1.22 mg/dl, and tumor marker levels were unremarkable (Carcinoembryonic Antigen: 2.0 ng/ml, cytokeratin 19 fragment: 2.9 ng/ml, pro-gastrin-releasing peptide: 72.4 pg/ml).
We planned a 2-staged surgery preceded by valvular surgery under total extracorporeal circulation. The cardiovascular surgeons performed mitral and tricuspid valvuloplasty through a median sternotomy (operative time, 422 min; extracorporeal circulation time, 257 min). During the initial surgery, we encircled the superior vena cava (SVC) at the most central site in the pericardial sac. We opened the right mediastinal pleura and confirmed the presence of the nodule in the right PA by palpation and judged that it was difficult to reconstruct the PA, especially on the peripheral side of the PA, through a median sternotomy. The postoperative course was uneventful. Her exertional dyspnea improved three months after surgery, and the echocardiography showed no regurgitation.
Therefore, a second surgery was performed. Following posterolateral thoracotomy at the fifth intercostal space, a right upper lobectomy was performed. The tumor was identified as a stony hard mass in the right PA. To clamp the right main PA, we tried to dissect apart the SVC and the right main PA and also tried to approach the right main PA for encircling from the space between the SVC and the aorta. However, severe adhesions obstructed dissection. Although the surgical margins appeared to be insufficient, we were able to grasp the mass manually. Therefore, we decided to place a vascular clamp forceps on the center of the mass, as centrally as possible. After introducing heparin with an activating clotting time of 200–250 s, the right main PA, middle pulmonary vein, and inferior pulmonary vein were clamped. When we opened the middle PA trunk using Metzenbaum scissors, a white stony mass that did not adhere to the artery wall on the mediastinal side was removed with the adherent PA wall. On the central side of the mass, the soft tissue contiguous to the mass was trapped by vascular clamp forceps. Because we could not loosen the forceps, the pinched tissue was separated, and the tumor was removed. The defect in the right main PA was reconstructed with bovine pericardium (Additional file : Video S1). The operative time was 404 min, with a blood loss of 940 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 16.
Histopathological examination of the tumor revealed that the pulmonary artery intimal sarcoma consisted of three components: osteosarcoma components, chondrocyte components, and spindle cell components .
Three months after the second operation, FDG PET/CT revealed a hypodense lesion without calcification in the right chest wall . CT-guided biopsy revealed PAS recurrence. FDG PET revealed another slight accumulation in the right PA in the central region of the PA reconstruction. Genomic analysis using the FoundationOne® companion diagnostic revealed a low-tumor mutational burden (TMB), microsatellite stable, and the loss of the methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) gene (MTAP loss). According to a multidisciplinary conference, proton therapy was administered only to the chest wall lesion, and short-interval observation was determined for the lesion of the right PA because it was difficult to distinguish reactive accumulation associated with PA reconstruction from local recurrence. Two months after proton therapy, CT revealed a low-density lesion in the PA, indicating local recurrence . She received a second proton therapy for local recurrence and is alive independently with stable disease 25 months after tumor removal. At home, she maintains almost the same level of daily life activities as before the two surgeries with doing housework.