A 65-year-old woman with persistent atrial fibrillation was referred for LAAc. The patient underwent mechanical aortic and mitral valve replacement in 1995 for rheumatic valvular disease and required a redo surgery due to an extensive pannus with two biological prostheses in January 2020; she also required a single-chamber pacemaker. Her current medical therapy included oral anticoagulation (apixaban 5 mg twice daily) in addition to diuretics and iron supplementation. She developed chronic anaemia due to active intestinal angiodysplasia with recurrent transfusion requirements once or twice each month. Her CHA₂DS₂-VASc score was 3 and HAS-BLED score was 3. Investigations ruled out other causes of anaemia, including haemolytic anaemia and paravalvular leak. The patient presented with two biological protheses (VHD) without active rheumatic valve disease and, as a result, may be a candidate for LAAc.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed spontaneous contrast in the LAA without formation of a thrombus (see , ). The ridge diameter was 28 mm. One centimetre inside the LAA, the maximum landing zone diameter was 22 mm. The shape of the LAA was tortuous and difficult to assess. Although the LAA had an initial angle like a chicken wing, pre-operative computed tomography (CT) revealed an unusual LAA morphology that was horn-like in shape (due to a vertical upward axis) (see , ) with an inferior implantation and a superior axis, with the ostium close to the mitral prosthesis ring .
After written informed consent, a first procedure was performed using a standard left femoral venous approach. The transseptal puncture was performed postero-inferiorly as recommended under TEE guidance. Nevertheless, despite multiple attempts, it was not possible to advance the sheath beyond the first centimetre of the ostium, even with the use of both double-curve and single-curve sheaths and a pigtail probe with an extra-stiff guide (see , ). The deployment of a 31 mm Watchman FLX (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, Massachusetts, USA) was attempted but was unsuccessful given the unsuitable sheath position (see , and ).
As a result of the unusual LAA morphology, a 3D printing model was prepared using SLS laser sintering technology ( and IMT Mines Alès) using Flexible TPU (Thermoplastic Polyurethane, EOS TPU 1301).
A volume file (IntelliSpace Portal version 12, Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands), segmented to depict the entire left atrium and LAA, a part of the right atrium, superior and inferior vena cava, and aortic and mitral prosthesis , and then reprocessed offline in preparation for 3D printing . Simulation was then performed from inferior and superior access points , and with different LAA occlusion devices (see , and ). Excessive sheath kinking was demonstrated with an inferior approach, but successful deployment was feasible using a superior approach (see , and ).
Transseptal puncture (second procedure) (see , ) was performed using a right jugular venous approach under TEE guidance (see , ). Apixaban was discontinued 72 h before the procedure and 2000 IU unfractionated heparin was administered after jugular puncture and reduced to 100 IU/kg after transseptal puncture with monitoring of activated clotting time to achieve >250 s during the procedure. A Swartz SL0 sheath (Abbott, Illinois, USA) and a BRK-1 XS Series transseptal needle (Abbott) were used. Safe access to the left atrium was achieved by advancing a 0.014 stiff coronary wire Iron Man (Abbott) through the BRK-1 XS needle and placed in contact with inter atrial septum connected to radiofrequency. The sheath was then advanced in the left atrium over the needle and Iron Man wire. The SL0 was exchanged for the single-curve 14Fr delivery sheath over an Amplatz Super Stiff guidewire placed into the LAA. Deep and safe advancement of the delivery sheath was performed over a pigtail catheter and the Amplatz Super Stiff guidewire until proper depth was achieved. Proper sheath alignment (see , ) without kinking was obtained allowing successful implantation of a Watchman FLX 31 device in stable position without residual leakage (see , ). The position was as predicted during the simulation on the 3D-printed model. No complications occurred during the first or second procedures.
Following the successful second procedure, the patient continued to receive apixaban (2.5 mg twice daily) until the control CT scan at month 2. Between the two interventions, the patient continued to need transfusions. At the patient’s 3-month follow-up visit, and after cessation of oral anticoagulation, an improvement in symptoms was seen with no need for additional transfusions. Imaging demonstrated complete LAA occlusion and correct placement of the device along the LAA superior axis as predicted by the simulation procedure, with an adequate compression and no residual leak ( and , ). TEE follow-up confirmed there was no leakage around the device. After 9 months’ follow-up, there was no need for further transfusions, the patient’s pulmonary pressure and functional class had improved, which was attributed to the withdrawal of blood transfusion-related volume loading, as well as the cessation of repeated post-transfusion inflammatory responses and the favourable effect of normalized iron stores.