A 71-year-old man underwent a robot-assisted partial nephrectomy in 2022 at Azienda sanitaria territoriale Pesaro-Urbino, Italy, to treat a 5 cm mass located at the upper pole of his left kidney (7a according to the RENAL Nephrometry Score).8 Following appropriate preoperative preparation, the mass was enucleated with a clamp of renal artery of 21 minutes. Care was taken to close the renal wound meticulously using absorbable sutures and covered with sealing matrix (made by human fibrinogen and thrombin), and perirenal fat. Post-surgery, pathological analysis of the surgical specimens revealed stage pT1a, grade 2 renal cell carcinoma (RCC). The patient recovered well, with the temporary drainage tube removed on the fourth postoperative day, and he was discharged on the fifth day. However, six months later, was re-admitted with fever and elevated inflammatory markers, she had no history of urinary stones and did not report any recent trauma. CT urography showed a 8 cm perirenal collection at the upper pole of the left kidney, with contrast leakage from the upper calyx into the perirenal space. Subsequent retrograde pyelography confirmed the presence of a urinary fistula between the urinoma and the upper urinary calyx. To address this complication, a retrograde double pig-tail stent was inserted in the collecting system and percutaneous US drainage was positioned by interventional radiologist in the perirenal collection. Cultural examination of urine and drainage fluid yielded negative results. However, at the one-month follow-up, the urinary fistula persisted. Along with the interventional radiologist, despite the non-dilatated collection system a US guided percutaneous access into the lower calyx was obtained with a vascular introducer sheat. After confirming the presence of the fistula from the upper calyx with contrast injection, a catheterization of the fistula was obtained with a Bern catheter and a microcatheter (Progreate 2.7 F Terumo). Adhesive fibrin, a solution comprising frozen aprotinin and thrombin-calcium chloride, was then introduced via the microcatheter in the fistula, following a sudden closure of the fistula, as indicated by the urogram. The percutaneous nephrostomy was left with the distal tip within the upper calyx group after the procedure along with the double pig-tail stent, in order to optimize the drainage of the entire collecting system of the kidney. After three days, a pyelography control showed no contrast leakage in the upper calyx, which remained absent on subsequent controls at nine days and after a further 15-day period. With the urinary fistula resolved, the percutaneous drainage and nephrostomy were removed, while the double pig-tail stent remained. A final pyelography conducted one month after nephrostomy removal confirmed the sustained absence of the urinary fistula, prompting the decision to remove the double pig-tail ureteral stent.