A 45 year-old male patient presented to the outpatient unit of Internal Medicine Department in September 2019 with complaints of fever, abdominal pain (right flank), and burning micturition for 3 days. He was otherwise well in the past and none of his family members had similar illness. On physical examination, he had normal temperature, blood pressure, pulse rate, and respiratory rate. On systemic examination, he had tenderness at his right renal angle. Respiratory, cardiovascular, and neurological examinations were unremarkable. There were no rash, lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly.
On urine investigation, 1–2 pus cells were seen per high power field (hpf) but no red blood cells (RBC). Total white cell count (TC) including differential counts (DC), hemoglobin (Hb), platelet count, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were within normal limits. His blood creatinine level was 0.9 mg/dL, urea was 33 mg/dL, sodium 142 mmol/L and potassium 4.8 mmol/L. Urine and blood culture was ordered. Ultrasonography (US) of his abdomen-pelvis showed mild fatty changes in liver, right renal concretions, and prostatomegaly (approx. 26.59 g). The patient was sent home on oral cefixime 400 mg twice daily, oral diclofenac 75 mg thrice daily, and hyoscine tablet 20 mg thrice daily.
On Day 4, the patient returned to the outpatient unit with persistent symptoms. He was then admitted to the medical ward with intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone 1 g twice daily, Injection tramadol for pain, and intravenous fluids. Urine and blood culture reports showed no growth of pathogens. Routine laboratory investigations were repeated. Urine showed plenty pus cells but no RBCs, sugar and albumin. Serum creatinine level increased to 1.5 mg/dL whereas blood urea (30 mg/dL), sodium (135 mmol/L), and potassium (3.8 mmol/L) levels decreased. Liver panel (transaminases, total and direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphate, serum lipase, serum amylase) was normal. .
The patient continued to be symptomatic on Day 5 of illness despite IV medication. Routine urine and blood investigations came out unremarkable except for a sudden decrease in platelet count (190,00 on Day 4 to 115,000 on Day 5) and serum creatinine level (1.5 on Day 4 to 1.3 on Day 5). Follow-up US abdomen-pelvis showed globular right kidney with probe tenderness, suggestive of acute pyelonephritis. Antibiotics were then upgraded to IV meropenem and IV teicoplanin.
A plain computer tomography scan of the patient’s kidneys-ureters-bladder (CT-KUB) showed right perirenal haziness and fatty strandings; thickened right lateral conal fascia with minimal surrounding haziness but no evidence of hydroureteronephrosis; tiny renal concretions, splenunculus, and plate atelectasis in the posterobasal segment of right lower lobe of right kidney; and mild degenerative changes in the visualized spine. These findings complemented the US diagnosis of acute pyelonephritis. .
On Day 7 of illness, the patient was still complaining right flank pain along with fever. He suddenly became tachypneic with respiratory rate of 24/min. An urgent US chest was performed which showed minimal bilateral pleural effusion. Routine laboratory investigations came out unremarkable except for decreasing creatinine level (1.2 mg/dL). Then, a possibility of serositis was suspected.
Kathmandu city was hit by dengue epidemic at the time of the patient’s hospital admission. Therefore, a possibility of tropical fever in this patient was thought of too. His blood samples were sent for the investigation for dengue virus, scrub typhus, leptospirosis, leishmaniasis (kala-azar), and malaria (optimal test). All tests came out negative except for scrub typhus –IgM antibodies positive on rapid diagnostic test. Immediately, doxycycline (100 mg IV twice daily) was added to the patient’s medication list (Day 7 of illness).
The patient’s clinical features and lab results did not change remarkably for 36 h of initiating doxycycline. However, over the next 48 h (Day 10 onwards), the patient showed clinical improvement. His fever and abdominal pain decreased significantly. On Day 12 of illness (9th day of admission, 7th day of IV meropenem, 5th day of IV doxycycline), the patient had a feeling of well-being, so he was sent home with oral doxycycline for 10 additional days and oral levofloxacin for 7 days.
When the patient visited hospital after 6 days of discharge (Day 17), he was found apparently asymptomatic; all blood and urine investigations came out normal; and his follow-up ultrasonography findings (chest-abdomen-pelvis) were non-significant.