A 69-year-old hypertensive male was transferred to us with traumatic brain injury after sustaining a ground-level fall. On admission, his Glasgow Coma Scale was 12/15 (E4V2M6). CT scan depicted a left temporal hematoma with extensive acute subdural hematoma, diffuse edema and mass effect, and midline shift of 6.6 mm . He was admitted to the special care unit for observation where his GCS dropped to 9/15. He then underwent left-sided emergent DC and was discharged 4 weeks later. At the time of discharge, he was awake, alert, and intermittently following simple commands without gross motor or sensory deficits. His speech was slurred and intermittently, he had mildly agitated behavior (Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale or RASS + 1) with a Modified Rankin Scale of 4.
One week later, the patient returned to the hospital with progressively worsening agitation without a decline in consciousness. CT scan showed interval development of the right chronic subdural hematoma with interval resolution of the previous acute hematoma. The hematoma was evacuated through burr-hole craniotomy and drain placement. The procedure was uneventful but after the surgery, his agitation increased (RASS + 3) and cognitive dysfunction did not improve. Mini-Mental Score could not be assessed as his comprehension was not intact. At this point, patient was extensively evaluated for other causes of agitation such as electrolytes disturbances, endocrine abnormalities, infection, sepsis, drug intoxication, or alcohol withdrawal, all workup was within normal limits.
On serial CT scans, the right subdural collections decreased and his craniotomy skin flap started to sink. Suspecting “syndrome of trephined” and in view of his persistently unexplained behavioral dysfunction, we planned for early cranioplasty which was performed 6 weeks after the primary procedure . Within 48 h of cranioplasty, his agitation started to improve. On the 4th day, his RASS was + 1.
At 6-month follow-up, the patient was found able to walk unattended and only required minimal assistance with his activities of daily living (ADL) (MRS 3). His comprehension had also improved considerably and he was able to follow two-step commands with consistency.