A 13-year-old girl with intellectual disability experienced epilepsy and fatigue for two years, with a recent event of edema, breathlessness, and nocturnal dyspnea that prompted admission to the Cardiology Department of Beijing Children’s Hospital. She had a fever and convulsions 2 years before admission and was treated with oral digoxin, prednisone acetate, and captopril at another hospital. Her prenatal and perinatal history was unremarkable. Her family had no similar health issues.

Two weeks before admission, the girl developed a cough, worsening dyspnea, breathlessness, and orthopnea. Antibiotics failed to improve her condition. Physical examination exhibited systolic murmur, jugular vein distention, and enlarged liver and spleen. Blood biochemistry showed elevated blood urea nitrogen (BUN) (12.95 mmol·L− 1), creatinine (1.1 mg·dl− 1), uric acid (734.1 µmol·L− 1), aspartate aminotransferase (63.8 U·L− 1), and alanine aminotransferase (97.6 U·L− 1) and low estimated creatinine clearance rate (53.98 ml/min/1.73 m2; bedside Schwart estimation). Troponin-I (0.132 ng·mL− 1) and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) (15,906 pg·mL− 1) levels were significantly increased. Blood pressure was 100–122/65–84 mmHg. The urine routine showed no abnormalities, including white cells, red cells, or proteinuria. The 24-hour urine volume was 820–1100 ml. Tests for urine organic acids and plasma amino acids were negative. Echocardiography showed a low ejection fraction (34%) and fractional shortening (16%). Echocardiography indicated heart enlargement and ventricular hypertrophy, suggesting cardiomyopathy. Edema, dyspnea, elevated NT-proBNP levels, and reduced ejection fraction were all indicative of heart failure. In addition, echocardiography revealed left cardiac dysfunction, general heart enlargement, ventricular hypertrophy, massive pericardial effusion, moderate regurgitation in multiple valves, and a severely reduced ejection fraction of 35%, further supporting the diagnosis of heart failure. Electrocardiography indicated paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia and ST-T wave alterations. Routine urine tests and a kidney ultrasound were conducted, revealing no evidence of proteinuria, hematuria, or morphological changes typical of NPHP, such as corticomedullary cysts or significant structural abnormalities. No kidney biopsy was performed, limiting a conclusive diagnosis of a kidney pathology based on histological assessment. Although the blood tests indicated elevated BUN and creatinine, these findings were considered to be acute kidney injury due to severe cardiac failure, which might lead to impaired kidney perfusion rather than primary kidney disease. After informed consent, genetic testing was conducted on the patient and her relatives. After filtering the non-candidate variants of the proband from the databases, a homozygous splicing mutation, XPNPEP3 c.970–2 A > G, was detected in intron 6, and no other related significant mutations were identified, establishing a diagnosis of NPHPL1. Using Sanger sequencing, this mutation was confirmed in the proband’s asymptomatic brother (heterozygous) and parents (recessive carriers). ESEfinder v.3.0 (http://rulai.cshl.edu/tools/ESE) predicted that c.970–2 A > G may reduce the binding of the splicing factors SRSF2 and SRSF5 to their target sequence, suggesting that the mutation may lead to abnormal splicing of XPNPEP3. Similar results were predicted by Human Splicing Finder (HSF) and the NetGene2 servers. Moreover, the experimental results of the minigene approach confirmed the deleterious effect of c.970–2 A > G. Agarose gel electrophoresis analysis of the PCR fragments revealed that the wild-type transcript had a longer band of 412 bp. In contrast, the mutant exhibited only one band of 326 bp, with the 86 bp band being absent. Sanger sequencing confirmed that the mutant plasmid transcribed a mature mRNA product with exon 7 being skipped entirely (86 bp del, c.970_1055del, NM_022098) in the mature mRNA, suggesting that c.970–2 A > G leads to the abnormal splicing of XPNPEP3 in the absence of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.

Upon admission, the patient received digoxin, milrinone, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide, and spironolactone to enhance heart function and metoprolol to manage arrhythmias. Despite these interventions, she developed worsening edema, kidney failure, hypotension, and sustained ventricular tachycardia within 5 days. Her parents opted to transfer her to another facility for continued care. Tragically, the child passed away approximately 1 week after discharge. It is believed that the cause of death may originate from arrhythmias, as the child had ventricular tachycardia, which could lead to malignant arrhythmias and result in sudden cardiac death. Furthermore, the exacerbation of heart failure, likely due to complications from end-organ damage, may also have contributed to the outcome.