A 62-year-old woman, G1P1, was referred to a gynecological doctor for a large “vaginal mass”. She did not have abnormal vaginal bleeding but found one vaginal mass by herself 1 month ago. Her age at the beginning of menopause was 52 years old. Her medical and surgical histories were both negative. On gynecological examination, we found that the mass was non-mobile and was 5 × 5 cm2 in size, with a location of approximately 3 cm from the vaginal orifice and closely attached to the vaginal wall. On rectal examination, we found that the mass located on the anterior of the rectal wall was approximately 3 cm from the anal verge. The pelvis MR scan and transvaginal ultrasound results showed a tumor, 5 cm in diameter, was mostly located in the space of the rectovaginal septum, with large portion protruding into the vaginal wall but only a small portion protruding into the rectal wall. Its boundary is clear . Colonoscopy revealed that the root of the tumor was located on the rectal dentate line . The origin of the tumor was uncertain. Based on these examinations, the gastrointestinal doctor and us co-evaluated that if we selected a transvaginal resection, we could intactly excised the tumor with less possible complications such as fecal incontinence or anal sphincter dysfunction due to its special location. The patient refused to radical anal resection for its anal complications. Therefore, we chose transvaginal resection as a better alternative. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a lithotomy position. Epinephrine, diluted at 1:40,000, was injected into the vaginal submucosa for resection. We incised the vaginal mucosa and separated the surrounding tissue until we reached the submucosa, keeping the tumor capsule intact. After exposing the tumor, we confirmed that it was located in the rectovaginal septum and partially encapsulated by the rectal muscle . We mobilized the tumor from the capsule and resected the intact tumor. The defect of rectal muscle was very small but kept the rectal mucosa intact. We vertically stitched the vaginal layers and horizontally stitched the muscular layer of the rectum . The postsurgery biopsy showed spindle-shaped cells were moderate differentiation and regular arrangement with clear margin by pathological examination . The results of histological examination showed that the tumor was positive for CD117, Dog-1, and CD34 . These findings suggest a moderate-risk rectal GIST that required follow-up. The patient recovered quickly. She had not suffered any anal dysfunction nor postoperative vaginal-rectal fistula. She refused to undergo enlarged resection but received imatinib treatment after surgery. She remained tumor-free for 2 years after surgery. She was lost for follow-up thereafter.