A 41-year-old Hispanic man with history of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and type2 diabetes mellitus was referred to the emergency room (ER) of a large urban city hospital from the rheumatology clinic for newly developed bilateral lower extremity rashes and edema after 1 year of being lost to follow-up. He was diagnosed with RA 2 years prior to admission after presenting with polyarthritis and strongly positive serum immunologic markers (rheumatoid factor titer 1220 IU/ml [normal range, < 20 IU/ml], anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide titer 240.05 U/ml [normal range, < 20 U/ml; strongly positive, > 60 U/ml]). Methotrexate, low dose prednisone and sulfasalazine had resulted in better control of disease activity. Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow-up. He had been off of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) for RA and was only taking ibuprofen 800 mg every 8 h as needed for about a month for joint pain.
When the patient was seen in the ER (day 0), the physical exam showed pinpoint, non-tender, non-blanchable purpuric macules coalescing into large patches on the left leg, with smaller areas of involvement on the right leg. The skin lesions were in a dependent distribution involving more of the flexor surface than extensor surface. Joint exam revealed polyarticular arthritis with pain and swelling in the right 2nd and 3rd metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints and left 3rd (MCP). Boutonniere deformities were observed in both hands (left more than right), as well as subcutaneous nodules under the elbow. Significant pitting edema was found in the lower extremities. The rest of the physical exam was unremarkable.
His urinalysis showed red blood cell of 21/high power field (hpf) and white blood cell 7/hpf. His creatinine was 0.9 mg/dl, with estimated GFR of 93 ml/min using MDRD equation. The diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome was established given large proteinuria (11 g/gm) on the spot urine sample, hypoalbuminemia (2.2 g/dL), and peripheral edema.
Further serology work-up showed low C3 of 86 (normal range 88–201), C4 of 24 (normal range 16–47), positive cryoglobulin qualitative with < 1% Cryocrit, as well as negative c-ANCA, p-ANCA, and ANA (including Anti-dsDNA, Anti-Smith, Anti-SSA and Anti-SSB). He had a polyclonal elevation in IgG (1790 mg/dl, normal range 694-1618 mg/dl) and IgA (661 mg/dl, normal range 68-378 mg/dl), with a normal IgM (181 mg/dl, normal range 77-220 mg/dl). There was absence of M-spike on serum protein electrophoresis. HIV, Hepatitis C and hepatitis B serologies were negative. Unfortunately, rheumatoid factor (RF) titer was not checked at that point of time. Prednisone was started at 10 mg daily empirically for treatment of nephrotic syndrome and active RA, and patient was referred to renal clinic for further diagnosis and monitoring of therapy.
Three days after being discharged (Day 5) and prior to being seen in the renal clinic, the patient developed painful purplish discoloration of the distal right thumb, which prompted another ER visit (Day 12). On exam, the distal phalanx was cool to touch and exquisitely tender on palpation with signs of onycholysis. There was no sign of cutaneous necrosis or surrounding cellulitis. Doppler ultrasound showed good radial and ulnar pulses with good blood flow to the distal phalanx of the right thumb. He was discharged from the ER since no macrovascular signs were found, and he was given follow up with rheumatology. On Day 16, rheumatology noticed new lower lip purpuric lesions, which, in conjunction to the positive cryoglobulin qualitative test along with the thumb and lower leg lesions, prompted an increase in Prednisone dose to 80 mg daily for treatment of systemic cryoglobulinemic vasculitis. Unfortunately, his skin lesions were not biopsied.
Renal biopsy was performed on day 28. A total of 23 glomeruli were obtained, of which 1 was sclerosed. Light microscopy showed diffuse capillary wall thickening with rare eosinophilic intracapillary thrombi . Silver stain showed spikes and holes in the glomerular basement membrane. Immunofluorescence (IF) staining showed diffuse, finely granular deposits of IgG , IgA, IgM, κ and γ light chains, C1q and C3. Anti-phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) stain was negative. Electron microscopy (EM) showed widespread subepithelial and intramembranous electron-dense deposits, with diffuse foot process effacement . Subendothelial or mesangial tubuloreticular inclusions suggestive of lupus nephritis were not found. The final pathologic diagnosis was compatible with membranous nephropathy with features of cryoglobulinemic glomerulonephritis. There were no signs of diabetic nephropathy on light microscopy.
Given the multisystem involvement (purpuric, non-blanching lesions in multiple skin and mucosal surfaces), characteristic pathological features (intracapillary thrombi) on renal biopsy and positive cryoglobulin qualitative test, a decision was made to start treatment empirically as systemic cryoglobulinemic vasculitis with Rituximab, considering that this is the first line treatment for hepatitis C-related cryoglobulinemic disease and evidence is limited for treatment of renal involvement in non-infectious mixed cryoglobulinemia. Unfortunately, treatment was delayed due to indeterminate Quantiferon and PPD tests.
One and a half months after starting high dose steroids (day 62), his right thumb and lower lip lesions had resolved, and his urine protein/creatinine ratio had decreased to 3.4 g/g.
Patient was started on Rituximab 1 g every 2 weeks and received 2 doses on day 67 and day 88, resulting in improvement of his proteinuria to 1.3 g/g (day 88). By this time, patient was on Prednisone 40 mg daily. Due to the persistently elevated blood sugar and Cushingoid features, a taper of the steroids occurred over the following 2 months.
Two months after he completed rituximab, the patient was admitted for presumed pneumonia (day 158) secondary to immunosuppression after presenting with 2-week history of dyspnea and cough. He underwent a CT scan of the chest with contrast, which showed hilar and mediastinal adenopathy without parenchymal consolidations. He underwent bronchoscopy with endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS), and the transbronchial lymph node biopsy of the mediastinal lymph node showed non-caseating granulomas. Acid fast stain and mycobacterium culture were negative. To rule out a lymphoproliferative disorder as a differential of non-caseating granulomas, PET scan, bone marrow biopsy and flow cytometry were performed, and they were negative for clonal lymphocytic proliferation. A clinical diagnosis of sarcoidosis was made, and his Prednisone dose was increased to 40 mg daily (patient was on a steroid taper and taking Prednisone 20 mg daily prior to this admission), resulting in rapid pulmonary symptoms improvement. No extrapulmonary signs of sarcoidosis developed in the course of his illness (e.g. erythema nodosum).
Six months after his first course of Rituximab, his proteinuria had increased back to 7 g/gm (day 291), so a decision to repeat Rituximab course was made. Unfortunately, this was again delayed due to patient’s personal issues, and he started it 2 months later. This time he received weekly Rituximab 750 mg for a total of 4 doses. Patient again manifested a dramatic initial response to the treatment with reduction of proteinuria to 1.1 g/g (day 371), but with a slow increase in his urine protein to creatinine ratio over the following 3 months, to an average of 3.8 g/g, compatible with an overall partial response if compared with his initial proteinuria of 11 g/g on presentation . His Creatinine level has remained stable between 0.8 ~ 1.1 mg/dl during the period of one and half year follow-up. His skin lesions and articular manifestations have completely resolved since the initiation of high dose steroids on day 62. Repeat Cryoprecipitate levels has been persistently positive. A timeline of the disease course is summarized in Fig. .