We present a 43-year-old nonsmoking and nondrinking white male with oral cancer on the left side of the tongue. A biopsy sample taken from the tumor revealed a G2 keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma. On a CT scan performed two months before the operation, the radiologist described a primary tumor measuring 15 × 10 mm with peripheral contrast enhancement and two suspected, probably metastatic lymph nodes on the left side of the neck in groups III and IV, size 17 × 14 mm and 26 × 16 mm, respectively. Distant metastases were ruled out on chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound. Moreover, anamnesis proved previous lower extremity deep vein thrombosis, but Doppler ultrasound ruled out active disease.
The surgical procedure included excision of the left half of the tongue, the floor of the mouth and the sidewall of the throat and bilateral cervical lymph node dissection in groups I-V on the left side and I-III on the right side. The second part of the operation involved reconstruction by using an anterolateral thigh flap. After three days, reoperation was performed due to hemorrhage from the wound after lymphadenectomy. The final histopathology report revealed G2 keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma, stage IVa (pT3 pN2b, AJCC 8th edition). Additional risk factors included perineural invasion of small nerves, an unfavorable pattern of invasion with small islands (the worst pattern of invasion, 4), a closest margin below 1 mm, and five metastatic lymph nodes (of 49 lymph nodes dissected) without extracapsular extension at levels II, IV, V on the left side. The novel prognostic histopathological grading system in oral squamous cell carcinoma based on tumor budding revealed G-2 . There were 102 budding foci detected per 10 high-power fields. Two to four cell-sized nests or single-cell invasion was observed. A multidisciplinary case conference qualified the patient for postoperative radiochemotherapy, but he refused systemic treatment. Given the patient’s decision, radiotherapy alone was recommended. Five-point head, neck and shoulder masks were employed for patient immobilization, and a CT scan (3 mm slice thickness) without intravenous contrast with the patient in the supine position was performed in the planning radiotherapy process. The dose prescription involved the bilateral lymph nodes I-V to a total dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions, the left side neck in groups II-V to a total dose of 60 Gy in 30 fractions and the tumor bed with bilateral submandibular lymph nodes to a total dose of 66 Gy in 33 fractions . The VMAT (volumetric modulated arc therapy) technique was applied. In the first stage of treatment, three full arcs were used, followed by three arcs lateralized to the left side of the neck in the second stage. In the third stage, two frontal arcs were applied. Radiotherapy was performed by linear accelerators (Clinac 23EX; Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA, USA) with an energy of 6 MV and maximal dose rate of 600 MU/min. Two weeks after the beginning of radiotherapy, ultrasound of the neck was performed due to a suspected lump in group III on the right side. It revealed a 16 × 9 mm lymph node. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy was performed in the next stage, confirming metastasis of the squamous cell carcinoma. The multidisciplinary case conference urged the application of a single-fraction stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) boost of 18 Gy to the metastatic lymph node. After 29 days of conventional treatment, a new 5-point mask, a new CT scan without contrast and an MR scan with gadolinium intravenous contrast (both with 1 mm slice thickness) in the supine position were performed in the planned stereotactic boost process. The GTVboost volume was 0.7 cm3. A 3 mm margin was added to the GTVboost to create a PTVboost volume of 3.1cm3. A new treatment plan consisting of four arcs was prepared. Four 6 MV FFF (flattening filter-free) photon beams with a maximal dose rate of 1400 MU/min were utilized. The dose that fully covers target volume was selected as the prescribed isodose level, so that the minimum dose in the target volume was 100% of the prescribed dose and the maximum dose was 108.4%. The angle range of arcs was adapted to the boost localization and was limited to the right and front sides of the patient. The boost was delivered two days after the last fraction of conventional radiotherapy with the same linear accelerator. Overall treatment time totaled 50 days. Figures and show the dose distribution of the SRS boost and the sum of conventional RTH with SRS boost, respectively. Dose analysis of the conventional and stereotactic radiotherapy is presented consecutively in Tables and . During radiotherapy, oral mucositis and moist desquamation (grade 3, CTCAE v5.0) were observed in the irradiated area, which subsided within three months of follow up. Additionally, Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella oxytoca were identified from the throat culture in six week of conventional treatment, subsequently treated using antibiotic therapy consistent with the antibiogram (clindamycin, amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium). Blood tests showed grade 1 anemia and leukopenia after 24 and 33 fraction respectively, and normalized seven months after treatment. Three, ten and thirteen months after the end of radiotherapy, CT scans and laryngological examinations did not prove locoregional recurrence. Chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound did not detect any metastatic changes one year after treatment. Xerostomia G2 was the only symptom of late toxicity fifteen months after radiotherapy.
At 17 months of follow-up, the patient reported coughing, suffocation and bloody sputum.
A CT scan revealed infiltration (64 × 65 × 100 mm) in the 3rd segment of the right lung, encompassing the hilum and central part of the mediastinum. Pathological examination after endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) proved squamous cell carcinoma with moderate PD-L1 membrane expression (< 50%). Acknowledgment of the tumor in the chest as lung cancer or metastatic disease due to oral cancer was difficult; nevertheless, a further aggressive course might suggest a new primary cancer. The patient was qualified for palliative radiotherapy to a total dose of 30 Gy in 10 fractions (VMAT technique, single arc, gantry angle 30.0–210.0 deg) for the tumor in the chest (systemic treatment was contraindicated in terms of performance status—ECOG 2). Three months later, multiple metastases in the mediastinum, right lung, spleen and bones were detected by PET/CT. The most painful osteolitic lesion in the left ischium and femoral head was irradiated in one fraction to 8 Gy (two-dimensional radiotherapy technique, two coaxial opposite beams from AP and PA directions were used). The patient died the next month.