A 54-year-old man was referred to our hospital after his previous doctor thoroughly examined him for right-sided abdominal pain. His previous diagnosis based on computed tomography (CT) was a right mesenteric tumor. Mild tenderness was noted on the right side of the abdomen, but there were no palpable masses. His medical history included diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Blood chemistry tests showed mild elevation of liver enzymes levels and elevated blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c levels, which are associated with diabetes mellitus. The tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen level was mildly elevated at 6.2 ng/mL. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed a mesenteric lobulated mass with an artery running through the center . FDG-PET revealed slight FDG uptake (maximum standardized uptake value, 2.0) in the right abdomen; hence, a benign or low-grade malignant tumor was suspected .
Based on the imaging findings, we suspected a malignant mesenchymal tumor, and because the tumor was painful, surgery was performed to diagnose and treat it. The tumor was located in the mesentery of the ileum and retracted into the mesentery . Surgery was performed via a laparotomy. Initially, the small mesenteric mass was resected along with the surrounding mesentery . However, resection of the tumor and mesentery resulted in impaired blood flow to the ileum in that area, and eventually, a 90-cm ileum was also resected . The cut surface of the 55 × 33 × 33 mm3 tumor was pale yellowish-white . Anastomotic reconstruction was performed using an instrumental functional end-to-end anastomosis. Our intraoperative search did not reveal any small bowel tumor, and an additional search of the resected ileum did not reveal any tumor. Thus, we diagnosed the patient with a primary ileal mesenteric tumor rather than a metastatic tumor.
Histological examination showed proliferative infiltration of atypical cells of unequal size and irregular spore structure. Some atypical cells infiltrated the surrounding adipose tissues and proliferating atypical cells had round nuclei and a relatively abundant cytoplasm with pale eosinophilia. There were narrow fibrovascular interstitial spaces between atypical cell foci . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD56 , chromogranin A , and synaptophysin . The Ki-67 index was 3% . The final pathological diagnosis was NET G2.
The patient’s postoperative course was good, and he was discharged 10 days after the surgery. The patient developed no recurrence for 1.5 years. Postoperative antitumor therapy was not performed for this patient because the histological diagnosis was NET G2, and it was determined that the tumor could be completely resected by surgery.