This 77-year-old man with a medical history including coronary artery disease and dysrhythmia presented to the neurosurgery clinic after months of evaluations for repeated episodes of presyncope and at least four syncopal events, where the patient was found unconscious or had awoken on the ground after presumably losing consciousness. The patient reported these symptoms and events were preceded by turning his head to the right. In some instances, the patient reported double vision in conjunction with the presyncopal symptoms.
On physical examination, the patient was neurologically intact. He was able to reproduce the symptoms with head rotation of approximately 45° to the right. As a matter of safety, these assessments were performed in short intervals as to not elicit a full syncopal event. Diplopia was not detected. A CT angiogram (CTa) of the head and neck demonstrated osseous changes consistent with cervical DISH as well as a “fang”-like osseous elongation of the right C5 lateral mass, which protruded into the vertebral foramen and compressed the VA . A catheter-based cranial and cervical digital subtraction angiogram (DSA) demonstrated approximately 74% stenosis of the right VA at C5 in the neutral position, which progressed to full occlusion with right head rotation . In addition, the patient was found to have a left VA which ended in an ipsilateral posterior inferior cerebellar artery without joining the right VA.
A C4–5 anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) was performed under general endotracheal anesthesia. The traditional Smith-Robinson approach to the cervical spine was employed and special care was taken not to injure the esophagus, which had been displaced to the right of the cervical spine by large hyperostotic osteophytes. In addition to the C4–5 discectomy, partial osteophyte removal was required at C5 to allow for the plating system to lay flat. A structural allograft and low-profile titanium plating system was used to complete the surgery.
The patient tolerated surgery well and was discharged on postoperative day 1. He had an uneventful recovery and reported complete resolution of his symptoms with head rotation. Approximately 9 months after surgery, the patient underwent a repeat CTa and DSA as part of an evaluation for cardiac dysrhythmia. The CTa demonstrated blunting of the osseous growth at C5, and the DSA showed no evidence of VA compression in the neutral or dynamic positions .