A 4-year-old Persian boy, 10 kg in weight and diagnosed with MMA, was referred and admitted to our hospital because of progressive lethargy after frequent vomiting since a day before hospitalization and excessive crying and irritability, upward gaze, and muscular hypotonia on the day of hospitalization.
He was the second child of healthy, related parents (cousins), born after an uneventful pregnancy and delivery with a birth weight of 2,750 g. His older brother was healthy. His family had a low-class income. His father works at a university and his mother is a housewife. The diagnosis of MMA was made at the age of 3 months on the basis of the clinical presentation and series of laboratory tests (metabolic acidosis, high level of ammonia, and high urinary concentration of methylmalonic acid). The patient had a history of frequent hospitalization owing to imbalanced electrolyte levels and he was regularly taking prescribed medications for 6 months including oral solution of cyanocobalamin 1000 mcg daily, l-carnitine (100 mg/kg/day), Shohl’s solution (sodium citrate) 30 ml every 6 hours.
Upon the patient’s arrival in the emergency room, owing to abnormal vital signs [temperature (T): 36.3 °C, pulse rate (PR): 280, respiratory rate (RR): 45, blood pressure (BP): 100/90 mmHg, and O2 saturation: 97%]. Electrocardiography (ECG) was performed and showed wide QRS complex ventricular tachycardia .Physical examination revealed pale skin, lethargy, and upward gaze. The muscular examination revealed hypotonia. Neurological examination: all cranial and peripheral nerve examinations were normal. During the present episode, the patient’s laboratory test results were as follows: red blood cell (RBC), 3,530,000/µl; white blood cell (WBC), 8210/µl; hemoglobin (Hb), 9.2 gr/dl; platelet (plt), 375,000/µl; alanine transaminase (ALT), 13; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 24; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 499; hepatitis B surface antigen (HBSAg), negative; and human immunodeficiency virus antibody (HIVAb), negative. Urine analysis: WBC, 0–1; RBC, 0; epithelial cell, 1–2; crystals, not seen; cast, not seen; and bacteria, not seen. Arterial blood gases (ABG) revealed severe metabolic acidosis (pH = 7.13, HCO3 = 9.5 mmol/L, pCO2 = 28.1 mmHg), hyperkalemia (K = 8.9 mEq/L, Na = 136 mEq/L), and renal insufficiency (serum creatine levels = 2.3 mg/dl and urea nitrogen = 80 mg/dl). Serum ammonium and lactate level was 95 mcg/dl and 26 mg/dl, respectively. Severe hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis with respiratory compensation were diagnosed.
The patient immediately underwent treatment, including calcium gluconate 10% intravenously infused over 10 minutes, sodium bicarbonate direct intravenous injection (2 mEq/kg) over 5 minutes, hydration with dextrose 10% intravenous serum, and regular insulin intravenous infusion (0.1 ml/kg/hour), and was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for further assessments. His blood pressure (BP) was 100/70 mmHg, pulse rate was 180/minute and irregular, respiratory rate was 42/minute, body temperature recorded 35.9 °C by skin, pulse oximetry indicated 97% in the PICU. The frequency of ventricular tachycardia gradually decreased and the ECG showed sinus tachycardia. Repeated ABG showed improvement (pH = 7.43, HCO3 = 13.3 mmol/L, pCO2 = 21 mmHg), and serum potassium level came down to 6 mEq/L within the next 6 hours. This management was continued under the observation of a multidisciplinary team. Additionally, kayexalate (10 g every 6 hours) as a sodium potassium exchange resin therapy and MMA formula were added to the treatment routine for the next 2 days. The patient stabilized, serum potassium level reduced to 4.9 mEq/L, serum creatine level reduced to 2.1 mg/dl, and urea nitrogen reduced to 57 mg/dl. It is notable that brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal and no growth was observed in patient’s blood culture. He was discharged with a good clinical condition. During the past 6 months, the patient has been regularly monitored every 2 months and has not exhibited any new neurological, cardiological, or other issues. Follow-up is ongoing.