A 50-year-old Japanese woman presented to a hospital with left-sided abdominal distention. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a cystic mass in the left-lower quadrant of the abdomen measuring approximately 10 cm in diameter. The patient had a history of iron deficiency anemia due to menorrhagia. She was referred to our hospital for surgical management. Upon admission, she complained of left-sided abdominal distention and denied abdominal pain and nausea. Physical examination revealed mild distention and a mildly tender mass in the left-lower quadrant of the abdomen. Laboratory examination findings on admission revealed elevated serum tumor marker levels: carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 21.4 ng/mL (normal range: 0–5.0) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level of 804.0 U/mL (normal range: 0–37.0). Other laboratory results were normal except for a low hemoglobin level of 10.4 g/dL. Abdominal US revealed a tumor located in the left abdomen with a maximum diameter of about 9 cm. The cyst wall was about 4 mm thick and relatively uniform, with no septa or nodules visible within the cyst. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen revealed a 10.2 × 9.1 × 9.3-cm-sized unilocular cystic lesion with maximum 12-mm-sized nodules located on the left side of the abdomen . CT revealed three uniform contrast-enhanced nodules similar to the cyst wall. The boundary between the nodule and the wall was unclear for all three nodules; one of the nodules was seen as a gentle ridge. MRI revealed three nodules in the cyst, and the nodules and cyst wall showed low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. The cystic mass was close to the left ureter, proximal jejunum, and descending colon, but separated from the left kidney and pancreas. The cyst wall was 3-mm thick. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET/CT revealed mottled mild FDG uptake in the whole cyst wall and intense FDG uptake in the mural nodules with standardized uptake value (SUV)-max of 16.15, and no abnormal FDG uptake in other organs . There were no malignant tumors on endoscopic gastrointestinal examination, and no findings to suspect gynecological diseases such as ovarian tumors. Although we were not able to identify the exact origin of the cyst based on radiological findings alone, we suspected a primary malignant cystic tumor arising from the retroperitoneum.
A midline laparotomy was performed after confirming the absence of disseminated lesions by laparoscopy and it revealed a cystic mass located in the mesentery of the descending colon . The cystic mass was rigidly attached to the descending colon, but not adhered to any other organs. The arterial supply of the tumor originated from the left colic artery; based on this, we diagnosed a mesenteric cystic tumor rather than a retroperitoneal cystic tumor. The cystic mass with the descending colon were completely removed without rupture.
The surgical specimen measured 9.2 × 9.2 × 6.5 cm . The cyst contained a serous, cloudy, ‘café-au-lait-like’ fluid . The pathological diagnosis of the specimen was adenocarcinoma. However, it was difficult to determine the histopathological subtypes (mucinous, serous, or seromucinous) due to the atypical histologic findings. The inner surface of the cyst wall was lined predominantly by a single layer to multiple layers of columnar epithelium and partially by simple cuboidal epithelium. The nodules consisted of atypical cells that showed nuclear atypia and abundant clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm composed of an irregular glandular or sheet-like structure with stromal infiltration , and the surface was covered with papillovillous component . The mesenteric tumor slightly invaded the subserosal layer of the descending colon, but not the mucosal layer. No ovarian stroma or teratomatous elements, including ectopic endometriosis, were observed. The atypical cells were immunohistochemically reactive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and p53, but negative for cytokeratin 20 (CK20), estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR), Wilms’ tumor gene-1, napsin A, and calretinin. Therefore, the final diagnosis was primary cystadenocarcinoma arising from the mesentery of the descending colon; the atypical cells were immunohistochemically reactive for CEA and CA19-9 .
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 11 days after the surgery. Adjuvant chemotherapy was initiated with S-1 (TS-1; tegafur, gimeracil, and oteracil potassium) at 100 mg/kg body weight per day for 8 courses (4 weeks of administration and 2 weeks of discontinuation). Approximately 1 year after the surgery, abdominal CT revealed no signs of disease recurrence, and serum CEA and CA19-9 levels had returned to normal.