A 70-year-old woman presented with 5 months of progressive low back pain. She had a complex medical history including a remote splenectomy, anti-phospholipid syndrome, autoimmune hemolytic anemia requiring previous courses of cyclophosphamide, L3 laminectomy 2 years prior, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with ongoing therapy with hydroxychloroquine and prednisone 20 mg daily. Her low back pain initially manifested in the context of a herpes zoster infection and management of presumed neuropathic pain was pursued. In ensuing months, she had progression of low back pain despite conservative management. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine showed evidence of an epidural abscess at L2–3, L3–4 with vertebral osteomyelitis at L2-L3. Admission vitals showed a heart rate of 120 beats per minute, blood pressure of 121/59 mmHg, temperature of 36.9 °C, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, and SpO2 of 93% on room air. She had a mild leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 12.18 k/uL. C-reactive protein and sedimentation rate were elevated at 2.8 mg/dL and 45 mm/h respectively. She underwent surgical evacuation of the epidural abscess and wound revision of L2-L3. Intra-operative findings included dark brown fluid that egressed from her epidural site, but no purulent fluid was visualized. Intraoperative cultures of vertebral bodies and discs showed no evidence of bacterial or fungal growth. Acid-fast bacterial (AFB) stains, cultures and QuantiFERON®-TB Gold In-Tube testing were also negative. Empiric treatment with vancomycin and cefepime was initiated with plans to complete a six-week course.
Three weeks after surgical intervention, she re-presented with persistent low back pain and encephalopathy. Cefepime was considered as a possible etiology of her altered mental status and therefore was replaced by aztreonam. Admission vital signs were unremarkable. C-reactive protein and sedimentation rate were 4.9 mg/dL and 36 mm/h respectively, with notable increase in C-reactive protein from 2.8 mg/dL. Lumbar spinal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated severe lytic and sclerotic destructive changes centered on the disc space of L2-L3 and the vertebral body of L4. There were also findings consistent with a large paraspinal abscess anterior to the L3 vertebral body. A biopsy of the L3 vertebral body was obtained and showed no organisms on gram stain with no growth after 7 days. This prompted a repeat bone biopsy in attempts to define the causative pathogen and direct further antimicrobial therapy. Meanwhile, empiric antibiotics to cover typical pathogens were continued. Two weeks following the initial vertebral body biopsy there was growth of acid fast bacilli from the bony specimen, which was further identified as MAC by hybridization probe. In vitro susceptibility testing indicated a favorable resistance profile with susceptibility to clofazimine, rifabutin, clarithromycin, ethambutol, and rifampin. Treatment with ethambutol and azithromycin was initiated after receiving susceptibility results. Two-drug therapy was selected due to the favorable susceptibility of the MAC isolate, in addition to efforts to mitigate potential adverse drug effects and medication interactions. She had no evidence of MAC pulmonary involvement on chest CT and the etiology of her infection was uncertain. Two months later she was seen in follow-up with resolution of her symptoms. She will continue antibiotics to complete a 12-month course.