A 73-year-old male presented to the emergency department with complaints of fevers peaking at 104 °F, chills, and rigors for 4–5 days. The patient's past medical history was significant for oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma treated with resection and adjuvant radiotherapy, hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma treated with laryngopharyngectomy and neck dissection with tracheostomy, prostate cancer, and melanoma. Per the patient, he did not have any pets and did not have any other zoonotic exposure. The patient resided in the city (urban environment) and had retired from his job as a construction worker 15 years earlier. The patient reported that several days prior to the onset of symptoms, he had started a new chemotherapy regimen for his squamous cell carcinoma. He also reported a chronic intermittent productive cough that was old. The rest of the patient's review of systems was negative.
The patient's vital signs upon admission were as follows: temperature of 39.2 °C, heart rate of 109 beats/minute, blood pressure of 99/70 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 26 breaths/minute, with a SpO2 of 100%. Physical examination yielded a gentleman who was lying comfortably in bed and was warm to the touch, with a tracheostomy in place. The tracheostomy appeared clean, non-erythematous, and free of discharge. Pulmonary auscultation revealed breath sounds decreased in the right lung, as well as coarse crackles.
Lab results were as follows: white blood cell count 13.4 K/μL with 88% neutrophils and 9% bands, hemoglobin 12.2 g/dL, platelet count 114 K/μL, albumin 2.9 g/dL, and lactic acid 1.4 mmol/L. A urinalysis was performed, which was unremarkable. A chest x-ray showed a new right mid lung nodule and right basilar opacity suggestive of pneumonia or mass.
Blood cultures were drawn, and the patient started empiric antibiotic therapy with intravenous cefepime, vancomycin, and metronidazole, which was subsequently switched to ampicillin/sulbactam, for presumed sepsis secondary to pneumonia. Two of the four blood culture bottles grew P. multocida sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, tetracycline, and penicillin G. A subsequent computed tomography scan of the chest showed multiple lung masses which were suspicious for metastases. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed no signs of infective endocarditis. After consultation with pulmonology and infectious disease, antibiotics were switched to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 875 mg–125 mg twice daily by mouth. Lower respiratory cultures were done which showed gram negative bacteria and later showed Pasteurella. This was considered consistent with blood cultures and the source for infection was considered secondary to obstructive pneumonia due to multiple lung masses. Speciation was not available from the lower respiratory cultures. Nasopharyngeal swab was not done.
The patient continued to improve, and the repeat blood cultures after 48 h were negative. As the patient did not have any new cardiovascular abnormalities and repeat blood cultures were negative with medical therapy, infectious disease did not recommend a transesophageal echocardiogram. The patient was discharged with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 875 mg–125 mg twice daily by mouth to complete a 14-day course.