A 40-year-old Caucasian man presented to our cardiologic outpatient department for regular cardiac evaluation. Dyspnoea or other cardiologic symptoms were negated by the patient. AA amyloidosis and associated end-stage chronic renal failure with need for constant dialysis due to highly active Ankylosing spondylitis was diagnosed 7 years ago and confirmed on kidney biopsy. At initial echocardiographic examination 4 years ago typical left ventricular wall thickening (19 mm) and ‘apical sparing’ with abnormal longitudinal function was stated, suspicion of CA was raised. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was normal (60%). Yet, no aortic or mitral dysfunction was stated. No additional cardiac diagnostic modalities were done because of potential contrast agent side effects in absence of expected further therapeutic consequences. The patient continued his regular visits at the nephrology department. Due to arterial hypertension and LVH, regular antihypertensive and heart insufficiency medication was initiated (ramipril 5 mg b.i.d.; lercanidipine 10 mg b.i.d.). Anti-inflammatory therapy for ankylosing spondylitis consisted of 15 mg Prednisolone daily. Despite our recommendations no echocardiographic follow-up was performed in the following 4 years till the present visit.
In the present echo exam, the patient showed no change in LVH or LVEF. Surprisingly, while any cardiac symptoms were negated, the patient now showed severe aortic valve stenosis and mitral valve stenosis, the valves showing signs of massive calcification (see , , Video S1) (left ventricular end-diastolic volume: 51 mm, left ventricular end-systolic volume: 36 mm, no pericardial/pleural effusion, no left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, no systolic anterior movement, aortic valve mean pressure gradient: 30.56 mmHg, aortic valve Vmax: 3.8 m/s, aortic valve area: 1.1cm2, mitral valve mean pressure gradient: 13.92 mmHg, mitral valve area: 1.7cm2, no relevant aortic, mitral, or tricuspid valve regurgitation). N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide was >70 000 ng/dL. Electrocardiogram showed regular sinus rhythm, without any conduction abnormalities. Clinical examination of the patient showed normal blood pressure (128/68 mmHg), normal heart rate (58 b.p.m.), rhythmic pulse and normal SpO2 (98%) by pulse oximetry. Auscultation revealed a 3/6 systolic, crescendo-decrescendo murmur, heard loudest at the 2nd right intercostal space. No peripheral oedema or increased jugular vein pulse was present. No hepatic or splenomegaly was present. Physical examination showed overheated and swollen knee joints. Due to suspicion of progressive systemic amyloidosis and ankylosing spondylitis a therapy with interleukin-6-receptor monoclonal human antibody (Tocilizumab) was initiated.
Following discussion in the multidisciplinary cardiology meeting, the decision for surgical valve replacement of the aortic and mitral valve, due to fast progression, was made. A coronary angiography for preoperative evaluation showed no relevant coronary stenosis. Despite the high surgical risk in this patient, transcatheter aortic valve implantation was rejected by the Heart Team due to the young age and accompanying severe surgically treatable mitral valve disease in compliance with the current European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease.
Surgical replacement of the aortic and mitral valve was conducted 8 weeks after severe aortic valve stenosis and mitral valve stenosis was diagnosed [23 mm Trifecta GT Aortic Valve (St. Jude Medical Abbott, St. Paul, MN, USA)/mitral valve prosthesis: 29 mm Hancock II (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland)]. Macroscopic examination of the valves revealed significant calcification and were sent to our pathologic department for further examination. Both valve prosthetic devices showed normal function as well as a normal LVEF in initial post-operative transoesophageal echocardiography.
Histopathological examination of the removed aortic and mitral valve showed severe calcification and the high presence of amyloid by Congo-red staining and immunohistological staining for AA-Amyloid (see ).
Post-operatively the patient suffered from severe systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) with prolonged weaning, recurrent respiratory and abdominal septic shocks, cardiogenic shock due to cardiac arrhythmias and multiple further complications. Respiratory weaning was complicated by recurrent hospital-acquired pneumonia with proof of Citrobacter koseri and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia in bronchoalveolar lavage. Weaning remained without progress despite surgical tracheotomy and anti-infective treatment (Tazobactam/Piperacillin/Ciprofloxacin). Furthermore, the patient suffered from retractory Clostridium difficile enteritis, treated with vancomycine/fidaxomicine. A rectoscopy in suspicion of gastrointestinal bleeding (decrease in haemoglobin, peranal haemorrhage) revealed a defect of distal rectum with tissue necrosis. Aetiology of the defect remained unclear. An endosponge was inserted by laparoscopy and a protective ileostomy was placed, local peritonitis was seen intraoperatively. Two days after bowel surgery, the patient’s condition worsened with increasing demand of catecholamines in suspicion of abdominal septic shock. Additionally, the patient showed repeated ventricular arrhythmias with necessity of 10 min of reanimation and multiple defibrillations. The patient died 3 months after surgical valve replacement due to intractable multiorgan failure.