A 32-year-old Mongoloid female with headache, progressive disturbance of consciousness, and right limb weakness was transferred to our hospital. On arrival, she was in a mild coma with dilated pupils. Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 9 (4 + 4 + 1). No movement but muscle retraction was observed in the right limb and the Babinski sign is positive. The National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 17. The patient was a fruit seller without previous chronic diseases, and denied smoking and drinking history, toxic and drug exposure, and family history. Noncontrast brain computed tomography (CT) and CT venography scan in another hospital showed CVST in straight sinus and sagittal sinus . Subcutaneous injection of weight-based low-molecular-weight heparin was immediately administered, yet symptoms deteriorated within 2 days.
After admission, cerebrovascular intervention was performed immediately, and the images indicated nonvisualization of right transverse, sigmoid sinus, and straight sinus, and large thrombus was identified among the junction of the superior sagittal sinus, the left transverse sinus, and the sigmoid sinus, with severe stenosis of the corresponding vein lumens . Urokinase was injected into right transverse sinus and upper sagittal sinus via microcatheter. After the operation, the microcatheter and the sheath were kept for alternate use of urokinase and alteplase in the next 2 days. Unfortunately, the patient’s symptoms did not improve significantly. We performed a second cerebral angiography and found nonvisualization of the straight sinus and the right transverse, while the large thrombus almost disappeared. Using balloon dilation and thrombus aspiration, we found that the visualization of right transverse sinus and sigmoid sinus was improved, while that of the straight sinus was not . After intervention, full-dose anticoagulation therapy was administrated, despite large bruises on both upper limbs and slight hemorrhage in the thalamus. The patient’s consciousness state was gradually improved within 2 days. Her later laboratory examination showed that serum thyroid-stimulating hormone was low with high free triiodothyronine (T3), free thyroxine (T4), and antibodies, but she was never diagnosed or treated. The department of endocrinology was consulted, she was diagnosed with hyperthyroidism (Graves’ disease), and corresponding drug treatment was carried out. She was discharged with her NIHSS score decreased to 2, diagnosed with hyperthyroidism and refractory CVST. Three months later, she complained of occasional numbness in right limb with NIHSS score of 0. Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) showed that sagittal sinus, transverse sinus, and sigmoid sinus visualized well, although the straight sinus was less clear.