A 21-year-old man was diagnosed with B-ALL 5 years ago (August 2015) and received chemotherapy consisting of one cycle of VCDLP (CTX, vindesine, daunorubicin, prednisone, PEG-aspargase) for induction ), and one cycle of MTX plus PEG-aspargase for consolidate . After these two cycles of therapy, minimal residue disease (MRD) was still positive. Therefore, he underwent a second-line therapy with MA (MTX and Arac) , and reached MRD-negative complete remission (CR). In March 2016, he received allo-HSCT (allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation) from an HLA-matched unrelated donor, and all went well with no occurrence of CMV reactivation. Four months later, a disease relapse was suspected, and the patient was admitted to our hospital for further treatment, where he underwent bone marrow (BM) examination. Flow cytometry revealed 18.5% abnormal B lymphoblasts, and immunohistochemistry showed significant hyperplasia of abnormal lymphoblasts with CD34+ TdT+ CD79a+ CD10+ CD19+ CD22+ CD3- BCL2+ MPO- and Ki-67 Li 90%. Gene examination revealed a missense mutation in the NOTCH2 gene and a splice variant of the IKZF1 gene. No evidence of central nervous system (CNS) invasion or any other extramedullary diseases were identified. Serological tests were negative for HBV antigens/antibodies except for HBsAb, but they were not performed for CMV antibodies. No CMV DNA or HBV DNA was detected in the blood. The chest CT scan and hematobiochemical results were consistently normal. He was allergic to ofloxacin and had no history of exposure to HBV, HIV, tuberculosis, or any other infectious diseases. No other clinical history, familiar or psycho-social history of importance.
Given the relapse after HSCT, we treated the patient with the sequential infusion of anti-CD19 and anti-CD22 CAR-T cells (ChiCTR-OPN-16008526). It took two weeks to manufacture the patient’s own anti-CD19 and anti-CD22 CAR-T cells from collected peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). The transfection rates of CD19 CAR and CD22 CAR were 35.6% and 40.9%, respectively . The patient was treated with 3-day conditioning chemotherapy consisting of fludarabine 25 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide 20 mg/kg per day, and was sequentially transfused with CD19 CAR-T cells and CD22 CAR-T cells at doses of 1.5x106 cells/kg and 1x106 cells/kg, respectively. As shown in , CAR-T cells expanded well in vivo with CD19 and CD22 CAR copy numbers of 1,034,286 and 52,857.14 per µg genomic DNA, respectively, on day 6. Meanwhile, after the infusion of CAR-T cells, the patient developed grade 3 CRS manifested as high fever (max temperature of 41°C), hypotension (lowest at 88/42 mmHg, responsive to fluids therapy), hypoxia (requiring high-flow nasal cannula oxygen), coagulopathy (requiring fresh frozen plasma), pulmonary edema characterized by extensive rales among both lower lobes of the lung, and grade 3 immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS) with two-side blurred vision. Eye examinations found patchy bleeding around the infratemporal branch of the central retinal vein and scattered exudation in the other parts of the right retina (suspected to be associated with coagulopathy and severe thrombocytopenia), and mild retinal edema (no hemorrhage was observed) in the left eye. Laboratory testing revealed markedly increased levels of IL-6 and ferritin after CAR-T cell infusion, as shown in , with peak values of 1,260 pg/mL and 30,014 µg/L on day 6 and day 8, respectively. The serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), N-terminal B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), and hypersensitive troponin were also abnormally elevated. After one session of plasma exchanges [to selectively eliminate inflammatory cytokines ], two 40-mg doses of methylprednisolone, and other supportive treatments, the inflammatory cytokine storm was gradually controlled, with both the levels of IL-6 and ferritin falling to baseline levels 2 weeks after the infusion as well as the levels of AST, ALT, NT-proBNP, and hypersensitive troponin. The blurred vision disappeared spontaneously two days later. In addition, the patient experienced severe myelosuppression but recovered two weeks later, as depicted in . The patient received prophylactic anti-infective treatment (excluding antiviral therapy) after CAR-T cell infusion, and no severe infection was observed during treatment. BM aspiration was performed on day 14, indicative of complete remission by flow cytometry.
On December 3, three months after CAR-T cell treatment, the patient was hospitalized with a 10-day history of low fever (37-38 °C) and cough, and a 3-day history of palpitations, chest tightness and dyspnea. The primary disease was well controlled, and B cells were still absent . The findings on chest X-ray suggested pulmonary infection and interstitial infiltration . CMV DNA, rather than bacterial DNA or fungal DNA, was detected in the peripheral blood by next-generation sequencing (NGS) sequencing. Given the patient’s previous medical history, clinical manifestations, and laboratory and radiographic evidence, he was diagnosed with suspectable CMV pneumonia (fiberoptic bronchoscopy was contraindicated as the patient was oxygen dependent, and therefore, no pneumonia tissue was available to confirm CMV infection). On December 4, the patient received antiviral (ganciclovir 5mg/kg q12h) therapy, as well as preventive anti-bacteria (tigecycline 50mg q12h, and sequential use of cefoperazone/sulbactam 3g q8h, meropenem 0.5g q6h and imipenem/cilastatin 1g q8h) and anti-fungi (sequential use of voriconazole 0.2g q12h and caspofungin 50mg qd) therapy (all intravenously). However, the symptoms worsened rather than alleviated, with the occurrence of diarrhea (yellow watery stool) and an SpO2 of 90% despite using oxygen mask on December 7. Therefore, we introduced intravenous gamma globulin 20 g/day, methylprednisolone 40 mg/day and bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) ventilation on December 8, after which his pulmonary symptoms gradually improved. Ganciclovir was changed to penciclovir (5mg/kg q12h, intravenous drip) due to the side effects of limb numbness, chills and pain at the infusion site. During treatment with these two antiviral drugs, the patient’s WBC count and platelet count decreased progressively . We stopped penciclovir on December 18 when the clinical symptoms had improved. Meanwhile, CMV DNA was negative in the blood, and a chest X-ray showed reduced inflammatory filtration. However, the side effects of myelosuppression aggravated, and three days after treatment discontinuation with penciclovir, the patient again reported chest tightness and shortness of breath. We reintroduced penciclovir on December 21, but the patient’s symptoms gradually worsened. He died on December 25 from respiratory failure. The key events in this case are summarized in .