A 67-year-old male farmer presented to the Ophthalmology Unit of Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals Complex in Ile-Ife, Nigeria, with a two-week history of pain, mucopurulent discharge and redness in the right eye. There was no history of foreign body entry into the right eye, nor was there ocular trauma or instillation of traditional eye medication. The patient had earlier used chloramphenicol eye drops which he obtained over the counter. His fasting blood sugar, complete blood count and electrolyte urea and creatinine were essentially normal for his age. The patient’s HIV status was negative on serology testing.
Further, ocular examination revealed a visual acuity of hand movement in the right eye, unaided and aided. Slit lamp biomicroscopic examination of the right eye showed a diffuse conjunctival hyperemia and a 5.5 x 4 mm corneal ulcer with raised and irregular margins which stained with fluorescein . Whitish stromal infiltrates were present in the ulcer bed and around the ulcer margins with associated stromal oedema and folds in the Descemet’s membrane. Anterior chamber examination revealed hypopyon of about one-eighth of the anterior chamber height. Pupil was round but sluggishly reactive to light and there was early lens opacity and no glow on fundoscopy in the right eye. Ocular findings in the left eye were essentially normal. A presumptive diagnosis of infective keratitis was made. During the slit lamp biomicroscopy, corneal scrapings were taken from the margins and the base of the ulcer and were sent to the microbiology and parasitology laboratory for bacterial and fungal tests. Direct lactophenol cotton blue mounts revealed septate fungal hyphae, while direct Gram stain showed cellular debris but no microorganisms. Culture on chocolate agar yielded scanty growth of cottony white colonies after 48 hours of incubation at 37°C. However, culture on Sabouraud dextrose agar at room temperature supported growth of woolly mould with reddish brown pigmentation on the agar after 48 hours . Lactophenol cotton blue staining of the mould under light microscope (x400 magnification) revealed conidiophores consisting of phialides, arranged in brush-like structures. Moreover, the phialides were cylindrical with small collarettes producing hyaline, smooth-walled conidia, which were arranged in masses. The macroconidia were septate, cylindrical with rounded apex and flat base . No bacteria were seen. The morphology of the mould identified was consistent with C. lichenicola.