A 75-year-old man presented with a chief complaint of abdominal discomfort and weight loss. His medical history included hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and refractory pruritus. He had lost approximately 10 kg of weight in 2 months and was referred to our hospital because of abdominal discomfort. At the time of consultation, his height was 174.8 cm, body weight was 56.5 kg, body mass index was 18.49; his vital signs were as follows: body temperature 36.1 °C, blood pressure 128/79 mmHg, heart rate at 77/min, and oxygen saturation at 97 % (room air). Hematological investigations performed on admission revealed carcinoembryonic antigen at 5.1 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen19-9 at 0.1 U/mL, and carbohydrate antigen − 125 at 7.7 U/mL, indicating no increase in tumor markers. No abnormalities were observed in the blood tests. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a wide, shallow, depressed lesion from the cardia to the mid-body, with an ulcerated part, which we diagnosed as a type 3 tumor . In addition, approximately 40 mm of the entire circumference of the esophagus was invaded . The lesions were diagnosed in Group5 (por, sig). Based on the biopsy results, all lesions in the ulcer presented as a wide shallow depressed lesion in the mid-body and lesions at the esophagogastric junction. Upper gastrointestinal examination showed that, on the oral side, lesions had an irregular wall and poor progression up to approximately 40 mm from the esophagogastric junction. On the anal side, they extended around the mid-body . We found an ulcerative lesion near the cardia and suspected invasion at the depth of the muscularis propria (MP). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed an irregularly thickened wall on the upper body and lesser curvature of the body, and an increase in the concentration of fatty tissue around the wall was also found in the mid-body . Therefore, the degree of invasion was determined to be at the depth of MP. There were no findings of suspected lymph node enlargement or metastases to other organs. Considering these facts, we preoperatively diagnosed gastric cancer as T2, N0, M0, StageIB (according to the UICC, 8th edition). We performed a total gastrectomy with abdominal esophageal resection, D2 lymph node dissection, cholecystectomy, and Roux-en-Y reconstruction. The proximal side of the invasive esophageal area (40 mm from the esophagogastric junction) was clipped as a marker preoperatively. Intraoperatively, it was confirmed that there was no cancer at the esophageal margin and that it was resected, including the clip. The excised specimen showed a shallow depressed lesion of 90×55 mm from the abdominal esophagus to the lesser curvature of the upper stomach, and a type 0-IIb + IIa + IIc lesion (according to the macroscopic classification of the gastric cancer) with esophageal invasion up to 30 mm from the esophagogastric junction . Histopathological findings showed that all widespread lesions were cancers that remained in the mucosa, with por2 being the majority and some sig being mixed. No submucosal invasion was observed, including in the ulcerated area . The pathological diagnosis was gastric cancer: T1a, N0, M0, and StageIA. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on POD 11. Five years since the operation, the patient is surviving without recurrence.