A 38-year-old male presented to our emergency room with a 4-day history of intermittent fever and chills without nausea or vomiting. The patient had a past history of intravenous heroin abuse and atrioventricular reentry tachycardia status post radiofrequency catheter ablation. Shortness of breath, cough with some yellowish sputum, tachycardia, low blood pressure (80/40 mmHg under Levophed use), and anuria were noted. The patient had not experienced nausea or vomiting.
Physical examination revealed bilateral coarse breath sounds and a 4/6 pan systolic heart murmur over the left fourth rib. Laboratory analysis revealed a white blood cell count of 35,030 μL (range: 3500–9100 μL; neutrophilia, 73.4%) and a creatinine level of 3.19 mg/dL (range: 0.70–1.30 mg/dL). Chest X-ray revealed interstitial infiltration with mottled consolidation superimposed on bilateral lung fields and blunting of the left costophrenic angle. Chest computerized tomography (CT) showed loculated pleural effusion, consolidations with central lucency collection in both lungs, and mild pericardial effusion . Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricle wall motion (left ventricular ejection fraction, 58%) and a floating vegetation in the tricuspid valve with moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation.
Because left empyema and tricuspid valve IE with septic or cardiogenic shock were suspected, left chest tube were inserted and left pleura effusion culture showed methicillin-susceptible S. aureus. Right heart failure secondary to severe TR and poor response to medical therapy were noted 1 day after chest tube insertion. An endotracheal tube was insert ion and the patient underwent tricuspid valve replacement with a 33 mm Hancock II tissue valve via median sternotomy with another left chest tube insertion due to all of the anterior chordae tendineae were rupture. The pre-operative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed 0.9 × 1.2 cm2 vegetation over tricuspid valve. .
Blood and sputum cultures showed methicillin-susceptible S. aureus. The patient received postoperative antibiotic treatment (oxacillin, 2000 mg six times daily). The early postoperative treatment course was uneventful, with white blood cell count decreased to 14,300 μL and creatinine level decreased to 1.08 mg/dL.
However, fever up to 38.4 °C and dyspnea were noted on postoperative day 14. Follow up chest X-ray revealed loculated bilateral pleural effusions with perihilar and lower lung haziness infiltrates . Chest CT revealed multiple cavitary nodules in the bilateral lungs . The patient underwent thoracoscopic decortication of the right pleura and incision of the right lower lung abscess with postoperative chest tube drainage. Intraoperative pleural fluid and lung abscess cultures showed carbapenem-susceptible A. baumannii complex and C. albicans. We replaced oxacillin with meropenem 500 mg four times daily and fluconazole 200 mg one time daily. No further fever was noted. After 4 weeks of antibiotic treatment, chest X-ray revealed bilateral clear lung markings with only mild blunting of the right costophrenic angle.