A 72-year-old man, who had been suffering from right hip pain for 7 years when walking, was referred to our institute. Roentogenography of the right pelvic bone showed an expansion of the cortical contour and a soft-tissue mass with punctate calcification . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a lobulated lesion expanding over the entire right pelvic bone with low-intensity on T1-weighted imaging and iso- to high-intensity on T2-weighted imaging, with the tumor protuberant to the pelvic cavity . Right hemipelvectomy was carried out. Histological sections showed a conventional chondrosarcoma having atypical chondrocytes with hyaline cartilage matrix or myxoid matrix . In a small section, dedifferentiated components were also identified, and these dedifferentiated components consisted of atypical spindle cells arranged in short fascicles or a storiform pattern showing MFH-like features, plus some pleomorphic cells with lace-like osteoid formation showing osteosarcoma-like features . Therefore, the final diagnosis was dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma because of the coexistence of conventional chondrosarcoma and dedifferentiated components.
Preoperative laboratory data were not remarkable. After surgery, the laboratory data also showed leukocytosis predominantly in the neutrophils with an elevated level of C-reactive protein . The serum level of G-CSF was also elevated (330 pg/ml [normal, <8 pg/ml]). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) revealed evidence of local recurrence and metastatic lesions in the lungs. Flow-cytometry indicated no evidence of leukemia and serological studies showed no evidence of specific infections, such as candidiasis or tuberculosis. Despite the administration of several antibiotics, the leukocytosis did not disappear. Two months after the surgery, the patient died of multiple organ failure. An autopsy was carried out, and in addition to the lung metastasis, metastasis was also found in the liver, thyroid, diaphragm, adrenal gland, digestive tract and skin. The histology of the recurrent and metastatic lesions was not conventional chondrosarcoma but only dedifferentiated components. Immunoexpression of G-CSF (anti-G-CSF [Ab1], Calbiochem, San Diego CA, USA) was seen in the dedifferentiated components, but not in the conventional chondrosarcoma components .