A 32-year-old man with a history of drug abuse presented to the emergency department with deterioration of paresthesia and limited movement of the left neck for 7 d.
The patient had slight paresthesia of the neck for 5 years. Seven days before this admission, the symptom became intolerable and was accompanied by a limited movement of the neck after an acute upper respiratory tract infection. He perceived a foreign body existing on the left side of the neck and the feeling was severe while coughing or swallowing.
The patient had no history of neck trauma, cervical spondylosis, or contagious diseases.
The patient was a heroin abuser 5 years ago and achieved successful detoxification for 2 years. He had no family history of hereditary diseases.
There was no abnormality in vital signs. Physical examination revealed only mild pain during the palpation of the left neck, and a rod-shaped solid substance was touched. Its location was parallel with the long axis of the left cervical artery.
A blood test revealed a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level (1.53 mg/dL) and white blood cell count (10.94 × 109/L). Other blood test results were normal.
The radiological examination showed that a rod-shaped foreign body was diagonally located in the anterior region of the neck and the lower end of the rod extended to the thorax and computed tomography revealed a high density extending from the cervical region to the upper mediastinal area .
Because of the unexpected imaging findings, further medical history was acquired. He finally admitted that he deliberately swallowed a segment of mercury thermometer after he broke a mercury thermometer and poured out the mercury 5 years ago under the influence of drugs when he was alone. He was sent to the emergency department immediately to undergo an endoscopy after he told his family about the accident. But neither a foreign body nor trauma or perforation was found. He did not receive further examinations or treatments because the clinician thought that he was talking nonsense under the influence of drugs, and the patient’s symptoms were tolerable until 7 d before this admission.