A 66-year-old female presented to our clinic with the mixed diagnosis of essential tremor and Parkinson’s disease, as she had both resting and action components of tremor in bilateral upper extremities with bradykinesia and rigidity that were somewhat improved on levodopa. The tremor was largely refractory to medication and interfered with her quality of life. She underwent bilateral DBS lead electrode implantation targeting the dentatorubrothalamic tract, specifically, the ventral intermediate nucleus (Vim), in the thalamus using the standard stereotactic protocol. A trajectory through the ventricle was avoided. Normally, we start by implanting the microelectrodes on the more symptomatic side and then proceed to the other side. In this case, three microelectrodes were simultaneously descended to target the left Vim (as her symptoms were worse in her right hand) first, followed by another three microelectrodes to target the right Vim. Their cannulas were used for macrostimulation to assess for improvement and to choose the best trajectory. Electrode placement (Medtronic 3387 model, Minneapolis, MN, USA) then occurred after confirmed improvement in tremor. The rostral ends of the electrodes were left in a subgaleal pocket to be accessed during a subsequent staged procedure for extension and pulse generator placement. The lead placement was verified in the operating room theater with computed tomography (CT) imaging before closure. Surgery was uncomplicated, and the patient remained interactive and conversant throughout. She was admitted to our neurosurgical ICU as per routine. Head CT performed on early postoperative day (POD) 1 was unremarkable . Physical examination revealed no deficit; the patient complained of headache with some nausea/vomiting. She desired to stay overnight. An examination later on the evening of POD 1 found her to be sleepy, and ultimately lethargic. Stat head CT performed revealed marked left-sided peri-lead edema extending into the centrum semiovale with cystic cavitation and trace right-sided edema . Physical examination on the morning of POD 2 revealed the patient to be alert but with global aphasia (not following commands and not speaking), right-sided neglect, and plegic right upper extremity. Corticosteroids (IV dexamethasone) were begun early on POD 2. She later became increasingly lethargic, and over concerns for airway protection was intubated. Repeat head CT revealed increased edema.
The critical care team was concerned for fulminant gas- producing bacterial infection as suggested by neuroradiology interpretation of cavitation surrounding one lead and strongly pushed for lead removal, which was resisted. Vancomycin and meropenem were empirically begun. Systemic tests for infection, including C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and white blood cell counts, were normal, as well as blood cultures, which were ultimately negative at 24, 48, and 72 h. Such negative infectious workup and lack of change on serial repeat imaging disproved this idea. Magnetic resonance imaging could not be performed due to safety concerns at our institution with an incomplete DBS circuit. Acute venous infarction was also considered a possibility, but the radiological appearance of a cortical- subcortical typically wedge-shaped ischemic pattern was not present. This patient ultimately underwent tracheostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy placement 6 days later. She was transferred to a rehabilitation facility on a steroid taper and subsequently discharged home on POD 40. She returned to the clinic 3 months after surgery fully recovered and ready for lead extension and pulse generator placement. Follow-up CT scans at the time showed significant resolution of the peri-lead edema and cystic cavitation .