A 46-year-old male was admitted with the chief complaints of nasal bleeding and nasal obstruction since 4 months. His blood profile for biochemistry and hematology was within normal limits. Tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and hepatitis C virus were negative.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan (CECT) and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (CEMRI) of the brain and paranasal sinuses were suggestive of a large heterogeneous mass in the left superior nasal cavity (causing its expansion) with intense heterogeneous post-contrast enhancement. The lesion was extending posteriorly into the nasopharynx, medially into the right nasal cavity and right maxillary antrum with deviation of the nasal septum to the right side, and laterally into the left maxillary sinus with blockage of the osteomeatal complex. Superiorly, the lesion was seen to erode the cribriform plate and extend into the anterior cranial fossa. There was evidence of peritumoral cysts at the tumor–brain interface with perilesional edema. The lesion involved bilateral ethmoidal and sphenoidal sinuses also . The patient underwent a combined bifrontal osteoplastic craniotomy and excision of the intracranial part of the tumor from above and transnasal endoscopic removal of the mass in the nasal cavities and paranasal sinuses from below. Postoperative CECT scan of the brain and paranasal sinuses was suggestive of gross complete excision of the mass .
On histopathological examination (HPE), the tumor was composed of lobules, sheets, and nest of primitive cells which were displaying high nuclear: cytoplasmic (N:C) ratio, pleomorphism, round hyperchromatic nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli, and scanty cytoplasm. On immunohistochemistry (IHC), the tumor cells were positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, chromogranin, CD56, and peripherally for S100 and were negative for CD99. True rosette formation was noted. Large areas of necrosis and brisk mitotic activity were seen. Neurofibrillary matrix was absent. The tumor cells were seen infiltrating the adjacent brain parenchyma. Some areas showed epithelial differentiation in the form of glandular, squamous, and respiratory epithelium. On IHC, these areas were positive for cytokeratin (CK) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). CK 5/6 was positive in the squamous morules and CK 7 focally in the glandular component. Intervening stroma was positive for vimentin. The final histopathological report was “mixed olfactory neuroblastoma-carcinoma (squamous and glandular differentiation) Hyams grade IV” .
The patient was discharged after removal of stitches on postoperative day 7. He was advised to take adjuvant radiotherapy, which the patient did not take due to personal reasons. Two months later, he presented to us again with nasal bleeding and nasal obstruction. CECT scan and CEMRI of the brain and paranasal sinuses were suggestive of a large recurrence of esthesioneuroblastoma with similar extensions as before . Metastatic work up of the patient was normal. The patient is now planned for salvage surgery followed by adjuvant chemoradiation.