A 22-year-old female with no past medical history presented to our hospital with a rash for several months that started on her face, then spread to her fingertips, the tips of her toes and her scalp . She also had some upper lip swelling without associated dyspnea, dysphonia or dysphagia. The patient reported feeling more fatigued for the last several months, subjective fevers and easy fatigability of her proximal lower extremities. She had been prescribed minocycline one month prior to her presentation for presumed acne by an outside provider with minimal improvement in her rash. Her physical examination was notable for an ill-defined, erythematous to violaceous, papular rash involving the nasal bridge, cheeks, ears, scalp, her bilateral upper and lower extremities and multiple dime-sized hairless lesions on the scalp . She was noted to have an edematous upper lip as well as oral and nasal ulcers and an enlarged cervical lymph node. Strength and sensation were noted to be intact in all four extremities with an objective muscle strength of 5/5 in all muscle groups and without any joint tenderness or swelling. Her laboratory workup showed pancytopenia with a hemoglobin of 11.9 g/dL (ref 12.0–14.6), a white cell count of 2.2 K/cumm (ref 4.5–10.0) and a platelet count of 120 K/cumm (ref 160–360). Transaminases were markedly elevated and continued to rise after admission (AST up to 3205 U/L (ref 15–41) and ALT up to 1058 U/L (ref 14–54). CK was mildly elevated at 239 U/L (ref 26–174). Lipase was found to be increased > 4400 U/L (ref 22–51). Additional laboratory workup revealed a positive ANA with a titer of 1:2560 and a speckled ANA pattern, positive anti-Smith antibodies, positive SSA, positive SM/RNP with negative anti-dsDNA antibodies. C3 and C4 were found to be decreased at 21 mg/dL (ref 90–180) and 5.5 mg/dL (ref 10–40) respectively. HIV testing was negative. The patient was found to meet the 2019 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for SLE (positive ANA, fever, acute cutaneous lupus, oral ulcers, nonscarring alopecia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, anti-Sm antibodies, and low complement levels) and the 2016 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for Sjögren’s (positive anti-SSA and positive Schirmer’s test), so a diagnosis of SLE overlap with Sjögren’s syndrome was made and the patient was started on hydroxychloroquine 200 mg daily.
During her hospital course, she spiked a fever and was started on empiric antibiotics. A thorough infectious workup remained negative. She underwent a CT of the neck which demonstrated numerous enlarged lymph nodes of variable size bilaterally with enlarged bilateral adenoids, raising concern for lymphoma. A CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy, hepatic steatosis and mild hepatomegaly. A fine needle aspiration lymph node biopsy of the enlarged cervical lymph node was performed and showed a low cellular specimen comprised of a polymorphous lymphoid population with scattered atypical cells. She was found to have a ferritin > 11,000 ng/ml (ref 5–204) and an IL-2R of 4995 pg/ml (ref 532–1891). A bone marrow biopsy resulted with hemophagocytosis consistent with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). The patient was started on dexamethasone 10 mg/m2 daily for macrophage activation syndrome (MAS). Cyclosporine 75 mg twice daily and mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg twice daily were added as steroid-sparing agents.
An MRI of the pelvis revealed abnormal muscle signal on fluid-sensitive (STIR, short tau inversion recovery) sequences indicating edematous changes of the muscles of the pelvis and proximal thighs . A quadriceps femoris muscle biopsy was performed and showed nemaline rod myopathy with fiber type disproportion and type 1 myofiber predominance . Light microscopy was followed by electron microscopy to confirm the findings of nemaline rods . A comprehensive genetic neuromuscular disorder panel was negative for any known pathogenic mutations.
Throughout the hospital course the patient experienced marked improvement in her strength, fatigue, rash, cytopenias, transaminases, lipase, ferritin, CK and aldolase. We were finally able to discharge her home on hydroxychloroquine, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine and a dexamethasone taper. On follow-up several months after discharge, her symptoms continued to improve with her strength back to her baseline.