A 79-year-old Japanese woman visited our hospital because of lower abdominal discomfort. She was endoscopically diagnosed with type 0–IIa + IIc cancer of the cecum, and biopsy of the lesion showed signet-ring cell carcinoma. Abdominal computed tomography showed no serous involvement, peritoneal dissemination, abdominal lymph node metastasis, or distant metastasis from the colon cancer. Based on all these findings, we determined that the preoperative clinical staging of the cancer was cStage I (cT2, cN0, cM0).
The patient underwent laparoscopic ileocecal resection with D3 lymphadenectomy . No residual tumors were macroscopically found in the radial margin during the surgery. Histopathological examination of the resected specimens showed signet-ring cell carcinoma [type 4, pT4a, pN3 (No. 203), M0, pRM1, stage IIIc, R1] with severe lymphatic involvement, many lymph node metastases, and radial margin positivity. We suggested resection of the residual tumor to the patient, but she refused it.
KRAS mutation test of the colon cancer revealed that the patient had wild-type KRAS. This result indicated that she was a candidate for anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) therapy. However, she refused the therapy because of its potential adverse effects, such as acne-like rash. She also refused vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors. She chose and began to receive oral chemotherapy using tegafur and uracil.
One year after surgery, the patient lost her appetite, and the blood carcinoembryonic antigen concentration elevated to 23.8 ng/mL. Colonoscopy revealed anastomotic recurrence, and biopsy of the lesion showed signet-ring cell carcinoma. Conventional upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with white light showed multiple longitudinal submucosal tumors with erosions on their surfaces in the middle to lower esophagus . Narrow-band imaging endoscopy of the esophagus showed that the elevated margins of the tumors were covered with non-neoplastic epithelia .
Biopsy of the esophageal tumors histologically showed that they were located predominantly in the submucosal layer, were continuous with the esophageal epithelium, and contained signet-ring cell carcinoma . The histological type of the esophageal tumors was the same as that of the resected ileocecal specimens. Based on all these findings, we diagnosed the esophageal tumors with metastatic esophageal cancer originating from signet-ring cell carcinoma of the cecum.
Immunohistochemical examination showed that both the primary cancer and its metastatic lesions were negative for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and were positive for CK20 and caudal-type homeobox (CDX) 2 . These results correspond to the staining pattern of colorectal signet-ring cell carcinoma. Therefore, we diagnosed the patient’s condition with anastomotic recurrence and metastatic esophageal cancer after the resection of colon signet-ring cell carcinoma.
The patient did not respond to 1-year oral chemotherapy using tegafur and uracil, resulting in anastomotic recurrence and esophageal metastasis of colon cancer. She hoped to receive a VEGF inhibitor, and her chemotherapy regimen was replaced with FOLFOX plus bevacizumab (FOLFOX/BV). Subsequently, she broke her femoral neck in a fall, and underwent bipolar hip hemiarthroplasty. She started physical therapy, but her performance status declined. After 2 cycles of FOLFOX/BV therapy was finished, her chemotherapy was discontinued. Two months later (i.e., 1 year and 5 months after ileocecal resection), she died of cancer progression.