A 32-year-old woman, gravida 3, para 1, was referred to our center at 26 + 3 weeks of gestation for further fetal cardiac examination for suspected cardiac anomalies. The patient was in good health without any maternal complications or high-risk factors (e.g. diabetes, hypertension, amniotic disorders). A detailed echocardiogram was performed to find any potential cardiac anomalies using transverse and sagittal scanning. Conventional 2DE was used to show fetal anatomical structures. Color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI), together with HDFI was used to show fetal hemodynamics. The sound beam was continuously moved upward along the vertical axis of the fetal thorax to perform the transverse scanning. The four-chamber view (4CV) showed a symmetrical left and right heart. The left and right outflow tract views showed normal ventriculoarterial connections. However, a small-sized ventricular septal defect (VSD) was identified at the 4CV and the left outflow tract view with the communication clearly shown by CDFI . An additional movie file shows this in more detail (See Additional file : Video). The pulmonary valve annulus (PVA) was apparently wider in comparison with the aortic valve annulus (AVA). The ratio of PVA/AVA was 1.6 in diameter. The size of the pulmonary artery (PA) was also larger than the aorta (AO) and the ratio of PA/AO was 2.1 in diameter. At the three-vessel trachea (3VT) view, the widened pulmonary trunk continued to be the ductus, which was connected with the descending aorta. At the same time, a tiny vessel was found located at the right side of the pulmonary trunk, with no convergence with the ductus . An additional movie file shows this in more detail (See Additional file : Video). Under normal conditions, the aortic arch joins with the ductus to form proximal descending aorta in a characteristic “V” shape at the 3VT view . The echocardiographic manifestations in the current case thus suggest the possibility of an IAA. Sagittal planes were also scanned to obtain more information. The arch did not present, instead, the ascending aorta was visualized going straight upward and then branching three brachiocephalic arteries in a “W” shape . An additional movie file shows this in more detail (See Additional file : Video). A preliminary diagnosis of IAA type A was then reached. The 3DE with STIC technology was then used to obtain 3D images of the great arteries to confirm the 2D diagnosis. A 3D motorized transducer (4–8 MHz) was used to acquire cardiac volumes when scanning the sagittal planes using HDFI. The acquisition time was set to 12.5 s and the sweep angle was set to 30°. Cardiac volumes were acquired automatically and then reconstructed to display in a cine loop in multiplanar mode. Volume post-analysis was then performed using an off-line software (4D viewer, version 14.0) to obtain the 3D reconstructed images. This could be achieved by properly adjusting the direction and size of the region of interest (ROI) and the rotation of the images in three orthogonal planes in the volume. A combination of smooth surface and gradient light algorithms was also used to enhance the 3D effect of the reconstructed images. The 3D image demonstrated an abnormal angle of attachment of the aortic arch to the ductus and descending aorta via a slim isthmus . An additional movie file shows this in more detail (See Additional file : Video). The final diagnosis was CoA at the isthmus.
The patient refused a chromosomal examination and did not go back to the following-up echo four weeks later for personal reasons. She came to the hospital at 31 gestational weeks as she could not feel fetal movement. Intra-uterine fetal death was demonstrated by fetal echo and proofs of intra-uterine infection were found during the induction of the labor. An autopsy was then performed and showed the great arteries in detail. The spatial relationships of the aorta and the pulmonary artery were normal. The size of the ascending aorta was approximately half of that of the pulmonary trunk while it went straight upward and gave off the innominate artery, left common carotid artery and the left subclavian artery, in turn. An abnormal angle of the connection between the aortic arch and the slim isthmus could be appreciated . In addition, a perimembranous VSD about 4 mm in diameter was also found. The gross findings confirmed the prenatal diagnosis.