The 15-year-old boy’s parents are both healthy. His main manifestations are epilepsy, autism, and dystonia, which progressively worsens. His family has no similar illnesses, half a month past the due date, cesarean section, weighed 9 pounds at birth, weak sucking ability, no history of asphyxia.

The boy reached the peak of his morbidity before the age of 15. He was diagnosed with epilepsy at birth. The main manifestation is has involuntary upper limb jerks and hand clumsiness, treatment with phenobarbital, sodium valproate, and levetiracetam. He learned to walk at the age of 2 and less verbal, but can say duplicate word, diagnosed with autism, rehabilitation was given with poor results. Involuntary jerks of both upper limbs disappears at about 9 years of age, discontinuation of “phenobarbital, sodium valproate, and levetiracetam.” At the age of 12, who appeared myoclonic jerks of the limbs, involuntary lifting of both upper limbs and stick out one’s lips, weakness of both lower limbs, the right lower limb is obvious, with abnormal posture of hands, feet and left shoulder, manifested by involuntary lifting of the hands, flexion of the fingers and toes of both hands, symptoms progressively worsen until they become unsteady and prone to falls. Completely unable to walk at age 14. Symptoms worsened again at about 14.5 years of age, accompanied by involuntary tilt back of the neck, have difficulty chewing, aggravated by external stimuli and/or stress, symptoms are worse at night, difficulty sleeping, occasional fecal incontinence. He was treated with oral baclofen tablets 3 times a day, but the results were not satisfactory, so he came to our hospital.

Physical examination of the nervous system shows, loss of speech, bilateral pupils are equal in size and circumference about 3 mm in diameter, sensitive to light reflection, limb flexion, involuntary limb movement, hypertonia of both hands and feet, inside left shoulder, the bilateral pathological signs were not elicited, and the physical examination of the residual nervous system did not cooperate.

Return of test results, blood routine: hemoglobin 115 g/L. Six items of blood coagulation: fibrinogen 1.39 g/L, thrombin time 21.5 s; thyroid function 3 items: thyrotropin 10.7 uIU/mL, the rest is normal; liver function: total protein 57.8 g/L, albumin 38 g/L; blood lipids: low density lipoprotein cholesterol 1.83 mmol/L; electrolytes: potassium 3.69 mmol/L, sodium 146 mmo1/L; no obvious abnormality was found in Hs-CRP, SAA, vitamin B12, folic acid, blood homocysteine, vitamin B1, and blood ammonia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed mild brain atrophy-like changes. Two-hour video electroencephalogram (EEG) showed that during the awakening period of abnormal adolescents, the background fast wave activity increased, and the family members identified the event without seizure pattern. Genetic testing showed that NM_024496.4 (IRF2BPL): c.379C > T (p.Q127*) may be pathogenic, and the frequency of this variant in the gnomAD database is 0. This variant is nonsense and is predicted to result in the possible premature appearance of the termination codon, with multiple losses of function reported downstream of this locus, the patient’s father, mother, and sister did not carry the variant, considering the clinical relevance of this variant in the context of the patient’s clinical presentation, as a result he has been diagnosed with NEDAMSS, autism. Sodium valproate oral solution 15 mL twice/day, levetiracetam tablets 0.125 g twice/day, clonazepam tablets 0.5 mg twice/day, baclofen tablets 15 mg in the morning, 10 mg in the afternoon and 10 mg at night were given. The patient did not have any further seizures and the dystonia improved over the previous period.