A 53-year-old male presented with a 4-day history of worsening chest pain. The pain was initially felt as episodic left sided non-radiating heaviness that resolved on rest, but in the last 24 h became constant and severe with associated sweating and shortness of breath. He had no known medical conditions but was a smoker.
ECG showed inferior ST elevation with Q waves. A coronary angiogram confirmed occlusion of the mid right coronary artery; aspiration thrombectomy and coronary stenting with drug-eluting stent were undertaken as complete occlusion likely occurred 24 h before a presentation and was performed successfully. He was admitted to the coronary intensive care unit, with still intermittent chest pain, but no murmurs on auscultation and improving ST elevation on sequential ECGs.
He remained persistently hypotensive post-procedure including an episode of cardiac tamponade with profound hypotension secondary to a haemorrhagic pericardial effusion that was emergently drained 10 h after coronary revascularization. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and cardiac computed tomography (CT) revealed a post-myocardial infarction inferior muscular VSD (14 × 16 mm and 12 × 17 mm diameter on TTE and CT, respectively, ). There was possibly an additional smaller VSD towards the base and an LV pseudoaneurysm due to inferior wall thinning or rupture that was felt to have been the cause of the haemorrhagic effusion.
After extensive multidisciplinary discussion, percutaneous VSD closure under fluoroscopy and transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) guidance was undertaken in view of ongoing patient haemodynamic instability despite medical management. An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was instituted after general anaesthesia for unresponsive systemic hypotension, along with inotropic support with noradrenaline and adrenaline. A Judkins right coronary catheter was used to cross from the femoral artery to the LV, through the larger VSD, and to the pulmonary artery. A double-length exchange terumo wire was snared in the pulmonary artery and externalized through the jugular vein, creating an arterial-venous loop. A 14Fr 65 cm Gore Dryseal long sheath was advanced from the venous side into the left ventricular outflow tract. A 37 mm GCA was chosen. To overcome the need to advance the device within the ventricle which would risk perforation, the distal extent of the device was advanced within the sheath before then unsheathing and deploying the left disc inside the LV (see , ). The LV disc was then brought back slowly onto the interventricular septum without tension and with TOE guidance. The waist and the right ventricular disc were then deployed (see , ). To keep tension off the device and to acknowledge that the apical extent of the device was only held by the free wall of the LV, the device was immediately locked. The locking loop was seen to engage the right islet.
Hypotension and significant ST elevation occurred at this point, requiring a short period of chest compressions. Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed complete VSD coverage and suggested device stability though no stability checks were performed as the device would likely pull through and enlarge the defect given the surrounding tissue fragility (, , ). The device was released by supporting the right disc islet with the long sheath to ensure no tension was placed on the device as the retrieval cord was removed.
The post-procedural TTE showed complete occlusion of the defect covered by the GCA.
The patient was successfully extubated the following day and subsequently weaned off IABP and inotropes over the next 3 days. He recovered well and was discharged home. The device remains well-positioned on subsequent echocardiograms.