A 49-year-old female patient presented to the outpatient clinic with headache for 11 d, and left upper and lower extremity weakness accompanied by fever for 1 wk.
The patient had persistent pain mainly due to right frontal and parietal headache, which could not be relieved after rest. The patient was hospitalized at the Department of Neurology with a body temperature of 39.2 ℃.
The patient had type 2 diabetes. A diagnostic consultation did not identify any foci of infection. She had no past history of otitis media, sinusitis, or head trauma.
The patient denied having any other relevant personal history and her familial history was unremarkable.
The physical examination revealed intact consciousness with a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score of 15, a soft neck, left upper and lower extremity muscular strength (1 out of 5), a shallow left nasolabial fold, and intact deep and superficial sensation.
A complete blood count with differential revealed a white blood cell count of 13.4 × 109/L (normal reference range: 4.0–10.0 × 109/L), 80.0% neutrophils (normal reference range: 50%–70%), 12.1% lymphocytes (normal reference range: 20%–40%), and C-reactive protein level of 50.1 mg/L (normal reference range: 0–10 mg/L). Urinalysis revealed a white blood cell count of 229/μg (normal reference range: 0-26/μg). Urine culture grew Enterococcus faecalis. Blood and sputum cultures were negative.
No obvious abnormalities were observed in a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest. Cardiac Doppler ultrasound revealed mild mitral regurgitation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head with and without contrast demonstrated the following: (1) Large-scale abnormal signal lesions in the right frontal lobe and right basal ganglia with low signal on T1-weigted imaging, slightly higher signal on T2-weigted imaging, and high signal on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI); (2) Enhancement of the gyrus around the lesion without significant space-occupying effect; and (3) Multiple long T2 signals and enhanced DWI signals in the left cerebral hemisphere . CT angiography of cervical arteries demonstrated occlusion of the right internal carotid artery . Further examination of the arteries by magnetic resonance angiography showed that there was no development of the right internal carotid artery skull base and intracranial segments, and the anterior and posterior cerebral arteries were supplied by the traffic branch .
All available clinical evidence up to this point suggested cerebral infarction, with the only unexplained symptoms being persistent fever and headache. Per antibacterial susceptibility testing of the urine culture, piperacillin and tazobactam were administered intravenously, in addition to the initiation of standard treatment for cerebral infarction. In the following week, the patient's temperature fluctuated between 38 ℃ and 39 ℃, and her headache did not improve significantly. Two consecutive cerebrospinal fluid tests revealed the following: (1) Greater than 100 nucleated cells, most of which were neutrophils; (2) Slightly elevated glucose and protein levels; (3) Normal chloride levels; and (4) Opening pressures of 170 mmH2O and 210 mmH2O. No bacteria or fungi were found in cultures of the cerebrospinal fluid. Considering the possibility of brain abscess, the patient was empirically treated with meropenem and vancomycin. However, as discussed above, a CT scan of the head showed a low-density shadow in the right frontal lobe and right basal ganglia. The right basal ganglia showed focal enhancement, the right lateral ventricle was slightly compressed, and there was slight midline shift to the left. In light of these findings, 100 mL intravenous mannitol, 250 mL intravenous glycerol fructose, and intravenous sodium chloride were infused every 12 h. The patient's temperature continued to fluctuate between 37 ℃ and 38 ℃, and her headache persisted. Approximately 1 wk later, the patient's temperature suddenly rose to 39 ℃. A review of the head CT revealed a large area of infarction corresponding to the right middle cerebral artery. The density of some areas was slightly higher, the midline was shifted, and cerebral palsy developed . Accordingly, right craniotomy and drainage were performed, with turbid serosanguineous fluid and no signs of abscess observed intraoperatively. After 1 wk, the patient's level of consciousness decreased (GCS, E3V4M4). Repeat MRI of the head was still consistent with cerebral infarction . However, after communicating with the patient's family, resection of the right brain lesion was performed and tissue was sent for gross pathologic and histologic examination. Findings reported by pathology included purulent brain tissue with visible fungal structures revealed by special staining to be consistent with mucormycosis . On the 10th d after the brain lesion resection, repeat head CT showed a large low-density shadow, and the midline returned to normal .