A 7-d history of fever and cough.
A ten-year old girl presented to our hospital with a fever and cough of 7 days’ duration. Her temperature peaked at 39.2 °C. She had been initially admitted to a local hospital, where she was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia and treated with intravenous antibiotics that did not resolve her fever and cough. Due to lingering symptoms, she sought further treatment at our hospital.
Her medical history was unremarkable.
The patient had no relevant personal or family history.
At admission, the patient’s weight was 34.0 kg and her vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 37.0 °C; blood pressure, 90/62 mmHg; heart rate, 130 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; oxygen saturation, 98% in room air. At the time of admission, moderate and fine moist rales were heard in both lungs with no wheezing observed.
Infection index white blood cell count, 17.52 × 109/L; platelet count, 256 × 109/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 30 mm/h; C-reactive protein, 60.65 mg/L (0.00-5.00 mg/L) (December 16, 2021). Immune function was normal. Liver function: Alanine aminotransferase, 29 U/L (0-40 U/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 33U/L (0-40 U/L). A positive culture result for Streptococcus parasanguiniswas obtained, with no fungal growth detected.
During her first stay at our hospital, the patient underwent electronic lung bronchoscopy, which detected endobronchial inflammation in the left upper lobe proper segment and left lower lobe basal segment . Results of CT retesting obtained 7 d later revealed growing, dense masses within lung tissues, as evidenced by darker shadows on the scan coinciding with the position of the outer basal segment of the lower lobe of the left lung that indicated the presence of multiple cystic translucent lesions. Moreover, various lesions of different sizes, multilocular thin-walled air-filled cavities, and patchy and highly dense shadows were observed that lacked clear boundaries and had approximate dimensions of 72 mm × 60 mm × 42 mm. The child was subsequently discharged with oral amoxicillin clavulanate potassium and advised to undergo an enhanced pulmonary CT scan 2 wk after discharge. The CT results revealed that the previously noted multiple cystic lesions within the lower left lung lobe and the dense mass within the basal segment outside that lobe remained unchanged in appearance. In contrast, the inflammatory lesions within the middle and lower lobes of the right lung were larger than before . Due to the fact that the pathological nature of the peripheral lung lesion could not be determined from these findings, the patient underwent a TBLB procedure to ensure that appropriate treatment would be administered to treat the disorder.
The entire procedure was conducted using the following steps. Prior to TBLB, inspiratory and expiratory CT images were uploaded to the Lungpro system (LungPoint VBN, version 3,4, Broncus Medical Inc, CA, United States), which was used to construct a virtual airway leading to the above-mentioned peripheral lesions. Next, picture archiving and communication system-based integration was conducted to build a virtual three-dimensional image of the patient’s lungs. Then, a bronchial centerline was used as a frame of reference to help the bronchoscope operator plan a path to the airway wall puncture point or focus point.
After the patient was prepared for the procedure, she was administered local anesthesia and intravenous midazolam, a mild sedative. Endobronchial occlusion was then performed using a bronchoscope (BF-P260, Olympus Ltd.). The patient was placed in the supine position and was administered oxygen through a nasal catheter. Using a nasal point of entry, the optimal navigational path to pulmonary lesions was selected, and the reconstructed three-dimensional image was superimposed onto the image as viewed under the bronchoscope. During real-time navigation, the position of the bronchoscope and the distance from the pleura and the focus were displayed.
Finally, Lungpro-guided TBLB was performed using a bronchoscope with a working channel diameter of 2.8 mm . Biopsy samples taken from the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe were sent to the hospital pathology department for microscopic examination . The patient experienced no complications after the procedure.