A 48-year-old Japanese male was treated for uveitis of unknown aetiology in the left eye at a general ophthalmology clinic. Prednisolone (PSL) 40 mg/day was started due to the development of macula oedema (ME) in his left eye. Although ME improved temporarily, tapering of PSL to 20 mg/day resulted in relapse of ME. He then complained of blurred vision in the left eye due to recurrence of intraocular inflammation and was referred by the local ophthalmologist to Department of Ophthalmology, Tokyo Medical University Hospital. He has no medical history. At presentation at our facility, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/12.5 in the right and 24/20 in the left eye, and intraocular pressure was normal. Slit-lamp examination revealed 1 + cells in anterior chamber in left eye; fundus photographs showed diffuse vitreous haze and mild exudates in peripheral retina in left eye; fluorescent angiography depicted significant retinal vasculitis characteristic of Bechet’s disease at the posterior pole and periphery retina in left eye; and OCT confirmed ME in left eye . Peripheral blood test showed elevated white blood cell count, elevated percent neutrophils, elevated LDH, positive for HLA-A26, negative for HLA- B51, negative tuberculin skin test (TST) and negative T-SPOT.TB test . He was diagnosed with incomplete type of Bechet disease based on the ophthalmological findings, recurrent oral ulcer, erythema nodosum-like rash in his legs, and HLA-A26 positivity. After a screening test, ADA was started as steroid-sparing therapy. Following the initiation of ADA, ME improved gradually and tapering of PSL to 2 mg/day was achieved, resulting in favourable outcome.
However, 8 months after starting ADA, the patient developed general malaise. Peripheral blood examination was positive for T-SPOT.TB at this time, and chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) showed granular shadows in bilateral lungs . He was diagnosed with miliary TB by a respiratory physician. ADA and PSL were discontinued immediately, and 4-drug regimen for miliary TB consisting of isoniazid (300 mg/day), rifampicin (450 mg/day), ethambutol (750 mg/day) and pyrazinamide (dose titrated from 0.8 g/day to 1.5 g/day) was started. The TB treatment was completed 6 months later based on clinical improvement , although T-SPOT.TB was still positive. During the period when ADA was discontinued, the patient received adjunctive therapy with betamethasone eye drops and sub-Tenon's injection of triamcinolone acetonide to manage the condition. However, the efficacy of these treatments approach was limited to control ME , resulting in decreased BCVA in the left eye (10/20) and gradual elevation of intraocular pressure due to topical administration of steroid. Therefore, a decision was made to restart TNF inhibitor. Although miliary TB treatment had been completed, the patient still tested positive for T-SPOT.TB, necessitating initiation of infliximab (IFX) in combination with isoniazid (300 mg/day) to address the condition. Following the initiation of IFX, subsequent fluorescein angiography demonstrated more severe vascular leakage compared to the initial examination. However, improvements of ME, vitreous opacity and BCVA in the left eye (24/20) were observed. Furthermore, there was no TB relapse during the course of treatment after starting IFX for 3 years.