A 42-year-old man presented with a 13-year history of intractable tonic seizures that were indicative of right parietal lobe brain tumor. Plain computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed a tumor 40 mm in diameter and consisting of calcification and cyst formation located in the right parietal region. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an area of marked signal hypointensity around the solid component on T2 and T2 *-weighted imaging. These findings were thought to represent the calcification seen on CT, or perhaps hemosiderin deposition due to old hemorrhage. The tumor was located adjacent to the lateral ventricle, and the posterior part of the lateral ventricle was slightly enlarged toward the tumor. Normal choroid plexus of the right lateral ventricle was located in the normal position, and continuity of the normal choroid plexus to the tumor was not confirmed . Cerebral angiography did not show any tumor staining or vascular abnormalities. The provisional diagnosis was cerebral cavernous angioma with hemorrhagic episode.
A right parietal craniotomy was performed using a navigation system and motor-evoked potentials. A yellowish, granulomatous, moderately hard, slightly lobulated avascular tumor was located in the right parietal lobe, with scant hemosiderin deposition identified within the lesion. The margin of the tumor was covered with predominant gliosis. At the deepest part of the tumor, the tumor was firmly adhered to the subependymal layer of the lateral ventricle. During dissection of the adhered area, the ventricular ependyma was penetrated and the body of the lateral ventricle was visualized through the cavity of the removed tumor. The normal-appearing choroid plexus was placed within the posterior part of the lateral ventricle and continuity of the normal choroid plexus and the tumor was not confirmed. The lateral wall on the lateral ventricle showed a normal appearance and continuous coverage with ependymal . The tumor thus originated completely in the cerebrum parenchyma and was firmly adhered to the wall of the lateral ventricle.
Pathological examination of the tumor revealed a papillary structure with a single layer of well-differentiated columnar epithelium in the lesion. Part of this lesion growth had infiltrated the cerebral parenchyma. In addition, activated macrophages were prominent around the cerebral parenchyma and were considered to represent a reactive lesion related to an old hemorrhage. Immunohistochemical examination was accomplished with the antibodies detailed in . Vimentin was strongly immunoreactive. Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (N-CAM, CD56), Epithelial Membrane Antigen (EM) and Cytokeratin 7 (CK7) exhibited focal immunoreactivity. Cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and prealbumin were not immunoreactive. Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP) was strongly immunoreactive. Podoplanin exhibited focal immunoreactivity in a few reactive cells . Mindbomb Homolog 1 (MIB1) labeling index (MIB1-LI) was 0.4%. Based on these findings, histological diagnosis was CPP with hemorrhagic episode.
The patient showed no postoperative neurological deficits, and cranial MRI confirmed complete removal of the tumor. Postoperatively, seizures were well controlled using antiepileptic drugs.