A 61-year-old Japanese woman underwent resection of a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor of the hand when she was aged 43 years and was followed up by radiological examination. Chest radiography revealed a mass lesion in the left upper lung 18 years later. She was a current smoker but had no history of asbestos exposure, and presented no specific clinical symptoms. As a result of a detailed examination, she was diagnosed with clinical stage I lung adenocarcinoma. Simultaneously, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) detected a 20-mm enhancing nodule with slow growth on the right diaphragm . 18-Fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography revealed that the maximum standard uptake value of the nodule was 3.5 . Ultrasonography (US) revealed a low-echoic lesion, and early enhancement was observed on Sonazoid-enhanced US . These results indicated that the lesion was a hypervascular tumor of borderline malignancy, such as solitary fibrous tumor (SFT). After a left upper lobectomy for lung adenocarcinoma, the patient was referred to our department for surgical resection of the peritoneal tumor. Laboratory data at the time of presentation were as follows: white blood cell count, 7240 cells/μL; hemoglobin level, 14.2 g/dL; platelet count, 10.4 × 104 cells/μL; aspartate transaminase, 22 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 24 IU/L; total bilirubin, 0.57 mg/dL; albumin, 4.1 g/dL; creatinine, 0.58 mg/dL. Serum tumor markers, such as proteins induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II and alpha-fetoprotein, were within the normal range (25 μg/mL and 2.1 ng/mL, respectively). Laparoscopic tumor resection was performed. Intraoperative findings are shown in Fig. . A thin pedunculated tumor was found to originate from the peritoneal surface of the right diaphragm. The tumor was compressing liver segment 8 but without apparent invasion. Well-developed capillary vessels were observed around the tumor. The pedicle of the tumor was clipped at its origin and divided, and a tumorectomy was completed. Gross examination showed a 28 × 20 x 11 mm3 brown–red tumor with a smooth cut surface . Histopathological examination revealed papillary architecture with focal small aggregates of mesothelial cells . Glandular lumen formation, indicative of an adenomatoid pattern, was partially observed. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin 5/6 (CK 5/6) and calretinin, and negative for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), and signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) . In addition, hot-spot mutations in TNF receptor associated factor 7 (TRAF7) were not detected by Sanger sequencing, and the tumor cells displayed negative immunostaining for L1 cell adhesion molecule. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed no homozygous deletion of 9p21 or hemizygous deletion of NF2 (data not shown). Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with localized adenomatoid mesothelioma. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day. She remains alive and is being monitored in an outpatient setting. No recurrence was noted 6 months after surgery.