Clinical information
The patient, female, 57 years old. In September 2021, lung tumors were found during the examination in The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University. The chief complaint was chest pain and fatigue for half a year. For further treatment, the outpatient department was admitted to the hospital on the grounds of “lung shadow.” The patient’s mental state is good, appetite is reasonable, sleep is good, and weight has no significant change. Based on MSCT plain scan of the chest, partial solid nodules appeared in the posterior segment of the upper lobe of the patient’s right lung (21 mm * 13 mm), with signs of lobulation, burrs, pleural indentation, and vacuole. Multiple small nodules in both lungs. Blood test: neutrophils↑, lymphocytes↓. The patient underwent surgical treatment and part of lung tissue was removed. Pathology revealed invasive adenocarcinoma in the upper lobe of the right lung, and no metastasis in the parbronchial lymph nodes.

TCM therapy
In November 2022, when the patient returned to the doctor, it was found that there were ground glass nodules in the upper lobe of the left lung, about 18 mm * 9 mm, indicating the recurrence of the primary cancer. The patient refused a second surgical treatment. The symptoms were fatigue, pale tongue, white fur, and weak pulse. TCM syndrome is Qi and blood deficiency, the treatment principle is tonifying Qi and blood, attacking evil, and removing blood stasis. The Chinese medicine prescription is as follows: Shashen (Adenophora stricta) 20 g, Baihe (Lilium brownii) 20 g, Dangshen (Codonopsis pilosula) 20 g, Chuanbeimu (Sichuan fritillary bulb) 15 g, Baihuasheshecao (Hedyotis diffusa Willd) 15 g, Jiegeng (Platycodon grandiflorus) 20 g, Maidong (Ophiopogon japonicus) 20 g, Sangbaipi (Mulberry root bark) 15 g, Shudi (Rehmannia glutinosa) 10 g, Danggui (Chinese angelica) 8 g, Fuling (Poria cocos) 20 g, Guiban (tortoiseshell) 8 g, Biejia (Carapax trionycis) 8 g, Gouqizi (Lycium chinense) 15 g, Niuxi (radix achyranthis bidentatae) 15 g, Muli (Concha Ostreae) 20 g. One dose per day, totaling 180 mL, twice a day in the morning and evening, half an hour after meals, lasting 1.5 months.

Treatment outcomes
After that, the patient took Chinese medicine and had a semiannual physical examination. In January 2024, The CT examination revealed a recurrent tumor shrinkage of about 7 × 9 mm, which was undoubtedly amazing. Blood routine examination was normal, liver and kidney function was normal. The patient had no signs of fatigue or wasting, and diet, bowel movements and sleep were normal. It shows that the treatment plan of traditional Chinese medicine is correct and the medication is symptomatic.

From 2021 to 2024, the patient underwent a follow-up examination of the lung tissue, and CT showed that the size of the lung masses changed, indicating that the lung tumors became significantly smaller during treatment after lung CT examination. The level of carcino-embryonic antigen tends to be normal. For this patient, the lung cancer recurred after surgery and could not tolerate another operation, so she sought Chinese medicine treatment. And achieved the expected desired efficacy. Before TCM treatment, the CT showed that dense shadows and cord foci could be seen in the hilar area of the lung. Ground glass nodules were observed in the upper lobe of the left lung. There are small nodules in both lungs and multiple small lymph nodes in the mediastinum. After treatment, the image showed that the lung texture became clearer and the nodules shrinked. Calcification shadow and cord foci lessened or even disappeared. The author believes that this treatment plan is worth promoting.