A 34-year-old Persian woman with a history of depression and Sjögren’s syndrome, currently being treated with fluoxetine, was brought to the emergency department (ED) by paramedics, presenting with nausea, hypotension, confusion, and drowsiness. Diagnosed with depression by a psychologist 6 months earlier, she had no previous history of overdose or self-harm. Approximately 4 hours before she arrived at the ED, she had taken about 40 hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) tablets (200 mg each) and 60 azathioprine tablets (50 mg each). Her baseline electrolyte levels 80 days before the incident were normal, indicating no prior hypocalcemia or hypokalemia.
Additionally, there were no previous instances of overdose, self-harm, or cardiac complications, further suggesting that the overdose was the cause of her current condition. She had vomited twice since the overdose. She had been under prednisolone, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, such as naproxen), and other painkillers for her pain management, but she stated that she did not overdose on these drugs. She had a family history of rheumatoid arthritis, but there was no family history of mental disorders.
Upon arrival, her vital signs were as follows: a heart rate of 62 beats per minute, blood pressure of 70/50 mmHg, respiratory rate of 19 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 97%. Her body temperature was 36.7 °C, and she weighed approximately 58 kg. Physical examination showed mydriasis with reactive pupils, a weak but normal-sounding heart, and weak pulses in both hands. She complained of lip and finger stiffness, with a positive Trousseau sign and a negative Chvostek’s sign observed. Initial electrocardiography (ECG) showed a mildly flattened T wave and prolonged QT interval (640 milliseconds). The echocardiography showed an ejection fraction (EF) of 55% and pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) of 25 mmHg. No clonus, tremors, or signs of hyperreflexia were observed. Neurological examinations revealed weakness in her extremities and a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 13, indicating she was confused but responsive to voices.
Laboratory analyses of her blood and urine showed hypokalemia (potassium: 2.4 mmol/L), hypocalcemia (calcium: 7.5 mg/dL), hypoglycemia (blood glucose: 65 mg/dL), and a positive result for benzodiazepine, tramadol, buprenorphine, and morphine. She stated that she had not taken any of these substances and overdosed on azathioprine and HCQ only. Her blood gas analysis indicated metabolic acidosis with respiratory alkalosis. Complete blood count (CBC) revealed low levels of hemoglobin, red blood cells (RBC), hematocrit (HCT), total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), and iron levels. We also managed to find the patient’s last routine laboratory tests (80 days prior), in which all her findings were normal and indicated no hypocalcemia or hypokalemia before the incident. However, since there were no cardiac complications in the patient before the overdose, there was no previous ECG. She was transferred to the hospital’s poison control center owing to her initial findings . Our data, as depicted in Table , indicate that the patient’s baseline electrolyte levels, including calcium (9.6 mg/dL) and potassium (3.5 mmol/L), were within normal limits 80 days prior to the incident. She received intravenous ondansetron (8 mg), pantoprazole (40 mg), potassium chloride injection (30 mEq), and a mixture of 5% dextrose and 0.9% sodium chloride. Her blood pressure improved to an acceptable level overnight following the administration of 1000 cc each of 5% dextrose and 0.9% sodium chloride. An infusion of 100 mg of calcium gluconate, diluted in 5% dextrose, ameliorated her finger stiffness. Post potassium chloride injection, her QT interval shortened to 590 milliseconds, and the flattening of T waves improved.
Approximately 24 hours after consuming HCQ and azathioprine, the patient reported nausea and headaches. She underwent a brain computed tomography (CT) scan and an ECG, which showed normal results . She received injections of ketorolac (30 mg), dexamethasone (8 mg), and ondansetron (2 mL) for her symptoms (nausea and headache). About 26 hours after admission, the patient chose to be discharged. She was prescribed calcium, iron, and folate supplements and was subsequently referred to therapy sessions with her psychologist.
One week later, during follow-up, the patient had fully recovered, and her blood tests showed no significant abnormalities. Consent for the publication of this case has been obtained from the patient. We confirm that all experiments were carried out following relevant guidelines and regulations. Informed consent for participation and publication was obtained from the patient. Postrecovery, the patient’s treatment regimen for Sjögren’s syndrome was thoroughly reviewed and adjusted to minimize future risks, highlighting the importance of individualized management in complex cases. The absence of immediate preoverdose health data presents a limitation in our case, possibly obscuring a complete understanding of the patient’s baseline health status before the overdose.