A 25-year-old male presented to an outside emergency department (ED) with a five-day history of cough, shortness of breath, nasal congestion, fatigue and loss of taste and smell. He had a past medical history of asthma and morbid obesity (BMI 50.5 kg/m2). The patient had no known connective tissue disease or hypertrophic scarring reactions. He had a 2-year history of vaping but states he quit one month prior to presentation. Sick contacts include a brother and his mother who tested positive for COVID-19 four days prior. He had a positive COVID-19 test three days prior to admission. In the ED, he was hypoxic to 88% on room air and tachycardic at 133 bpm. He improved to 90% saturation on 3 L nasal cannula (NC). Venous blood gas revealed normal venous pH of 7.4 and increased PCO2 of 50. Chest x-ray (CXR) revealed bilateral airspace disease consistent with known COVID-19 infection. He was admitted to the MICU and treated with Remdesivir and high dose steroids. He became febrile to 102.9 F, tachycardic to 134 bpm, tachypneic to 28, and required 15 L O2 via high-flow nasal cannula. D-dimer was normal at 0.28. His respiratory status continued to decline over the night of admission, requiring BiPAP with a minute volume of 25 L and respiratory rate of 40. Due to worsening respiratory distress and persistent hypoxia, despite aggressive respiratory support, the patient required intubation.
He was started on ceftriaxone and azithromycin due to SIRS criteria and an elevated procalcitonin. Ferritin and C-reactive protein were mildly elevated, but not unlike what is seen in most COVID patients. Oxygen saturation was 92% on 100% Fi02 via ventilator. Repeat CXR revealed diffuse bilateral interstitial infiltrates. A SARS-COV-2-IGG antibody was non-reactive, and he received a transfusion of convalescent plasma. Oxygen saturation was 53% despite maximal ventilatory support and he was transferred to our institution for ECMO consideration.
Upon arrival, the patient went from the heliport directly to the hybrid operating room where he underwent unremarkable cannulation with no repositioning required, and initiation of veno-venous ECMO with a 32 Fr Crescent™ double lumen cannula (Medtronic, Inc, Minneapolis, MN, USA) under transesophageal echocardiographic (TEE) and fluoroscopic guidance. There was a single attempt with no repositioning required. No upper body central line was present in juxtaposition with the VV-ECMO cannula. AP CXR is shown in Fig. following ECMO cannulation. The patient was supported on V-V ECMO for 14 days at which time he was able to be weaned gradually from the circuit for bedside decannulation on POD 16. He was maintained on heparin for anticoagulation and chart review of unfractionated heparin lelvels showed that he was never subtherapeutic. Attempts to remove the cannula at the bedside failed due to immobility of the cannula. Ultrasound of the right neck was unremarkable, so he was taken to the hybrid OR where both TEE and fluoroscopy were unrevealing. A longitudinal cutdown from the insertion site proceeding caudally was performed to expose the internal jugular vein. The cannula was freely mobile to the level of the first rib and clavicle and was not obstructing the vein. An upper sternotomy, confined to the manubrium, was performed and the superior vena cava and proximal jugular vein were dissected revealing a 2 cm segment of the distal SVC and proximal jugular vein that was densely sclerosed and adherent to the cannula. Proximal and distal control of the vasculature was established, and the vessel was opened across the adherent area at the level of the innominate vein. The cannula was then able to be withdrawn without difficulty. There was no evidence of thrombosis, scarring or local inflammation at the site of cannula adhesion. The distal SVC was repaired to the level of the innominate vein entry to the SVC to ensure good drainage, however, due to the severe sclerosis and damage to the jugular above the innominate, the vein was ligated proximally and distally. Post-op CXR is shown in Fig. . The patient suffered no ill effects and had an unremarkable recovery to discharge. Clinic follow up has also demonstrated no sequalae or serious adverse events. The Crescent catheter was examined by pathology at our institution and then returned to the company, neither found any defects. At our institution, we use Avalon, Crescent and ProTek Duo cannulas and have never experienced adhesions with any of the cannulas.