Family screening in a 9-year-old boy by a local paediatric cardiologist suggested a possible diagnosis of familial HCM and he was referred to our paediatric cardiomyopathy clinic. His father suffered from HCM and died 6 years ago in his 3rd decade due to a stroke. The paternal grandfather of the proband and his sister were also diagnosed with HCM. Other affected family members included a paternal uncle and his son as well as a paternal aunt and her son. Genetic testing of the latter family members revealed a mutation in the MYL2 gene {MYL2, c.487G > A [p.(Glu163Lys)]}—. The mutation was classified as likely pathogenic after reviewing mutation type together with a search in scientific databases and literature. More detailed information was not available. A family pedigree is shown in .
Clinically, he was well and asymptomatic with no signs of congestive heart failure and no history of syncope. His weight was 44.6 kg (93rd centile) and height was 150.5 cm (94th centile); heart rate was 60 b.p.m. and right arm blood pressure was 111/67 mmHg with a mean arterial pressure of 83 mmHg. On auscultation, a 2/6 systolic murmur in the 3rd intercostal space at the left sternal edge was audible. The ECG demonstrated discordant negative T-waves in Lead III and deep S-waves in the septal and anterior leads but based on these ECG findings solely and according to recent international recommendations in athletes, the patient would not have been considered for echocardiography. N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide level was 434 ng/L (normal range <112 ng/L). The echocardiogram showed asymmetric septal hypertrophy (maximal wall thickness 18 mm) of the left ventricle (LV) with mild flow acceleration in the mid-LV cavity (peak systolic velocity 2.6 m/s) consistent with HOCM (, Movie clips ). There was no systolic anterior movement (SAM) and no mitral regurgitation. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance was performed and confirmed the diagnosis of HOCM with a maximum wall thickness of 19 mm at the midventricular inferoseptal and inferior level . Left ventricle systolic function was hyperdynamic with LVEF of 80%. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging showed an area of patchy LGE at the level of the maximal LV wall thickness . The right ventricle was small for the patients’ age, functioning well, and not hypertrophied. Holter monitoring did not demonstrate significant arrhythmias. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing was carried out for functional and prognostic assessment and showed a reduced exercise capacity for his age with a peak oxygen uptake of 28 mL/kg/min (<3rd centile). Genetic counselling and testing were performed and showed that he carries the likely pathogenic familial variant in the MYL2 gene.
Risk assessment for the primary prevention of sudden cardiac death was performed using the newly developed HCM Risk-Kids calculator. The estimated risk of sudden cardiac death at 5 years was 7.5%. A team discussion regarding the indication for implantation of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) took place considering genetic findings, family history, and results from the HCM Risk-Kids calculator. The decision was made to recommend ICD implantation and to discuss this with the patient and his mother. In addition, the patient was advised to avoid competitive sporting activities and to have a regular fluid intake. He was allowed to participate in low to moderate recreational activities. Beta-blockade with bisoprolol was started for treatment of the left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.
The patient is under frequent follow-up in the paediatric cardiomyopathy clinic and is clinically well with no evidence for arrhythmias and no decrease in exercise capacity as shown by recent Holter monitoring and cardiopulmonary exercise testing.