We are presenting a full-term vital male newborn, born vaginally, with a gestational age of 38 + 6 weeks, birth weight (BW) 3,260 g, birth length (BL) 48 cm, AS 10/10, which has been referred to our Department of Neonatology for further evaluation of a midline cervical cleft along with an unidentified neck mass of unknown origin. The course of the pregnancy was complicated, with hyperstimulation syndrome as part of the IVF (in vitro fertilization) procedure which included using progesterone and myo-inositol among others (9th day after embryo transfer), but was otherwise regular.

Initially, an obvious skin defect was noticed at birth as a suspected mucosal protrusion at the anterior part of the neck, with possible secretion (about 2 cm in long diameter). The described mass was firm, arising from the median cervical cleft, well separated from surrounding neck regions, without visible communication with parotid or salivary glands. At first, possible differential diagnosis included thyroglossal duct cyst, dermoid and branchial cyst, as well as some malformation of gill arches and protrusion of esophageal mucosa. Otherwise, no abnormality in physical appearance has been detected.

Diagnosis and surgical management
Otorhinolaryngologic examination demonstrated a visible tumor formation in the median line of the neck on a relatively narrow base, about 2.5 × 0.5 cm in size, moderately hard on palpation with altered skin area around the formation of an oval shape. Below the described formation, there was a smaller skin area that looked more like a mucous membrane, but without visible fistula. First it was described as a possible anomaly of gill arches or a thyroglossal anomaly, because of the specific median position.

Ultrasound examination of the neck regions did not reveal pathologically altered lymph nodes. Both parotid and submandibular glands as well as the thyroid gland had regular dimensions and echogenicity, with a homogeneous structure without focal lesions. There was no dilation of the main salivary ducts. In the median line of the neck, referred to as a VI neck region (radiological region IV), there was a visible hypoechogenic skin area, with clearly limited formation of dimensions 1.2 × 1.2 × 0.9 cm without communication with the thyroid gland. Between the formation and the thyroid gland there was a small lymph node with a diameter of 0.3 cm. The formation showed no enhanced vascularization. There was no clear communication with the thyroid gland in terms of open thyroglossal ductus. The thymus was localized mediastinal with typical echogenicity without visible ectopic localizations. Other posterior neck structures have been described as within physiological limits in all regions.

Surgical treatment included excision of the exophytic formation at the front of the neck in the median line. During the procedure the sinus has been shown, with a depth of 3 mm (measured with the test). No communication with other posterior structures of the neck was demonstrated.

In the further clinical course, at the age of 1 year and 6 months, a re-evaluation was performed, which showed normal neck mobility, without functional limitations and the absence of any signs of respiratory or digestive difficulties, such as dyspnoea, respiratory distress, upper respiratory infections, feeding problems or persistent communication of neck structures and the digestive tract.

The purpose of the second surgical act was to improve the functional and cosmetic appearance of the scar, by using of Z-plasty technique which would redirect scar tissue into better alignment within natural skin folds and lines of least skin tension, which may lengthen the already contracted scars. This was done 1 year and 8 months after the primary surgical treatment. The postoperative course passed without complications with adequate wound healing. An additional tissue sample has been taken for pathohistological analysis, which confirmed, along with the scar and adipose tissue in the dermis layer, a focal tubular formation lined with respiratory epithelium and surrounded by abundant lymphoid tissue, which was equivalent to the initial PHD findings.

Long-term follow-up has been continued by otorhinolaryngologists, pediatricians and dermatologists, every 3–6 months. There was a stable clinical course, without associated complications and satisfactory cosmetic appearance of the scar, as well as full functioning of the affected region. Further follow-up is necessary because of the potential development of keloids, contractures, malignant transformation which can result with secondary respiratory and digestive problems.

Pathological findings
The observed material is a polyposis formation of 1.8 × 1 cm in size, on a peduncle of 0.4 cm in diameter. Histologically, it consists of skeletal and smooth muscle tissue fibers, individual seromucous glands, circulatory tracts, branches of the peripheral nerves and connective tissue, while on the surface, which is partially villous and eroded, there is a ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium with areas of squamous epithelial metaplasia. The subepithelial layer is composed of stroma which consists of multiple glands lined with the typical ciliated, columnar epithelium.

Finally, the described histological changes confirmed a mesenchymal hamartoma and are consistent with initial clinical diagnosis of the congenital midline cervical cleft (CMCC).