A one-year-old male patient presented at the cardiothoracic surgery department of South Valley University Hospital with right-sided chest swelling for 4 days duration associated with non-radiating pain. The chest swelling was gradual in onset, with a progressive course. His mother presented that he had a history of productive cough for two weeks duration. Three weeks prior, he had been hospitalized with a urinary tract infection. There were no systemic symptoms, rash, or chills. There was no history of chest trauma or previous surgery.
On examination, the patient appeared ill, with increased work of breathing. His temperature was 38.8 °C, heart rate was 120 beats per minute, and respiratory rate was 43 breaths per minute. Oxygen saturation was 94 % on room air. Inspection of the chest revealed a prominent, erythematous, firm, and tender swelling in the right back of the chest, measuring approximately 10 cm in diameter. The overlying skin was warm, with evidence of fluctuation without spontaneous discharge .
A chest X-ray revealed a significant amount of right-sided pleural effusion and a wholly opaque right lung. The subsequent chest CT scan confirmed the presence of Rt lower lobe consolidation and loculated pleural effusion extending along the lateral and posterior chest wall .
Leukocytosis (white blood cell count of 18,000 cells/mm3) was discovered by laboratory testing. To identify the causative organism, a sample of the pleural fluid was collected for microbiological analysis. Gram staining showed numerous polymorphonuclear leukocytes and gram-negative bacilli. Culture of the pleural fluid grew Escherichia coli, confirming the diagnosis of empyema necessitans due to an Escherichia coli infection. Based on the isolated strain's susceptibility patterns, we initiated the empiric antibiotic therapy with intravenous cefotaxime 200 mg/kg/day and intravenous vancomycin 60 mg/kg/day to cover the most likely pathogens, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus. And Once culture and sensitivity results become available, the patient was immediately started on the appropriate intravenous antibiotics. The third-generation cephalosporin was a component of the antibiotic regimen.
Under general anesthesia, the patient underwent surgical drainage, the abscess loculation was broken down effectively in all directions, and yellowish-white pus was drained; thereafter, the abscess cavity was thoroughly irrigated with sterile saline solution. Moreover, the abscess cavity was packed with sterile gauze. Lastly, a thoracostomy tube was inserted to drain the pleural cavity. Then patient was admitted to ICU for close monitoring, respiratory support, and postoperative care. The child's clinical course was constantly observed, and laboratory values, vital signs, and respiratory status were evaluated on a regular basis. Throughout the hospital stay, the patient gradually displayed clinical improvement. The swelling on the right side of his chest gradually went down in size as his fever reduced, respiratory symptoms was improved. Follow-up imaging revealed that the pleural effusion had resolved, and the lung regain its expansion. After 14 days, the patient successfully finished the intravenous antibiotic regimen and was discharged in stable condition. At the 1-month follow-up, the child remained asymptomatic with no recurrence of infection .