A 45-year-old female patient presented with seizures, altered consciousness, incoherent speech, irritability, and urinary incontinence for a month. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the patient revealed the presence of multiple patchy and punctate hyperintense signals in the bilateral frontal lobes, left insular lobe, and left basal ganglia on both T1-weighted and T2-weighted MRI sequences. The T2 FLAIR sequence demonstrated high signal intensity, but no enhancement was observed (as shown in ). The laboratory tests revealed that the patient had a NMDAR antibody IgG titer of 1:300 in peripheral blood and 1:100 in cerebrospinal fluid. Additionally, the CA19-9 level was elevated at 48.44 U/mL, while the CA125 level was within the normal range at 21.9 U/mL. Due to the detection of abnormal NMDAR antibody IgG titers in both peripheral blood and cerebrospinal fluid, abnormal brain MRI findings, as well as symptoms of epilepsy, cognitive impairment, and speech disorders, the patient was ultimately diagnosed with anti-NMDAR encephalitis based on diagnostic criteria . Given the strong association between this disease and teratoma, a bedside ovarian ultrasound imaging examination was performed. The result revealed an oval mixed echo group measuring 54 × 37 mm in the adnexal area. The lesion exhibited clear boundary, a thin cyst wall, and homogeneous, dense, punctate hyperechoic areas, as well as liquid anechoic areas within. These findings suggest a possible teratoma in the left adnexal area. No lesions were detected in the peritoneum on ultrasound examination.
The pathological gross examination (shown in a) revealed a pile of grayish-red fragmented tissue measuring 7 × 6 × 2.2 cm. Some of the tissue fragments were cystic, with a wall thickness ranging from approximately 0.1 to 0.8 cm. Two solid tissues with diameters of 1.3 cm and 1.8 cm were observed. The solid area appeared grayish white with a medium texture; no obvious hair was detected. Microscopic examination found that ectodermal components epidermis, skin appendages and mesodermal component mature adipose tissue were easily found (shown in b). Other mesodermal and endodermal derivative components were also found, such as bone tissue, mature cartilage tissue, respiratory epithelium tissue, and salivary gland tissue (shown in c). No mature or immature neural components were identified. These findings confirm the pathological diagnosis of MCT. Furthermore, the solid component of the gross tissue displayed histological features characterized by a significant proliferation of densely arranged astrocytes, exhibiting sparse cytoplasm and mild to moderate atypia (shown in a). There were variations in cell density, with some regions showing abundant cells and others showing sparse cellularity (shown in b). The surface was lined with ciliated columnar epithelium; beneath the epithelium, a neurofibroid-like matrix was present (shown in c). Mitotic figures are rare, and there is a small amount of blood vessels and lymphocytes in the interstitium, with no necrosis observed. We think that the morphology, particularly the presence of a relatively large glial cell proliferation area measuring approximately 1.3 cm, densely arranged cells with cellular atypia (shown in d), the absence of significant necrosis, strongly suggests a diagnosis of a low-grade glioma.
Immunohistochemistry analysis of the solid area (shown in ) revealed diffuse and strongly positive cytoplasmic staining of GFAP, confirming its glial origin. The negative expression of EMA suggests the exclusion of ependymal origin, further supporting astrocytic origin. Olig-2 showed partial positivity, indicating the presence of oligodendroglial components. P53 and IDH1 R132H were negative. The Ki67 index was approximately 10% positive expression, suggesting the presence of low-grade glioma lesions . However, further molecular studies are required to confirm the diagnosis according to the 2021 WHO classification of the CNS tumors, which are unable to conduct in our institution.
Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with malignant transformation of MCT into a morphology of low-grade glioma, not otherwise specified. The patient underwent laparoscopic resection of the left ovary and fallopian tube without any additional treatment for ovarian tumors. Peritoneal resection was not performed, and there is no history of peritoneal glioma. The patient was treated with immunosuppression and hormone therapy. A pelvic CT examination conducted 5 months after tumor resection showed no signs of teratoma recurrence. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient did not exhibit symptoms of seizures or altered consciousness but reported feeling slightly depressed and dreamy. The patient continued taking antipsychotic medication and received regular reviews.