An 8-year-old Japanese boy presented with recurrent headache. He had a medical history of hypothyroidism and Down syndrome confirmed by a 47,XY, +21 karyotype. No thyroid peroxidase or anti-thyroglobulin antibody were detected . There was no family history of cerebrovascular disease. Magnetic resonance imaging and angiography showed old cerebral infarction in the left temporal lobe and bilateral occlusion of the terminal portions of the internal carotid arteries with development of collateral arteries consistent with moyamoya syndrome . Based on the asymptomatic stage and the lack of perfusion defects as revealed by 123I-iodoamphetamine single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) , we initiated antiplatelet therapy with aspirin, not revascularization.
At 9 years old, he developed altered consciousness and slurred speech. Hypoperfusion was identified in the left cerebral hemisphere on 123I-iodoamphetamine SPECT . To prevent further stroke, the patient underwent left-sided indirect revascularization consisting of encephalo-duro-arterio-synangiosis and encephalo-myo-synangiosis. No perioperative complications were observed. After the bypass surgery, ischemic symptoms regressed. Postoperatively, 123I-iodoamphetamine SPECT and cerebral angiography demonstrated improved cortical perfusion . However, cerebral angiography showed left choroidal anastomosis and residual moyamoya vessels .
At 13 years old, the patient was admitted to our center with sudden onset of severe headache and recurrent vomiting, with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14 and blood pressure of 127/81 mmHg. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain revealed left thalamic hemorrhage with left intraventricular hemorrhage , considered as a cerebral hemorrhage attributable to the left dilated anterior choroidal artery . Aspirin therapy was discontinued and blood pressure was managed using an intravenous calcium channel blocker for 7 days to achieve a systolic blood pressure under 120 mmHg (<95th percentile for age and sex) . Four days after the onset of cerebral hemorrhage, he again complained of headache. Brain CT at this point revealed expansion of intracerebral hemorrhage to the right ventricle, suggesting rebleeding. Eight days after onset, clinical symptoms improved and magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated decreased intracerebral hemorrhage. The patient developed bacterial aspiration pneumonia and gastric ulcer and was therefore started on intravenous ampicillin and famotidine. Twenty days after onset, brain CT detected no findings of post-hemorrhagic hydrocephalus and he was discharged with no neurological deficits. Four months later, cerebral angiography showed spontaneous regression of the dilated left anterior choroidal artery .
Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood sample of the patient and targeted Sanger sequencing confirmed a heterozygous RNF213 R4810K variant (GenBank accession number, NM_001256071.3), as a major susceptibility gene for MMD . Follow-up angiography detected the development of a contralateral right choroidal anastomosis and the patient therefore underwent right-sided direct revascularization to prevent future hemorrhagic stroke six months after onset of the left hemorrhagic stroke. Four months after revascularization, angiography showed regression of the right choroidal collateral vessels. No ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke was observed as of the time of writing, 22 months postoperatively.