A 33-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital for treatment of a hepatic mass, 8 cm in diameter, located in segment 8. The tumor was detected by abdominal ultrasound screening. Contrast computed tomography (CT) showed a lobular, cystic tumor pooling highly viscous liquid . With magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the mass was iso-intense or less commonly hypo-intense (compared to the muscle) on T1 and hyper-intense on T2 . Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA) contrast MRI showed that the tumor’s internal dividing wall was contrasted. The tumor did not show uptake on fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) . Ultrasound showed a solid, hypoechoic mass, with a boundary that was slightly unclear and internal inhomogeneity. Sonazoid-enhanced ultrasound showed a solid, hypovascular tumor, with an enhanced internal partition wall . Liver function tests were unremarkable. Blood tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen, α-fetoprotein, and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 were within the normal ranges. The patient was not a carrier of hepatitis B or C, and her human immunodeficiency virus serology was nonreactive. From these findings, she was diagnosed with mucinous cystic neoplasm of the liver and underwent S8 subsegmentectomy of the liver. Macroscopic examination showed a tumor (8.0 × 7.5 cm) that was well circumscribed, oval, and rubbery . The cut surface of the tumor showed myxoid and vascular components . Histopathological examination showed that the tumor was composed of spindle-shaped cells with vascular proliferation in a myxoid stroma . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells stained positively for vimentin , desmin , CD34 , ER, and PgR and negatively for S-100, EMA, CK19, CD99, HMB45, and α-smooth muscle actin. Electron microscope image showed that collagen fibers extended around the nucleus .
The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged from the hospital 9 days after surgery. The patient was followed for 10 months postoperatively. There were no signs of recurrence or distant metastasis.