A 19-year-old Asian man presented at our hospital’s emergency department with reduced consciousness and seizures. He had a Glasgow Coma Score of 11 to 12, and was agitated and confused during the first 2 days. He experienced two to three general tonic–clonic seizures of approximately 15 to 30 seconds’ duration each within hours of each other, and he was awake between seizures. His seizures started with stiffness in his whole body and his eyes were rolled back during seizures. His Glasgow Coma Score was reduced to 8 on the third day and he was intubated and sent to our intensive care unit (ICU). He had a continuous high fever, ranging from 39 °C to 40 °C, headache, confusion, and vomitus. His fever began to decline to 38.0 °C several hours before hospital admission. He and his family had no history of epilepsy, weakness and paralysis of limbs, drug abuse, tobacco smoking, or alcoholism.
A physical examination showed nuchal rigidity and tetraparesis with accentuated tendon reflexes. Cranial nerves and ophthalmoscopy examinations were normal. An immediate electroencephalography (EEG) showed periodic epileptogenic waves at his right temporal area and general bitemporal cortical dysfunction. These findings suggested an acute structural lesion at his right temporal area or an epileptic state, and a possible viral cause.
Evaluation of hematology showed dynamic changes of leukocytes and C-reactive protein (CRP) level during his illness. His white blood cell count and CRP reached peak level at day 70 when ventilator-associated pneumonia and pleural effusion occurred . Coagulation parameters and a liver function test showed normal values. A cerebral spinal fluid examination showed a white blood cell count of 16/mm3, polymorphonucleocytes (PMN) of 13/mm3, mononuclear (MN) cells of 87/mm3, glucose level of 42/dL, and an increased protein level of 216 mg/dL, which suggested a nonspecific viral infection. Gram, India ink, and Ziehl–Neelsen stains were negative. Computed tomography (CT) scans were performed twice, on 2 September 2014 (day 6) and 22 September 2014 (day 26). The first CT scan result was normal but the second showed a smeared bright area in ependymal cells at the lower area of the third ventricle . Serology tests were performed against herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster virus. These tests showed negative results for immunoglobulin (Ig) M and IgG. The possibility of human immunodeficiency virus was eliminated by a CD4 count of 750 cells/mm3. Different results were found in the serology test for CMV. First, a serology test showed negative results for IgM and IgG anti-CMV. A second serology test showed a borderline positive result for IgG anti-CMV with a titer of 0.9 U/mL. The last two serology tests showed positive results for IgG anti-CMV with titers of 5.0 U/mL and 3.8 U/mL. The four-fold increase in IgG anti-CMV from 0.9 U/mL to 5.0 U/mL within 8 days is an important finding . Serial images of his thorax and clinical pulmonary infection score assessment accompanied by blood and sputum cultures were regularly performed, and confirmed a diagnosis of pneumonia in our patient. Based on his medical history, physical examinations, laboratory results, and supporting examinations, the diagnosis of CMV meningoencephalitis was made.
His clinical condition deteriorated even though therapy with cefixime, acyclovir, dexamethasone, and phenytoin was administered intravenously. His cranial reflexes started to become reduced after 1 week in our ICU. On day 19, spontaneous respiration disappeared, cranial reflexes became negative, and BSD was suspected because he had no response to all brain stem tests, including an apnea test . A vasopressor was used to maintain his hemodynamic stability. His family insisted life support should be continued indefinitely. This condition lasted for almost 2 weeks with no improvement and brain stem tests were regularly performed with negative results.
On day 30, he provided a vague response to painful stimuli at his supraorbital nerve. On day 35, he opened his eyes. Respiration started to appear on day 37, followed by gradual movement of his fingers. His consciousness improved from day 37, and he became fully conscious on day 50. Ganciclovir replaced acyclovir based on a four-fold increase of IgG anti-CMV serology in a test result on day 27. Other therapies on days 19 to 30 included antibiotics based on culture, corticosteroids, antibiotics, antipyretics, and antifungal agents. He also had pleural effusion and a water-sealed device was installed on day 75. A higher positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) on the ventilator was applied to maintain oxygenation and prevent alveoli collapse. After day 80, his respiration improved. On day 85, he was weaned from the ventilator and was able to breathe without it. He started to move his arms but his legs were still paralyzed. On day 90, he was moved from our ICU to in-patient care where he stayed for 10 days until he went home.