A 25-month-old boy was referred to our outpatient clinic without complaints due to a prenatal ultrasound that showed renal cysts. The patient was already on antibiotic prophylaxis and his physical examination and vital signs were within normal limits. The parents reported no family history of renal disease and/or other hereditary disorders. A renal ultrasound performed at 2 days of life showed bilateral hydronephrosis, mainly in the right kidney. At 5 months of age, a DTPA and a DMSA were performed. The DTPA showed strong retention of the marker in the pyelocaliceal system bilaterally, with little response to diuretic challenge, while the DMSA indicated preserved renal function and symmetrical distribution of the radiotracer in the kidneys with relative renal function of 46% in the left kidney and 54% in the right kidney.

Based on the first consultation in our clinic, the antibiotic prophylaxis was maintained and a new renal ultrasound was requested, which showed dilation in the entire length of both ureters (10 mm on the right side and 8 mm on the left side), with an abrupt stenosis in the distal region of both ureters at the entrance to the bladder, with a caliber of only 2 mm. In addition, moderate bilateral hydronephrosis and slight thinning of the cortical renal parenchyma were also observed. These findings indicated the diagnosis of bilateral megaureter secondary to stenosis caused by OJVU and vesicoureteral reflux (RVU). At 2 years and 10 months of age, a DTPA and a DMSA were requested. The DTPA showed obstructive pyelocaliceal and urethral stasis in both kidneys, with a scintigraphic pattern consistent with bilateral hydronephrosis secondary to stasis at the level of the JVU with preservation of renal function. Despite the observed dilation, the parenchyma and the renal cortex were preserved and the DTPA pattern showed a degree of slow emptying, while the DMSA showed that the relative renal function remained stable at 46:54.

Based on clinical and imaging findings, non-surgical management was adopted with clinical follow-up and serial imaging. During the first year, the patient visited the outpatient clinic every 6 months and in the following 2 years, annually. At 7 years and 7 months, the antibiotic prophylaxis was discontinued, with no history of urinary tract infections, and follow-up visits were maintained every 2 years. Renal ultrasound at 10 years of age showed significant improvement of all parameters with ureteral transverse diameter exhibiting a mild to moderate increase (0.9 cm) and JVU preserved, indicating satisfactory evolution and bilateral renal development expected with the non-surgical approach. During the entire follow-up period, the patient remained normotensive, with normal serum levels of urea and creatinine, and without proteinuria, indicating a favorable clinical evolution.
