This is a two-year-four-month old female, born by a primigravida. The girl was delivered at 39 week of gestation by the Cesarean section due to placenta failure. The girl was delivered with a general good condition, her Apgar score at 1 min after birth was 9 and she displayed features of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Her birth weight was 1850 g (<3 percentile), height 44.5 cm (<3 percentile), head circumference 31 cm (<3 percentile). From day 7 on, the baby was exclusively breastfed which resulted in gradual weight gain. At 16 day, the baby girl weighed 2018 g and was discharged from hospital with a general good condition.
At the age of three months, the infant was treated at the Paediatric ENT Department for suspected hypoacusis. The Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) test performed in sleep revealed bilateral severe hearing loss. At follow-up ABR test, sensorineural hearing loss was confirmed. At the age of 4 months, she had a hearing aid placed.
In her infancy, physical developmental delay was diagnosed – her weight and height were substantially below 3 percentile. Her psychomotor development was normal. The girl was able to sit at the age of 8 months and simultaneously she started to stand up and crawl. When she was 14 months old, she began to walk. She started talking when she was a thirteen-month-old. No abnormality was found in the MRI of her central nervous system.
Low weight and height gains, some dysmorphic features (triangular-shaped face, prominent forehead, ocular depression, lipodystrophy at the lumbar region and around elbows led to suspicion of SHORT syndrome.
Our patient presents most common signs and symptoms of SHORT syndrome except Rieger anomaly,insulin intolerance, hyperextensibility of joints and clinodactyly.
The comparison of features typical of SHORT syndrome, with our patient’s features presents Table .
While preforming molecular genetic testing, we have found a novel mutation in PIK3R1 -variant c.1956dupT (p.Lys653*) in exon 15 of PIK3R1 which is responsible for the symptoms in the patient.
The variant has been confirmed to be de novo mutation (not present in biological parents) that has never been reported in the literature.
At present, the patient is 2 years 4 months old and requires multi-speciality care. Her height and weight remain considerably below 3 percentile, though her psychomotor development is correct.