A 49-year-old woman at first consultation presented at our hospital for surveillance of the pancreas because her father (II-3) and her younger brother (III-6) had pancreatic cancer. She had undergone surgery for subarachnoid hemorrhage at 19 years of age because of an arteriovenous malformation. Her family tree revealed that her younger brother died of pancreatic cancer at 33 years of age; he could not be treated through surgery because of his advanced stage with distant metastasis. The patient’s paternal aunt (II-1) also died of pancreatic cancer at 65 years of age. Her father was also diagnosed with advanced-stage pancreatic cancer, which could not be controlled despite chemotherapy.
In the first genetic counseling session, the patient was informed that she was likely to have FPC, Lynch syndrome, or HBOC syndrome, all of which follow an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Therefore, germline multi-gene panel testing using ACTRisk® (ACT Genomics, Co. Ltd. Taipei, Taiwan) was performed to analyze germline variants in this case.
In the second genetic counseling session, we informed her that the blood genetic test revealed two germline variants. She harbored a heterozygous PALB2 pathogenic variant, NM_024675(PALB2): c.1675_1676inv (p.Gln559*), and a heterozygous NBN pathogenic variant, NM_002485(NBN): c.265C > T (p.Arg89*). These variants are predicted to cause loss of normal protein function through either protein truncation or nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Therefore, we advised her to undergo surveillance for breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer. Her father died 9 months after her first consultation; however, he had previously provided a blood sample to our department before his death to support her future healthcare. Accordingly, genetic testing of her father’s blood sample was recommended to her.
In the third genetic counseling session, we explained that her father’s blood revealed the presence of the PALB2 c.1675_1676inv (p.Gln559) pathogenic variant, which was the same as hers. Furthermore, we informed her that her first-degree relatives (FDR) have a 50% chance of testing positive for these variants. Therefore, we recommended genetic counseling for her children at the next session, and she agreed.
In the fourth genetic counseling session, the patient and her three children, a 28-year-old woman, a 24-year-old man, and a 22-year-old man, presented at our outpatient department. We explained to them that their mother and her father harbored the PALB2 pathogenic variant, which was probably associated with breast, ovarian, pancreatic, and prostate cancer. Furthermore, we informed them that their mother harbored the NBN pathogenic variant, which was potentially associated with breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer. Upon surveillance, no issue was noted in the cases’s breasts and ovaries; however, she displayed a branch duct type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (BD-IPMN) in her pancreas. We suggested she continue active surveillance of her breasts, ovaries, and pancreas. Furthermore, her 28-year-old daughter wished to undergo genetic testing because her uncle had died from pancreatic cancer at an early age. Therefore, we performed genetic testing at a single site for the patient’s daughter. Finally, the patient’s daughter underwent genetic counseling and was found to harbor only the NBN c.265C > T(p.Arg89*) pathogenic variant, which was probably associated with breast, ovarian, pancreatic cancer. Thus, the daughter will be recommended to undergo surveillance for breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer.