An 82-year-old lady was referred to gynaecology outpatients in June 2007 with a one month history of post menopausal bleeding. Her past gynaecological history included a negative hysteroscopy in 1998, and previous use of hormone replacement therapy. She had previously given birth to two children. The patient was fit and well, with no significant past medical history apart from hypertension for which she took bendroflumethiazide and atenolol.
Physical examination revealed a bulky uterus with no adnexal masses. A pipelle biopsy demonstrated only tiny fragments of blood clot. A subsequent transvaginal ultrasound scan showed a large endometrial mass with calcification . The ovaries appeared normal. She underwent a hysteroscopy in July 2007 when a 6 cm uterine fibrotic polyp, which filled the uterine cavity, was removed.
Microscopy demonstrated polypoid tissue with a variably cellular and fibrotic stroma, focal adipose and possible chondroid metaplasia, but no malignant features. The glands showed focal mucinous and keratinising sqaumous epithelial metaplasia. There was focal nuclear atypia, focal mitotic activity and occasional cribriform gland fusion. These features were in keeping with either atypical complex hyperplasia within an endometrial polyp associated with metaplastic changes, or a polypoid uterine teratoma.
Immunohistochemistry showed positive staining of the small crowded epithelium for the epithelial marker cytokeratin (CK)-7 and the thyroid and lung marker TTFI. There was positive staining of the chondroid area for S100 protein, focal staining of dilated gland epithelium and stromal cells for oestrogen receptor and progesterone receptor, and staining of stromal cells for smooth muscle α-actin (SMA). Thyroglobulin, desmin, CK20 and CDX2 staining was negative. A diagnosis of benign teratoma with thyroid gland and cartilaginous elements was therefore made.
Following hysteroscopy, the bleeding continued. A repeat ultrasound scan revealed that the teratoma had grown back almost completely filling the uterine cavity. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan in November 2007 showed the tumour filling and distending the endometrial cavity and extending down into the cervix . There was evidence of posterior wall myometrial invasion but there was no lymphadenopathy and the ovaries appeared normal. Tumour markers including alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and Ca19-9 were within normal limits. Serum Ca125 was slightly elevated at 42 U/ml (normal range 0–35 units (U)/ml) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) raised at 372 IU/L (normal range 125–250 U/ml).
The patient proceeded to a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectmy in December 2007. At operation, the uterus was found to contain a haemorrhagic polypoid tumour (110 × 80 × 70 mm) arising from the posterior aspect of the endometrial cavity . Uterine size was equivalent to that of a 12-week gestation uterus.
Microscopically the tumour was a teratoma containing mature and immature elements with mixed malignant transformation . The tissue types found included squamous and glandular epithelium, thyroid parenchyma, smooth muscle, connective and adipose tissue. In addition there were areas of immature bone, invasive adenocarcinoma, and papillary thyroid carcinoma. There was extensive lymphovascular invasion and deep myometrial, but not serosal, involvement. The omentum, cervix, fallopian tubes and ovaries were free of tumour. Immunohistochemistry showed that the malignant epithelial components were positive for CK-7 and TTF-1, but negative for CK20 and thyroglobulin. One area of the tumour stained positive for desmin but not for SMA, S100 or CD10, suggesting that this is likely to be a small focus of myogenic sarcoma.
The histopathological conclusion was of a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and a focal myogenic sarcoma arising in a polypoid uterine teratoma with mature and immature elements. A post-operative computer tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis found no evidence of distant disease giving an overall International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics disease stage 1C.
The patient recovered well from surgery and was referred for oncological follow up. Given her age and performance status a surveillance approach was taken with regular clinical examinations, serial tumour markers and routine CT scans. Initially in remission, six months post-operatively para-aortic lymphadenopathy was detected on CT although she remained asymptomatic with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0. In view of her age and wishes for a treatment with acceptable toxicity, the patient was commenced on an initial dose of cisplatin (20 mg/m2) and etoposide (100 mg/m2). This was well tolerated so one week later treatment was continued with a fortnightly alternating regimen of paclitaxel (135 mg/m2) and etoposide (150 mg/m2), followed by paciltaxel (135 mg/m2) and cisplatin (60 mg/m2). This treatment was chosen based on our experience of its effectiveness and tolerability in the treatment of relapsed germ cell tumours and gestational trophoblastic disease [,].
After three cycles of chemotherapy there was a reduction in the size of the para-aortic mass, but an increase in the cystic component suggesting possible differentiation towards a mature teratoma. Consequently she underwent a retro-peritoneal lymph node dissection in October 2008. Histology from this confirmed the presence of metastatic teratoma. Unfortunately she had a turbulent post-operative course and, although she recovered well enough to return home a month later, she sadly died shortly thereafter.