A 32 year old woman in her first pregnancy had an anomaly scan at 23 weeks of gestation, at which the fetus was diagnosed to have a right sided CDH. The pregnancy was also complicated by polyhydramnios. There was a normal fetal echocardiogram. The initial observed to expected (O/E) lung area to head circumference ratio (LHR) was 41 %, which reduced to 17 % at 26 weeks of gestation. The mother was then referred at 26 weeks of gestation to our Fetal Medicine Unit where a fetal endoluminal tracheal occlusion (FETO) procedure was performed. FETO was performed by placing a thin walled flexible Teflon cannula loaded with a custom designed pyramidal trocar into the amniotic cavity through the abdominal and uterine walls and directed towards the fetal mouth. The trocar was then withdrawn and fetoscopic instruments, including an endoscope, inserted. The endoscope was introduced into the fetal mouth, pharynx and epiglottis and advanced through the vocal cords to identify the carina. The catheter was positioned to deliver the balloon just above the carina. The procedure was performed under local anaesthetic. Post-FETO, the observed to expected LHR O/E increased to 90 %. At 26 and 31 weeks of gestation, amnio drainage was undertaken because of the polyhydramnios (1700 and 2,700 mLs respectively were removed). No chromosomal anomalies were detected on genetic testing undertaken by microarray analysis. At 31+3 weeks of gestation, there was preterm, premature rupture of the membranes. An in-utero transfer was undertaken to our tertiary perinatal medical and surgical unit. The FETO balloon was punctured in-utero. The mother was given a complete corticosteroid course (two doses of betamethasone 24 h apart). She subsequently went into spontaneous preterm labour at 35+6 weeks of gestation. The O/E LHR immediately prior to delivery was 55 %.

The female infant was born by a forceps assisted vaginal delivery. The infant’s birthweight was 2.37 kg and the Apgar scores were five at one minute and six at five minutes respectively. A nasogastric tube was inserted and the baby was electively intubated at two minutes of age. She was initially ventilated on conventional mechanical ventilation (CMV) with a fraction of inspired oxygen concentration of 0.60, but due to a rising pressure requirement due to hypercarbia she was transferred to high-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) until day three. In total, she was ventilated for 25 days and remained oxygen dependent up till discharge to her local hospital at two months of age.

A postnatal echocardiography showed a small intra-atrial communication and a PDA with bidirectional flow. Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) was started on day one after birth due to a moderate pre-and post-ductal SpO2 difference of 5 %, but was able to be weaned after 48 h.

The chest radiograph demonstrated elevation of both hemidiaphragms with clear small lung fields. The appearance on the chest ultrasound (USS) and CT Chest suggested a CDH and a contralateral eventration, but with the possibility that there could be bilateral CDH. The abdominal radiograph demonstrated a double bubble and no gas in the distal bowel loops and hence duodenal atresia (DA) was suspected. DA was confirmed by barium follow-through. Surgical repair was undertaken on day six. Bilateral, type C posterolateral CDHs were noted with herniation of the liver on the right and the spleen, stomach, colon, and left lobe of liver on the left. Surgical repair included bilateral patch repair of the CDHs using ‘domed’ Goretex patches, as primary repair was not possible due to the size of the defects. Type one duodenal atresia (DA), with no malrotation, was identified and repaired with enterotomy and diamond duodenoduodenostomy. In order to prevent abdominal compartment syndrome, the abdomen was kept open using a Goretex patch. The patch was reduced on day 12 and the abdomen was closed on day 15.

The infant no longer required respiratory support by two months of age. At an outpatient follow-up appointment at four months of age, she continued to require no respiratory support. The infant was gaining weight along the second per centile for age having a combination of breast feeding and bolus nasogastric feeds (Infatrini) via a pump.