Four years ago, a healthy 64-year-old Caucasian woman began to experience pain in the lower abdomen, only partially relieved by analgesics. Her past medical history was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis demonstrated a pelvic solid mass.
A total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The surgical procedure also included pelvic lymphadenectomy, partial colectomy, and cystectomy. Histopathologic staging revealed a high-grade endometrial carcinosarcoma measuring 14 cm in its greatest dimension. Tumor infiltration included the uterine serosa, rectosigmoid serosa, surrounding adipose tissue, cecal appendix, right fallopian tube, and ovaries. No lymphatic or vascular invasion and no involved lymph nodes were present. Peritoneal fluid was collected and was found to be positive for malignant tumor cells. Her immunohistochemistry result was positive for CD10, vimentin, AE1/3, endomysial, and S100 antibodies and negative for actin, desmin, estrogen and progesterone receptor. The patient was given adjuvant systemic chemotherapy with six cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel.
The patient developed local recurrence 8 months after the end of her chemotherapy and was referred for surgery. An exploratory laparotomy revealed a high-grade endometrial sarcoma involving the terminal ileum and visceral peritoneum. The patient underwent a secondary cytoreductive surgery with no residual disease. After surgery, she received two cycles of ifosfamide at 2 g/m2 D1-3 combined with epirubicin at 50 mg/m2 D1-2 every 21 days. Treatment was interrupted due to encephalopathy and hematologic toxicity. Hematologic toxicity included grade 4 neutropenia according to the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0. The patient developed symptoms of agitation, confusion, and seizure due to ifosfamide-related encephalopathy. Her neurologic symptoms were totally reversed after chemotherapy interruption.
The patient was followed for 8 months, when fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography–computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) revealed two major perihepatic peritoneal nodules near segment VI, along with several other, smaller peritoneal implants. She had a complete tertiary cytoreduction that included resection of hepatic implants near segment VI, mesentery, and peritoneal bladder. Her pathology results confirmed carcinosarcoma, with a predominant high-grade, undifferentiated stromal component. Following surgery, she received carboplatin at a target carboplatin area under the time–concentration curve of 5, combined with docetaxel at 60 mg/m2; however, after the third cycle, she developed grade 3 NCI CTCAE version 4.0 infusion-related allergy to carboplatin, and the fourth cycle included docetaxel monotherapy at 60 mg/m2.
Five months later, MRI and FDG-PET/CT demonstrated a peritoneal recurrence near hepatic segments VIII and VI, as well as the precaval lymph node and hepatic hilum with extension to the retropancreatic space. Nevertheless, a new attempt at cytoreductive surgery was ruled out. She was started on topotecan at 1.25 mg/m2 D1-5 every 21 days, but she developed progressive disease shortly after the fourth cycle. Her clinical condition included jaundice, malaise, and a great deterioration of PS.
Biliary stents were placed. The procedure was successful, and the patient experienced considerable clinical improvement. The physician team decided to initiate metronomic chemotherapy. Oral cyclophosphamide at an empiric dose of 50 mg/day, given continuously, was started. The patient tolerated this regimen quite well, started to feel better, and recovered her performance status. Abdominal MRI was performed to evaluate treatment efficacy, and the patient was found to have a partial response according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1 criteria. Figure displays MRI scans obtained before and after metronomic therapy.
Three months later, the patient complained of a new abdominal pain, and MRI demonstrated a new liver mass that was interpreted as progressive disease. Metronomic therapy was switched to a standard vinorelbine dosing schedule, namely 25 mg/m2 D1 and D8 every 21 days. After three cycles, the patient was experiencing worsening of her abdominal pain as well as daily fever. Chemotherapy was discontinued. A new abdominal MRI scan demonstrated that the liver lesion was bigger, with a central necrotic aspect. Percutaneous drainage of the lesion confirmed that there was a hepatic abscess. After the procedure and antibiotic treatment, the patient’s condition improved. This suggested that the medical team had misinterpreted computed tomographic (CT) scans and that the new liver lesion which had developed while the patient was on metronomic chemotherapy was a liver abscess. Earlier this year, cyclophosphamide was reinitiated, and a new MRI performed 3 months after treatment initiation revealed a partial response based on RECIST 1.1. The patient has continued with oral cyclophosphamide therapy through the time of this report. Tomographic evaluation was performed in December 2015, and the images demonstrated a partial response in comparison to the initial CT scans performed before cyclophosphamide treatment. The patient’s progression-free survival is 22 months at the time of this report.