9-year-old schoolchild, second child of non-blood parents, height 167 cm father and 160 cm mother (average for Chilean population), she has a history of pulmonary sarcoidosis. Her 11-year-old older sister had an advanced bone age of 13 years at 10 years and 7 months of chronological age, without associated height alteration. She was also diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and overweight, without associated cognitive alterations or dysmorphies.

The pregnancy was monitored, without associated pathologies and she was born at 37 weeks of gestational age by caesarean section with a weight of 3,960 kg (2.25 SD) classified as large for gestational age, height of 51 cm (1.04 SD), CC of 37.5 cm (3.62 SD) according to the curves of Alarcón and Pittaluga, and APGAR score 9-9.

During his neonatal stage he presented hypotonic syndrome managed with motor rehabilitation with good evolution. As for his psychomotor development, he walked at 15 months of age and presented a delay in the start of language. At 7 years old he was diagnosed with verbal and motor dyspraxia, and at 9 years old he was in the process of acquiring reading and writing skills in a special school.

She was above the normal growth curves for height, weight and WHR from infancy. At 9 years old, she had a weight of 57.7 kg (2.67 SD), height 150 cm (2.42 SD), body mass index (BMI) 25.6 (2.48 SD) according to WHO anthropometric curves, WHR 57.5 (≥ 2 SD) according to Nellhaus curves, and a wingspan of 160 cm, with proportionate body segments. Her pubertal development at 9 years old was Tanner I, consistent with her age. She did not have any eating disorders throughout her life.

His hormonal and biochemical tests including thyroid hormones, IGF-1, gonadotrophins, testosterone, calcium-phosphorus, glycemia and glycosylated hemoglobin were within normal ranges. He presented an altered lipid profile at 9 years of age with a total cholesterol of 196 mg/dL and triglycerides of 162 mg/ dL. His wrist x-ray showed an advanced bone age of 13 years at his chronological age of 8 years and 10 months.

In the neurological sphere, he was diagnosed with mild DI, high-functioning autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and ADHD, and was being treated with methylphenidate 10 mg daily. His main neurocognitive manifestations were difficulties in expressive language with dyslalia, alterations in fine motor skills and sensory modulation. He had difficulties in maintaining sleep. Throughout his life, he received comprehensive treatment with speech therapy, occupational therapy and psychopedagogy, showing positive progress in all areas with the therapies and without diagnoses of behavioural or conduct disorders. He had an altered electroencephalogram with very frequent left temporal interictal epileptiform activity, with no history of convulsions, and a brain MRI was performed at the age of 9 with normal results.

Cardiovascular evaluation showed no cardiac anomalies, normal blood pressure, normal electrocardiogram, normal Holter rhythm and normal echocardiographic evaluation.

Other studies included mild neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count of 1,470/uL), with study of the V617F variant in the JAK-2 gene for negative myeloproliferative syndrome. Audiometry and impedanciometry without alterations, and normal abdominal echotomy. He was operated on for adenoidectomy at 3 years and 6 months.

From the genetic point of view, he was studied by karyogram with a 46,XY karyotype and the diagnosis of Fragile X Syndrome was ruled out by molecular study with triple PCR (TP-PCR) due to his language delay.

At 9 years of age, he was evaluated by a clinical geneticist and was found to have coarse features, light hair, prominent forehead, narrow temple, prominent and horizontal eyebrows, low-set auricles, enlarged orbital rim, broad and flat nasal bridge, long eyelashes, descending palpebral fissures, deep-set green eyes, bilateral infraorbital crease, full cheeks, anteverted nostrils, cupid shaped upper lip and full lower lip, and prominent upper central incisors. Apart from the facial dysmorphies described, no other dysmorphic features were found on a full physical examination of the patient.

It was studied by WES in the commercial laboratory CENTOGENE through an Illumina platform, and a heterozygous variant in the DNMT3A gene, NM_022552.4:c.2311C > T, p. (Arg771*), located on chromosome 2 at position 25463182 (Reference position rs779626155) according to the GRCh37/hg19 version of the human genome was detected. The detected variant is in a region of adequate coverage and depth by the sequencing reads (> 20x) and was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The variant generates a premature stop codon and according to the criteria of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) was classified as probably pathogenic. This variant has not been previously identified in individuals with STBR, however, it has been described associated with colorectal adenocarcinoma.

Given the sister's history of advanced bone age, overweight and TADH, she was also studied by WES, ruling out the presence of the DNMT3A variant identified in the proband, and no pathogenic variants associated with the described phenotype were identified. The parents of the identified variant could not be studied for segregation, however, neither of them presented alterations in the clinical history or dysmorphies at the physical examination suggestive of disease, both having a history of normal intellectual, anthropometric and pubertal development.
