A 12-year-old entire male Basset Hound presented with a 1 week history of tenesmus, bloody penile discharge and anorexia, and polyuria and polydipsia of 2 days’ duration. General examination revealed mild dehydration and a high rectal temperature (39.5 °C). Digital rectal examination and caudal abdominal palpation revealed an enlarged, symmetrical and painful mass that extended from the cranial hypogastrium to the pelvic cavity, just cranial to the prostate. The prostate was smooth, non-painful and of a normal size. Scrotal palpation revealed diffusely swollen scrotal tissue and vaginal tunics, and small, solid, non-painful testes. There was a mucopurulent discharge from the external orifice of the urethra.
Haematology revealed mild non-regenerative anaemia, leucocytosis and neutrophilia with left shift. A serum biochemistry panel yielded results consistent with dehydration: slight increases in alanine aminotransferase (112 U/L; reference range: 20–98 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (125 U/L; reference range: 17–111 U/L) and hyperglobulinaemia (78 g/L; reference range: 24–40 g/L) were noted. Subsequent endocrine evaluation revealed a low serum testosterone concentration (0.9 ng/ml; reference range: 1.5–8.5 ng/ml; radioimmunoassay) and high concentrations of oestradiol (32 pg/ml; reference range: < 15 pg/ml; radioimmunoassay) and progesterone (3.1 ng/ml; reference range for neutered females: < 1.0 ng/ml; radioimmunoassay).
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic hollow lesion that was 10 cm in length and up to 4 cm wide, which was adjacent to the prostate and extended cranially, beyond the level of the apex of the urinary bladder . The prostate was normoechoic and had a diameter of 2.5 cm. The urinary bladder was moderately full and had a wall of normal thickness, without irregularities. Cystocentesis of the urinary bladder was performed, and the fluid obtained was submitted for biochemical and cytological evaluation, as well as culture and sensitivity testing. The urine was clear, and had a pH of 7.0 and a specific gravity of 1.020. The urine cytology was normal and the bacterial culture was negative. Cystocentesis of the cystic structure revealed that it was filled with a dark mucopurulent liquid . Cytological examination of this revealed abundant mature and degenerate neutrophils, a small number of large polygonal epithelial cells and a low N:C ratio . Clusters of rods and cocci were also found. Subsequent culture of the fluid showed the presence of Escherichia coli.
Exploratory laparotomy revealed the presence of a single, large paraprostatic cyst that was located dorsal to the neck of the urinary bladder, arose from the prostate, extended cranially into the abdominal cavity, and had two horn-like blind-ended tubes that were suspended from the genital fold . The ducti deferentia lay lateral to the cyst. The cyst was ligated and fully resected, and the abdominal cavity was closed in routine fashion. The testes were removed via a scrotal approach and then scrotal ablation was performed. Both testes were firm and small (2 cm in diameter and 3.5 cm in length). A 10 day course of oral amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (Nisamox, Norbrook; Newry, United Kingdom; 12.5 mg/kg twice daily) was then administered and post-operative analgesia was provided using meloxicam (Metacam, Boehringer Ingelheim; Germany; 0.1 mg/kg once daily for 7 days).
The tenesmus and penile discharge resolved immediately following the surgery and examinations conducted 10, 30, and 60 days later were unremarkable. Ultrasonography performed 60 days after surgery revealed normal hypogastric and pelvic anatomy.
Histopathology of the paraprostatic cyst showed that it was a tubular structure, lined by simple columnar epithelium that contained glands, and therefore resembled endometrium. It also had a smooth muscle layer, but no evidence of neoplasia. Mild lymphocytic, neutrophilic, plasmacytic and eosinophilic inflammatory cell infiltration was also present. A histological diagnosis of true uterus masculinus was made . Histopathological examination of sections prepared from the testes revealed the presence of neoplastic changes in the seminiferous tubules. The mass was composed of neoplastic intratubular Sertoli cells and a significant scirrhous reaction. The cells showed mild anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, were fusiform in shape and contained a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm, with variably distinct cellular borders. Their nuclei were oval and euchromatic, and contained stippled chromatin and a single basophilic nucleolus. Three mitotic figures were present. Therefore, a histological diagnosis of bilateral Sertoli tumour was made.