A 25-year-old woman was admitted to our emergency department after a fall from a chair onto her outstretched left hand. Due to mild alcohol consumption, communication with her was unsatisfactory. She complained of pain and inability to use her elbow, while no other injuries were found. She had a clear medical history, with no comorbidities, except smoking. Physical examination revealed swelling and “dinner fork” deformity of her left wrist, tenderness over her left elbow without any bruises or open wounds, while no obvious neurovascular injury was recognised. Frontal and lateral plain roentgenograms of her left forearm revealed a type-1 Bado Monteggia lesion accompanied with an ipsilateral type 1 Frykman distal radius fracture (Colles’ fracture) with dorsal comminution (, ). Fortunately, no other fractures were found around her elbow, such as coronoid process or radial head fracture. Presence of such associated injuries compromises the final outcome. The patient was operated on within 8 h after admission, under general anesthesia and tourniquet. At the operating room, the neurological examination was repeated, but no neurological disorder was indicated. The ulna was anatomically reduced and fixed through the classical lateral approach between flexor and extensor carpi ulnaris. Osteosynthesis was performed using a dynamic compression plate (3.5 mm limited contact dynamic compression plate [LC-DCP]). Intraoperative, fluoroscopy showed a spontaneous reduction of the anteriorly dislocated radial head after the ulna’s fixation. Subsequently, through a Henry approach, the distal radius fracture was reduced and fixed with a 3.5 mm T-shaped buttress locking plate . Intraoperatively, after the fixation of both fractures, the elbow was found to be stable in all directions with a full range of motion of wrist, elbow, and forearm. The post-operative course was uneventful, and our patient was discharged 2 days after surgery with a dorsal plaster splint. The cast was removed 2 weeks after surgery, and then gradually the mobilization began. The range of wrist (arc: 108°) and elbow (arc: 0—°) motion, as well as the supination and pronation (overall arc: 175°) of the forearm recovered completely 2.5 months postoperatively . Roentgenograms and clinical evaluation showed completed bone union of both fractures’ sides 3.5 months after surgery (, ). The patient returned to her daily routine within 4 months following injury. At last follow-up, 6 months postoperatively, the Broberg and Morrey (98/100) and Quick Dash scores (2.27% of disability) were excellent, without any decline in motion, strength, and stability, accompanied by no pain.