A 73-year-old man in need of nursing care visited our dental clinic in 2020 with severe gingival pain and intraoral bleeding. His medical history included cerebral infarction, hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. The patient was treated with apixaban (10 mg/day), nifedipine (30 mg/day), olmesartan medoxomil (20 mg/day), metformin hydrochloride (75 mg/day), sitagliptin phosphate hydrate (15 mg/day), lansoprazole (10 mg/day), flunitrazepam (1 mg immediately before sleep), zolpidem tartrate (5 mg immediately before sleep), and sennosides (12 mg immediately before sleep). The patient’s family medical history was unremarkable.
At the first examination, the patient’s gingiva showed generalized redness and bleeding with spontaneous pain . Prominent bleeding and discharge of suppuration were observed in the gingiva. The interdental papillae exhibited crater-shaped ulcerations. Severe oral halitosis was present. Physical examination findings were as follows: body temperature, 36.7 °C; blood pressure, 142/60 mmHg; and heart rate, 84 beats/min. The initial blood test indicated the following: white blood cell count, 6500/μL; platelet count, 22.8 × 104/μL, total protein (TP); 6.9 g/dL, C-reactive protein (CRP); 0.14 mg/dL, prothrombin time (PT), INR, 1.2; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 40 s; and HbA1c, 6.0%.
Although there were no suspicious symptoms or signs suggesting the possibility of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or leukemia, we ruled out these diseases through blood examination. Because the patient presented with gingival necrosis, spontaneous bleeding, severe pain, and halitosis, he was temporarily diagnosed with NPD. Periodontal examination and scaling were not performed during the first visit to avoid exacerbating gingival pain. Instead, we carefully removed the accumulated dental plaque from the tooth surfaces using gauze and applied 2% minocycline hydrochloride ointment to the gingival mucosa and periodontal pocket throughout the oral cavity.
The acute symptoms resolved on day 7 (A). We conducted a periodontal examination, including an assessment of probing pocket depth (PPD) and bleeding on probing (BOP). Because our patient had difficulty undergoing extensive examinations, we evaluated the one-point PPD instead of the six-point PPD (B). Panoramic radiography was also performed (C). During the periodontal examination, the entire circumference of each tooth was explored using the walking probe technique, and the value of the deepest pocket was recorded as representative of that tooth. In 11 teeth, PPD ≥ 4 mm with bleeding was detected. Of these, seven had deep pockets of >6 mm (B). Panoramic radiography revealed a horizontal absorption of the entire alveolar bone (C). On the basis of these comprehensive findings, NP was confirmed as the final diagnosis. Our patient also met the transiently and moderately compromised status criteria in the 2018 classification of NPD.
To improve daily oral hygiene, a team of periodontists, dentists, and dental hygienists educated care workers and other staff at the nursing home on appropriate oral cleansing, including brushing three times a day using the Bass technique. Basic periodontal therapy, including whole-mouth scaling and debridement of the root surfaces using hand and ultrasonic instruments, was also performed.
On day 14, the patient’s periodontal condition was seen to have improved following treatment, and the gingival necrosis, redness, and pain resolved . The halitosis had also reduced. After periodontal treatment, six teeth had a poor prognosis (#4, #9, #26, #30, #31, and #32). These teeth had severe mobility and dental caries. We discussed the issues with the patient, and extraction of these problematic teeth was planned considering the patient’s overall well-being and situation, including the general condition, previous and present medical history, medication, paralysis, nursing care system, and the patient’s needs.
On day 21, we extracted three teeth (#4, #9, and #32). One week later, on day 28, we extracted three more teeth (#26, #30, and #31). Seven days before the first extraction appointment, apixaban, a direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC), was changed to clopidogrel sulfate (75 mg/day), an antiplatelet agent. We thoroughly stopped the bleeding from the extraction fossa using sutures and cellulose oxide. No severe bleeding occurred after tooth extraction. The sutures were removed seven days after each extraction appointment. Seven days after the second extraction appointment, apixaban was restarted, and clopidogrel sulfate was ceased. On day 77, BOP and PPD ≥ 4 mm were no longer observed . Currently, dentists visit the patient fortnightly to manage his oral hygiene. To date, good oral health has been maintained.