A 59-year-old man experienced ptosis, diplopia, fibromyalgia, muscle fatigue, and fluctuating limb weakness for 1 year. Worsening weakness in bilateral lower limbs caused walking disability. The patient then came to our outpatient hospital in hopes of regaining muscle power and better walking ability.
The patient’s symptoms had started 1 year ago with recurrent episodes of weakness in four limbs. His eyelid dropped soon after he woke up and double vision appeared spontaneously. He also required a ventilator to maintain his daily sleeping.
The patient was initially diagnosed with MG on August 5, 2018, accompanied by severe ptosis, diplopia, and fibromyalgia. He visited a neurologist in a local medical center, who prescribed acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, pyridostigmine (oral: 60 mg/tab, 2 tabs three times daily), for 1 year. Later, the patient was treated with immunosuppressive drugs; namely, rituximab (intravenously: 375 mg/m2, once weekly for 4 wk), and received six courses of IVIG to improve his conditions. However, the severe ptosis, diplopia, and fibromyalgia persisted without any sign of recovery. The patient reported no improvements in the weaknesses of his bilateral lower limbs, which caused walking disability and muscle fatigue, which severely affected his daily life.
The patient had no significant personal or family history.
During his visit, the MG activities of daily living scale (MG-ADL scale) total score was 20/24 , while that for the quantitative MG scale (QMG scale) was 32/39 . The patient’s vital signs were within the normal ranges. Repetitive stimulation test at 3 Hz revealed decremental responses (11.8%) in both orbicularis oculi muscles but not in the right abductor pollicis brevis muscle, which suggested the need to consider post-synaptic neuromuscular junctional disorder.
Laboratory evaluation revealed positivity for acetylcholine receptor antibody (5.97 nmol/L). The blood biochemistry examinations revealed mildly decreased complement C3 (74.8 mg/dL) levels compared to normal values (79–152 mg/dL). The urine analysis showed normal values.
No abnormalities were noted on electrocardiograms and chest X-rays. Regional cerebral perfusion (rCBF) scans by brain single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) were performed 30 min after the intravenous injection of 30.8 mCi Tc-99m ECD. Easy Z-score Imaging System was used for statistical analysis. The first brain SPECT showed decreased rCBF in the frontal regions and anterior cingulate gyri . Magnetic resonance imaging of the chest showed no evidence of a thymic mass.
The results of the antinuclear autoantibodies (ANA) test were negative. The levels of RA factor (serum) were within normal limits (< 20 IU/mL). The levels in anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) screening were also normal (0.6 U/mL). The patient was negative for HLA-B27. Finally, the result of the myositis 16-specific Ag panel was unremarkable.