Patient: A 59-year-old man.

Chief complaint: dyspnea.

History of the present illness: at the age of 54 years, hypertension was diagnosed during hospitalization for intestinal obstruction.

Treatment was started with a calcium channel blocker and an angiotensin II receptor antagonist, and thereafter his BP was well controlled.

At the age of 59 years, his systolic blood pressure (SBP) increased to about 170 mmHg and BP was poorly controlled for several months. His serum creatinine increased from 0.8 mg/dl to 1.6 mg/dl during a 3-month period. The patient developed exertional dyspnea, which gradually became worse.

He was transported to our hospital by ambulance due to the onset of respiratory distress at rest. Echocardiography indicated that left ventricular systolic function was maintained, but a chest X-ray film demonstrated cardiac enlargement and pulmonary congestion. A diagnosis of pulmonary edema due to heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) was made and he was urgently admitted to the hospital.

His past medical history included pulmonary embolism and pericarditis in his 30s. There was no special mention of his family history. His social history showed that he smoked 20 cigarettes a day for 40 years and had consumed 44 g of alcohol a day.

Physical examination on admission revealed height 163 cm and weight 49 kg, blood pressure was 174/124 mmHg, and heart rate was regular and 89/min. His heart sound showed no murmur. A lung examination showed an increased respiratory rate (28/min) and wheezes at the end of exhalation in both lungs. No peripheral edema or hepatomegaly were observed.

Immediately after admission, he was treated with intravenous furosemide, as well as carperitide (0.025 γ) and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. Diuresis was rapid and his respiratory condition became stable. Since the patient had hypertension and circumferential cardiac enlargement on echocardiography, hypertensive heart disease was suspected. After admission, he received multiple antihypertensive agents (nifedipine CR at 60 mg/day, telmisartan at 20 mg/day, furosemide at 40 mg/day, and spironolactone at 50 mg/day), but his BP remained around 150/90 mmHg and was not sufficiently controlled.

The patient had renal dysfunction and hypokalemia (2.5 mmol/L). Further tests on admission demonstrated secondary aldosteronism associated with high plasma renin activity (PRA). Consequently, renovascular hypertension was suspected due to uncontrolled hypertension, hypokalemia, high PRA and aldosterone, progressive renal dysfunction, and heart failure. Ultrasound and plain computed tomography (CT) (Siemens, Munich, Germany) were performed, detecting unilateral renal atrophy. Due to the patient’s renal dysfunction, unenhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Philips, Amsterdam. Netherlands) was performed to evaluate the renal arteries rather than contrast CT, revealing severe stenosis or occlusion at the origin of the right renal artery and the right renal atrophy.

On hospital day 17, selective renal angiography was conducted via the left radial artery, confirming total occlusion at the origin of the right renal artery. The location of the right renal artery was identified by CT and MRI relative to the position of the left renal artery, and a stump was detected at the occlusion site. Accordingly, it was considered that blood flow could be restored and PTRA was performed.


A 6F guiding catheter (JR4.0; Medikit Co., Tokyo, Japan) was positioned at the ostial part of the right artery. A 0.014-inch guide wire (Aguru™ floppy; Boston Scientific Corporation, Marlborough, USA) and a microcatheter (Prominent, Tokai Medical Products Inc., Kasugai, Japan) were used to cross the occlusion, after which the microcatheter was advanced to the distal part of the renal artery and back flow of blood was verified. Then, tip imaging was conducted, and it was confirmed that the wire was in the lumen of the main trunk of the renal artery. To treat the lesion, a 2.0×20 mm balloon (Shiden; Kaneka Medical Products, Osaka, Japan) was inflated and then exchanged for a larger balloon. Subsequently, a 4.0×15 mm cutting balloon (Peripheral Cutting Balloon, Boston Scientific) was used to achieve additional dilation. Finally, a 5.0×19 mm stent (Express™ Vascular SD; Boston Scientific) was placed to fully cover the lesion from the entry site. The occlusion improved to 0% stenosis and there was no distal embolism or renal artery perforation. Selective collection of renal vein blood for measurement of PRA was done before and after release of renal artery occlusion during PTRA. Before PTRA, PRA was significantly higher in the right renal vein compared with the left renal vein, while the right-left difference disappeared 15 min after the procedure.

To protect the kidney, intravenous fluid infusion was conducted from 1 day before PTRA to postoperative day 4, and continuous hemodiafiltration was performed for 2 days after PTRA. Good diuresis (4000 ml/day) was achieved after PTRA, with no deterioration of renal function, and proteinuria also decreased.


Immediately after PTRA, the dose of nifedipine was decreased from 60 mg/day to 20 mg/day, while furosemide and spironolactone were discontinued on day 8 after the procedure. Control of the patient’s BP was markedly improved by the procedure. At 1 week after PTRA (1 week after completion of fluid infusion), mean SBP was significantly lower than at 1 week before PTRA, with morning SBP decreasing from 145/93 mmHg to130/78 mmHg and evening SBP decreasing from 140/83 mmHg to 120/72 mmHg (both p<0.05).

PRA and the plasma aldosterone concentration decreased dramatically after PTRA. After discontinuation of the aldosterone antagonist, the potassium level remained within normal range. The patient was discharged from hospital on hospital day 30. Both home and office BP have been controlled at around 130/80 mmHg for approximately 6 months since discharge.