A 70-year-old woman Gravid 12 was referred to the Tumor Clinic of Ghaem Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences in September 2013. Her symptoms were abdominal pain, loss of appetite, nausea, and vomiting from 20 days ago with a history of moderate hematemesis. No severe disease was observed in her medical records. She looked dehydrated and ill in terms of general appearance. Vital signs were blood pressure 70/50 Hgmm, pulse rate 100/minute, temperature 36.1°C and respiratory rate 14/minute. Laboratory studies detected leukocytes 20000 and PMN 87%. Liver and kidney function tests were normal. She was misdiagnosed with the left bundle block view in ECG and the AF rhythm in auscultation which caused her to undergo medical therapy in CCU. At first admission in hospital, abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the right and left lower quadrant of abdomen without rebound tenderness and guarding, and evidence of rigidity and abdominal distention.
In sonography evaluation, size of uterus was 133.5 × 80.5 cm with hypoechoic mass 101 × 109 cm in the left lateral of uterine body, which could be probably interpreted as uterine myoma, and some free fluid in peritoneal cavity was also reported. Paracentesis 5 mL suppurative fluid was aspirated under the guidance of sonography. Findings of CT-scan were a round cystic mass with focal calcification at its periphery located in the pelvic cavity with the diameter about 14 × 11.5 cm probably ovarian cyst adenoma ( and ).
Based on the diagnosis of peritonitis (suppurative fluid aspirated), emergency laparotomy was performed and 700 mL of suppurative fluid in the abdominal cavity with normal appearance bowel and liver was found. The origin of pus draining was a 1 × 1 cm rupture in the anterior wall of uterus. However, there were multiple polypoid tumors in cervical canal yielded stenosis of cervical discharge. After peritoneal irrigation with 5 to 6 L of normal saline, total hysterectomy with bilateral salpango-oophorectomy was performed. Then, the patient received board-spectrum antibiotic. But in recovery image, the patient became oliguria with rise of creatinine level, and decrease of the blood pressure, despite normal hemoglobin level. Despite all medication and efforts performed, the general condition of the patient deteriorated and she expired ten hours after operation probably because of the septic or cardiogenic shock.