This study was conducted under the approval of the ethics committee of the Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University, and the protocol accorded with its standards.
This patient was a 52-year-old man who was admitted to our hospital due to low back pain 2 weeks ago. The symptom of low back pain did not improve after bed rest. He was a chronic smoker for the past 20 years and quit smoking for 5 years. Twenty-nine months previously, he underwent right radical nephrectomy not followed by local radiotherapy. Histopathology of the nephrectomy specimen revealed a CCRCC. No recurrence or distant conversion was found in intermittent reexamination. A routine physical examination revealed a body mass index = 19.27 kg/m2 (reference <25) with significant conjuctival pallor but no organomegaly. His blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, and body temperature were all in the normal range. He had no hypertension, heart disease, diabetes, any infectious disease, or drug allergy history.
Six months ago, he fell down accidentally during work and later developed lumbar pain. He went to the local hospital for computed tomography (CT) examination, which showed lumbar compression fracture, and received local physical therapy. Later, he felt that his symptoms were better than before. However, he had low backache for the last 2 weeks without cause. At day 1 after admission, the lumbar CT revealed expansive bone destruction in the vertebrae and appendages of the 11th thoracic vertebra and the first lumbar vertebra, bone cortex thinning, and local continuity interruption, accompanied by soft tissue mass formation and vertebral canal compression . Multiple spotty abnormal signals were seen in the cervical vertebra, thoracic vertebra, lumbar vertebra, and sacrum by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which were both low signal on T1-weighted imaging and high signal on T2-weighted imaging, accompanied by mass formation in the 11th thoracic and first lumbar vertebrae and appendages . Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) of vertebral showed scattered high signals, and they were low signals on the corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) imaging . Pathological fractures were seen on multiple vertebrae suggestive of metastasis of bone or MM.
A routine laboratory examination showed that red blood cells and hemoglobin were decreased. Leukocyte and platelet count were normal. Total protein and globulin increased, while albumin decreased. His serum β 2-microglobulin was 4.59 µg/mL (ref. 0.9–2.7), M protein was 45.79 g/L, and IL-6 was 28.871 pg/mL (ref. <10). Five items of myeloma detection showed that IgG (70 g/L, ref. 7.51–15.6) and immunoglobulin k light chain (KAPPA, 94 g/L, ref. 6.29–13.5) were increased, and immunoglobulin A (IgA; 0.515 g/L, ref. 0.82–4.53), immunoglobulin M (IgM, 0.253 g/L, ref. 0.4–2.74), and immunoglobulin M light chain (LAMBDA, 1.16 g/L, ref. 3.13–7.23) were decreased. Immunotyping of lymphoma (including plasma cell tumor) was abnormal. Serum-free light chain assay showed that elevated serum free kappa was 832.5 mg/L (ref. 3.3–19.4). Blood calcium was reduced, and blood phosphorus was normal. Bone marrow aspiration was MM. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was normal .
The patient had symptoms of lumbar nerve compression, and surgery was the first choice in clinical practice to relieve the symptoms of nerve compression, but he had anemia. Before surgery, anemia must be corrected and immunotherapy and targeted systemic therapy must be performed. According to the above results, bone marrow aspiration and CT-guided vertebral biopsy were performed to make a definite diagnosis. Pathological examination showed the coexistence of myeloma with CCRCC in hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining . There were monomorphic cells with clear cytoplasm and an intricate network of capillary vasculature in the CCRCC site. The variegated areas of atypical plasma cells infiltrated in CCRCC. There was no clear distinction between the two components. The CCRCC cells were positive for carbonic anhydrase IX (CA-IX), cytokeratin-8, and paired box gene 8 (Pax8); however, the myeloma cells were positive for CD38, CD138, multiple myeloma oncogene 1 (MUM1), and kappa and negative for lambda.
He received radiotherapy and immunotherapy and acquired a satisfying outcome. The patient recovered well after treatment and was followed up for 12 months during the whole treatment course. The symptom of back pain was significantly relieved.