A 62-year-old male with hypertension and hyperlipidaemia presented to an urgent care clinic with 7 days of dizziness, fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. He was transported to the emergency department, evaluated, and discharged home. Approximately 4 days later, emergency medical services were called after the patient experienced syncope. Electrocardiogram (ECG) obtained en route reported anterior ST-segment elevations. Before arrival at the hospital he developed ventricular fibrillation. Cardiac defibrillation was successful and endotracheal intubation was performed. Upon arrival at the emergency department, ventricular fibrillation recurred, and resuscitative efforts restored sinus rhythm and spontaneous circulation. Following return of spontaneous circulation, exam was notable for heart rate of 77 b.p.m., a regular rhythm, and hypotension (86 mmHg/48 mmHg). There were no appreciable murmurs. There was no lower extremity oedema. The extremities were cool to touch. On pulmonary exam, he required mechanical ventilation with a rate of 28, tidal volume 500 mL, FiO2 100%, and positive end-expiratory pressure of 8 cmH2O. Breath sounds were present bilaterally. The subsequent ECG showed wide complex rhythm consistent with slow ventricular tachycardia with right bundle branch block morphology and left axis deviation. .
Given the report of ST elevations prior to ventricular fibrillation, along with the ECG at presentation, there was high suspicion for acute coronary syndrome. He received aspirin, ticagrelor, and heparin for a presumed ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. Epinephrine infusion was started due to bradycardia with hypotension. He was emergently taken to the catheterization lab, but coronary angiography did not reveal coronary stenosis. Right heart catheterization revealed elevated right-sided filling pressures with a right atrial pressure of 22 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure 61/28 (39) mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 15 mmHg, and Fick cardiac index 2.6 L/min/m2. Due to the unclear nature of his presentation, point-of-care echocardiogram was performed, and demonstrated a dilated right ventricle with severely reduced function. Based on point-of-care echocardiogram findings, there was concern for pulmonary embolism. Immediate pulmonary angiography was performed and revealed large, bilateral pulmonary emboli (, Video ). EkoSonic™ endovascular thrombolysis catheters were advanced into both main pulmonary arteries and 5 mg of tissue plasminogen activator was delivered through each catheter, followed by 2 mg/catheter/h for 2 h, then 1 mg/catheter/h for 16 h. Infusion was guided by fibrinogen monitoring as per institutional protocol.
Upper and lower extremity Doppler ultrasounds were obtained but showed no evidence of venous thrombosis. Formal transthoracic echocardiogram confirmed depressed right ventricular function (, Video ). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed bilateral peripheral ground-glass opacities with wedge-shaped opacities in the right lung . These were thought to represent pulmonary infarctions, but, given refractory hypotension requiring vasopressors, he was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics for pneumonia. A viral respiratory panel was negative, but tracheal aspirate culture was positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Following completion of catheter-directed thrombolysis, repeat ECG showed sinus rhythm with first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block, left axis deviation, incomplete right bundle branch block, and prolonged QTc interval (498 ms) . Over the following 4 days, he developed anaemia, and CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed a mediastinal haematoma and persistent ground-glass opacities . Given his radiographic findings, and growing prevalence of COVID-19, he was tested for SARS-CoV-2 and found to be positive. He was transferred to a COVID-19-dedicated intensive care unit where he was placed under enhanced contact precautions and received supportive care. He was extubated 4 days later. Following extubation, he did well. He was admitted to an inpatient rehabilitation facility and discharged home on lifelong apixaban 5 mg twice daily. At 1 month follow-up, he described mild exertional dyspnoea that was improving. Transthoracic echocardiogram at that visit noted improvement of right ventricular dilation and systolic function (, Video ).