A 42-year-old man underwent emergency ascending aortic replacement (Triplex Advanced; Terumo Corporation, Tokyo, Japan, 22 mm and 20 mm) and aortic valve resuspension for acute type A aortic dissection at our institution 6 months previously. During the primary surgery, distal anastomosis was performed using only the outer felt, and bovine pericardium was used to cover the site with the intimal tear proximally as root intima patch repair. Replacement of the ascending aorta was performed using a 20-mm graft, and the proximal part had a 22 mm graft-graft anastomosis. The operation and postoperative course were uneventful, and the patient was discharged and followed up monthly. Four months later, there was a slight increase in the serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level. At 5 months after the surgery, laboratory data indicated mild hemolysis, and he complained of fatigue on exertion. Six months after the surgery, he was admitted to our institution because of severe hemolysis that required blood transfusion. The serum hemoglobin (Hb) level was 8.6 g/dL, LDH enzyme level: 3071 IU/L, hematocrit: 25.8%, relative reticulocyte count: 8.1%, total bilirubin: 4.1 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 13 mg/dL, and creatinine: 1.38 mg/dL. Upon discharge after the primary surgery, the serum BUN level was 14 mg/dL, and creatinine was 0.75 mg/dL. A peripheral blood smear showed many schistocytes; however, the Coombs test was negative. Physical examination showed yellowish skin discoloration and red-yellow urine color, while eye examination showed jaundice and conjunctival pallor. A systolic murmur (Levine II) was heard in the second right intercostal space. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a severely kinked graft in the ascending aorta, with normal left ventricular function and valve. At the kinked site, the peak jet velocity was 4.8 m/sec and the pressure gradient was 92 mmHg. Computed tomography showed severe kinking at the graft, approximately 35 mm from the proximal anastomosis . These data suggested that mechanical destruction of red blood cells by the kinked graft caused the hemolytic anemia, and he needed resection of the replaced ascending aorta. He required transfusion of 14 units of blood in the 4 days before the surgery, and the Hb was 8.6 g/dL at the time of surgery.
The chest was opened by redo median sternotomy. Slightly distal to the valve level, the graft showed a sharp, crinkled oblique fold partially obstructing the post-valvular flow, and a strong thrill was felt at the site of the kinked graft . Extracorporeal circulation was established by femoral artery cannulation and venous drainage from the right atrium. After inserting the left ventricular vent cannula through the left superior pulmonary vein, clamping, and anterograde cardioplegia, the graft was opened at the suture line. The valve showed normal function with no regurgitation. The proximal and distal sides of the kinked graft were resected diagonally, and graft-graft anastomosis of approximately 1 cm in length was performed . The thrill became weaker than before resection after unclamping. The duration of extracorporeal circulation was 66 min, and the operation time was 283 min.
Postoperatively, gross hematuria and hemolytic anemia resolved completely and the serum LDH and bilirubin levels normalized . Subsequent surgical and clinical course were uneventful, with discharge in very good condition after eight days .