A 26-year-old Asian man was transported to the emergency department via ambulance due to bilateral lower limb weakness. He had no relevant medical history except for a diagnosis of aseptic meningitis more than 10 years ago without sequelae. The patient was a construction worker who performed heavy labor. He stated that he had suffered from intermittent muscle cramping over the right shoulder radiating to back for a week, and he visited a local traditional medicine practitioner a day before the emergency department visit. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and another unknown agent were injected. The muscle cramping improved before he slept. However, acute limb weakness occurred after the patient woke up in the morning. He had difficulty standing and fell, resulting in upper limb contusions.
Upon arrival at our emergency department, the tympanic membrane temperature was 38.1°C, with normotension and no other abnormalities in vital signs. In addition, a review of the system showed no loss of consciousness, limb or trunk pain, upper respiratory symptoms, vomiting, diarrhea, or heavy sweating. He had no regular consumption of alcohol or smoking habits, and his family history included only hypertension and diabetes mellitus of his grandparents, without diseases related to hypokalemia or muscle weakness.
The patient was oriented with a good mental health status and appeared to be well nourished. Physical examination showed decreased muscle power of the bilateral lower limbs, mainly proximal, and both scored 2/5, which progressed to 1/5. The deep tendon reflex of the bilateral knees and sensation of the lower limbs were intact, and the muscle power of the upper limbs was not affected. There was also no Babinski sign elicited on either side. Blood tests, including complete cell count, blood sugar, and a biochemical panel, were normal, except for white blood cells (10,800/μL), potassium (1.7 mEq/L), and creatine phosphokinase (178 U/L). Urinalysis was normal. However, electrocardiogram showed a flattened T wave and exhibited U waves in the precordial leads V1–V3.
Oral and intravenous potassium supplements with 40 mEq was administered, and the serum potassium level result was still 2.0 mEq/L the following morning. We then administered another 60 mEq of potassium, and upon assessment, the muscle power of the patient’s bilateral lower limbs improved in the afternoon (4/5). He was admitted to the ward and was administered an additional 20 mEq of intravenous potassium (a total of 120 mEq since the emergency department); hypokalemia resolved (serum potassium 4.0 mEq/L), and the patient could walk steadily. Because his paralysis improved rapidly after hypokalemia correction and myopathies were less likely, electromyography was not done during admission.
The urinary potassium excretion of the patient was low (urine potassium/creatinine ratio is 1.5 mmol/mmol) and there was no evidence of potassium loss from gastrointestinal tract. He also denied potassium-shifting or potassium-wasting medication use, such as insulin, beta-agonists, thyroxine, or diuretics. The levels of serum aldosterone (109.5 pg/mL), renin (34.98 pg/mL), and free T4 (1.14 ng/dL) were borderline normal; however, elevated levels of serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (5.91 uIU/mL) were noted. Arterial blood gas analysis was normal. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis was considered as the clinical impression because of rapid normalization of potassium levels and improvement of weakness. However, the patient did not receive further genetic tests due to personal reasons.
Furthermore, the patient denied having much carbohydrate-rich food intake or strenuous exercise before the attack. His family contacted the local clinic which disclosed that it had administered 5 mg dexamethasone through intramuscular injection. His serum cortisol level was <1.00 μg/dL and 4.39 μg/dL at 2 and 4 days after the injection, respectively. The final diagnosis was HPP of the non-familial type, suspected to be induced by dexamethasone injection. Finally, he was discharged without further sequela.
One year later, he came back to our emergency department due to hypokalemia-induced paralysis after eating a big carbohydrate-rich meal. We advised him to avoid using corticosteroids and eating carbohydrate-rich food.