An 18-month-old boy was referred to our center for the first time because of fever, lethargy, repeated seizures, and vomiting since two days ago. During hospitalization, he experienced three focal clonic seizures affecting the right side of his body with orofacial automatism. Seizures were ultimately controlled with phenytoin, phenobarbital, and levetiracetam, followed by clonazepam.
The infant had no nuchal rigidity on physical examinations with negative Kernig and Brudzinski’s signs. No sign of organomegaly was detected either. On neurological examinations, cranial nerves were intact. His muscle tone and deep tendon reflexes were slightly decreased, but the Babinski sign was seen in his right foot.
He was the first child of non-consanguineous parents born through Cesarean –section. He had no history of asphyxia at birth and no history of previous seizures or medication consumption. He had normal development before starting the disease.
Due to fever, loss of consciousness, and seizures, Electroencephalography (EEG) and brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) were requested. MRI revealed diffuse involvement of the left fronto-parieto-temporal regions and the left thalamus. EEG showed periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges (PLEDs) in the left hemisphere .
A lumbar puncture was requested to rule out herpetic encephalitis, which indicated red blood cell=1000 / mm3 and white blood cell=100 /mm3 (60% neutrophils and 40% lymphocytes). Glucose and protein levels were in the normal range. Cerebrospinal fluid PCR for herpes simplex virus was also requested. According to imaging and CSF findings, the patient’s treatment started with ceftriaxone and acyclovir, with a presumptive diagnosis of herpetic encephalitis. After three days, HSV -PCR of CSF showed a positive result for HSV 1, and treatment was continued with acyclovir.
During hospitalization, the patient regained consciousness, his fever recessed, and the seizures did not recur. After a twenty-one-day course of acyclovir, the patient was discharged while phenytoin, phenobarbital, and clonazepam were prescribed for him.
One week after being discharged, the patient returned with restlessness, speech difficulties, and choreic movement, especially in the upper extremities. For better evaluation, he was re-admitted, and brain imaging was performed. A brain MRI revealed abnormal high signals in his left fronto-parieto-temporal regions with encephalomalacic changes due to sequella of previous infection and recent right temporal involvement
No leukocytosis was reported in his initial tests. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were normal. Organic acids in blood and urine samples and serum ammonia and lactate levels were tested for metabolic disorders; all were in the normal range. CSF- PCR for herpes simplex was requested again to rule out relapsing herpetic encephalitis, and its result was negative. The history and extrapyramidal signs, including choreic movements, raised the possibility of autoimmune encephalitis. Therefore, serum and CSF were analyzed for autoimmune disorders. The Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate receptor antibody test was positive in the autoimmune panel investigation in CSF, and the diagnosis of Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate receptor autoimmune encephalitis was confirmed. The patient was treated with five-day methylprednisolone pulse therapy, followed by intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for three days and aripiprazole. After three months, the patient’s speaking, behavior, and restlessness improved, and his choreic movement resolved.