A 65-year-old female presented to the emergency room with uncontrolled abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Medical history was significant for Type 2 diabetes mellitus, previous intestinal intussusceptions, and moderate abdominal pain. Initial abdominal CT scan indicated a small bowel obstruction with a transition point at the jejunal area . Related to this finding were mildly enlarged lymph nodes in the right pelvic region. Differential diagnosis included small bowel neoplasm, adhesions, or a reactive intestinal inflammatory process.
Shortly after presentation, the patient's clinical condition worsened, requiring emergency small bowel resection. Histological analysis of the resected bowel segments demonstrated small intestinal mucosa with intraepithelial and mucosal infiltrates of benign CD3 (+) T-cells, consistent with celiac sprue. Also found were medium-sized infiltrating lymphocytes with characteristic pleomorphic nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Immunohistochemical stains revealed tumor cells positive for CD-3, weakly positive for BCL-2, and negative for CD5, CD20, CD10 and cyclin-D1. Immunohistochemical analysis for Ki-67 showed a markedly increased proliferative index, with 90% of lymphocytes staining positive . Polymerase chain reaction analysis for T-cell receptor-gamma gene rearrangement was positive, demonstrating the presence of a clonal population of T-cells. The combined morphological and immunophenotypic features of this lesion were consistent with jejunal EATL. Further systemic investigations were all non-contributory. The patient was discharged and the recommended treatment for her primary condition was chemotherapy.
Three weeks post-diagnosis, the patient received a positron emission tomography CT scan from her skull to mid-thigh, which indicated no hypermetabolic lesions suggestive of active malignancy in the skull base or neck. However, five weeks post-diagnosis, she developed new onset neurological symptoms consisting of changes in her mental status and left facio-brachial weakness. Brain MRI demonstrated a single ill-defined, irregular, right fronto-parietal enhancing lesion surrounded by vasogenic edema, with associated mass effect and midline shift . She underwent surgical resection of the intracranial lesion, and post-operative MRI demonstrated the resection of the right frontoparietal mass with small air fluid level and residual blood product seen at the tumor bed . Histopathologic evaluation of the lesion biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic EATL involving the brain .