A 69-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department with a 2-h history of dyspnoea, following a family quarrel. Her past medical history included mitral valve prolapse with mild mitral regurgitation diagnosed in young age and colon cancer successfully treated by surgery and chemotherapy 3 years before. The patient suffered from anxiety, occasionally treated with anxiolytic drugs. Physical exam revealed apical systolic murmur 2/6 Levine scale with systolic click and crackles at both lung bases. Blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, heart rate 73 b.p.m., respiratory rate 22 b.p.m., and O2 saturation 96%. The ECG showed sinus rhythm, ST-segment elevation up to 1.5 mm in lateral and anterior leads and prolonged QTc interval (496 ms). Increased high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (937 ng/L—URL 20 ng/L) and no other abnormalities were detected on blood sample analysis. Haemoglobin (13.8 g/dL), white blood cells (7.8 × 103/µL), platelets (189 × 103/µL), prothrombin time (12.3 s), and activated partial thromboplastin time (31 s) were within normal range. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF, 38%) due to akinesia of cardiac apex . The patient was immediately referred to the cath lab with an initial diagnosis of ST-elevation myocardial infarction and treated with unfractionated heparin 5000 IU i.v. and dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 250 mg i.v. and ticagrelor 180 mg per os) according to current guidelines. Unexpectedly, coronary angiography revealed normal coronary arteries while left ventriculography confirmed the echo finding of extensive systolic dysfunction of the apical segments with hyperkinesia of the basal segments resembling ‘takotsubo’ morphology . Considering the preceding trigger event and the apical akinesia despite normal coronary arteries, the suspicion of typical TTS arose. This hypothesis was reinforced by an InterTAK diagnostic score value of >70. The patient remained under close clinical observation in the intensive care unit for 2 days receiving the following therapy: low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) 6000 IU s.c. twice daily, aspirin 100 mg/day, metoprolol 50 mg twice daily, ramipril 2.5 mg/day. Due to signs of heart failure, furosemide 20 mg i.v. twice daily was added. On the 4th day of hospitalization, the patient was transferred to the cardiology unit. Therapy remained unchanged, except for LMWH which was withdrawn. Two days later, the patient developed dysarthria and right hemiparesis. Head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a small hypodense area at the cortico-subcortical site of the left parietal lobe. The day after, due to sudden disappearance of spontaneous speech, a new head CT was performed, revealing an additional ischaemic hypodense area localized at the cortex of the precentral gyrus, whilst no hyperdense area suggestive of ongoing intracranial haemorrhage was detected. TTE showed persisting apical akinesia and detected a small apical thrombus (1.2 mm × 3.2 mm) attached to the apical segment of the left ventricular (LV) lateral wall . Therefore, anticoagulation therapy with acenocoumarol per os was started, with dose adjustment according to periodic laboratory testing of international normalized ratio. At 72 h from the onset of neurological symptoms, head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the diagnosis of ischaemic stroke showing diffuse cardioembolic lesions mainly involving the left parietal and frontal lobes . Ten days after hospitalization, LV systolic function improved significatively (LVEF 48%) and the size of the apical thrombus appeared reduced . Owing to the persistence of the neurological disorders, the patient was transferred 3 days later to a neurological rehabilitation institute, in stable haemodynamic conditions. At 1-month follow-up, she was asymptomatic, hemiparesis was no more detectable and dysarthria was slowly but significantly improving. The ECG showed only diffuse negative T-waves. TTE showed normal LVEF (58%) and no apical thrombus . At 3-month follow-up, the patient was in good clinical conditions. Speech had further improved, albeit still slower than normal. No more ST-T segment abnormalities were identifiable at ECG. Cardiac MRI confirmed the complete recovery of LV systolic function and the absence of thrombi . No areas of oedema or late gadolinium enhancement were appreciated . Therefore, anticoagulation therapy was withdrawn. At 5-month follow-up, the patient fully recovered speech without any relevant symptoms.