A 40 -year-old male patient, nondiabetic, nonsmoker and normotensive was presented with the history of persistent pain along the dorsal surface of right foot, which was aggravated with the activities. Conservative management was tried for 8 months without much relief. Diagnosis of ATTS was made on clinical examination. Nerve Conduction velocity (NCV) showed decreased conduction in deep peroneal nerve and stress test was positive. Patient was planned for operation. Under spinal anesthesia, the body part was prepared and tourniquet inflated. Intraoperatively, thrombosed dorsalis pedis artery was found along with two adjacent collateral vessels (, , and ). Retinaculum was released and nerve was mobilized. No adherence with the surrounding structures was found. Tight compartment got released. Upon deflating the tourniquet blood flow in the collaterals was checked, which was adequate. Dorsal pulsation was felt too. No excision was done. Wound was closed and the patient was followed up in outpatient department. Over 9 months of follow up, no recurrence of any symptoms was noted.
Tarsal tunnel corresponds to the carpel tunnel in the limb counterpart. Tight compartments exert pressure over the nerves resulting in the compressive neuropathies. Tarsal tunnel syndrome as the name suggests relates to the tightening of the inferior extensor retinaculum of the foot. It causes compression over the deep peroneal nerve resulting in the spectrum of symptoms. Numerous factors have been described to cause this compression. Intrinsic factors mentioned in the literature are due to osteophytes, ganglionic cysts or lipomas. These factors cause compensatory forefoot valgus leading to subtalar supination and midtarsal inversion leading to the pressure over the nerve.
Distally the nerve is vulnerable to injury due to lack of protective sheath. Extrinsic factors like tight shoe laces or the external trauma can cause injury to the nerve. Edema or fibrosis causes pressure over the nerve and neural ischemia. The relation of nerve with the tendons and the vascular structures is depicted in . The little space in the tunnel formed by the inferior extensor retinaculum and the close proximity of the structures make the nerve vulnerable to compressive neuropathy. In an already small space, any addition to the structure can cause pressure over the nearby structures. The final brunt is to be burnt by the nerve, as happened in our case.
The patient had trivial trauma at the ankle, which can cause thrombosis at the dorsalis pedis artery. Over time, the collaterals had developed to compensate for the dysfunctional arterial segment and to bypass it. Addition of new vessels in the already tight tunnel had resulted in the pressure over the nearby structures, including the nerve. The mixed sensorimotor nature of the deep peroneal nerve leads to both sensory and motor symptoms as in our case.