We present a 48-year-old patient, to whom a transrectal biopsy of the prostate gland was performed in 2005 due to increased level of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) to 597 ng/ml, and the pathohistological (PH) finding revealed an adenocarcinoma of the prostate with the Gleason score 7 (4A+3B) and 80% tumor volume. According to the digitorectal examination, the prostate gland was found to be heterogenous, rough, with the size of an average walnut. Ten days after the biopsy, due to the complete urine retention, a urinary catheter was inserted and then transurethral resection of the prostate was performed.
The patient had pre-surgical value of PSA 132 ng/ml and also elevated levels of: acid phosphatase at 10.74 U/L (up to 6.6), prostatic acid phosphatase 7.7 U/L (up to 3.5) and alcaline phosphatase 146 U/L (up to 136). Pathohistological analysis of the prostatic tissue sample, obtained by transurethral resection, confirmed the existence of prostate adenocarcinoma with the Gleason score 7 (4B+3B) and infiltration of bladder wall, pT4a. Bone scintigraphy showed a clear zone of asymmetrically increased accumulation of radiopharmaceuticals in the VIII right rib, less homogeneous binding in the spine and increased binding of radiopharmaceuticals in the projection of costovertebral joint, right, in level VI. According the decision of the Uro-oncology consilium, the patient was treated with a maximal androgen blockade, zolendronic acid in monthly intervals, as well as the radiotherapy, with dose of 65 Gy in 32 sessions, which was done because of the patient’s relatively young age. After 9 years of the initial diagnosis, within the period of 14 months, a gradual increase of PSA from 4.3 ng/ml to 23.09 ng/ml was registered, with inhomogenous, slightly enlarged and firmer in whole left testis.
The values of the tumor markers /AFP, beta HCG and LDH/were within referential values, and two echo-heterogenous oval zones were identified by the ultrasound examination of the left testis, 10 mm in diameter . Osteoclastic changes in the vertebral bodies TH 6, 8, 11 and L4 were detected by a multisliced computed tomography (MSCT), but bone scintigraphy had normal finding. Left inguinal orchectomy and right orchectomy were done, and the PH result of the left testis showed metastases of prostate adenocarcinoma. One month after the surgery, the PSA value fell to 2.76 ng/ml, and the treatment was continued with Bicadex (bicalutamid) tablets, 50 mg daily and with zolendronic acid per month. Two years after the bilateral orchectomy, the patient is symptom free and in good general condition with latest PSA value of 4.22 ng/ml.