The patient was a 53 years old woman with a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus type II who was referred to a heart center for inserting an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) after a few attacks of sudden ventricular tachycardia and loss of consciousness that had not responded to medical therapy. The ICD was successfully inserted.
After six months, the patient returned to the heart center complaining of an awkward and unpleasant sensation from the moments the ICD sensed the tachyarrhythmia and shocked her. Following is the patient's drug history: Mexiletine, diabezide, aspirin, amlodipine, metohexital, metformin, atorvastatin, valsartan, and empagliflozin. Stellate ganglion block was done twice in the center, aiming to modulate the pulse rate and ICD shock number. Aspirin was discontinued four days before each block.
The first session of SGB was done six months after the insertion of the ICD. The block was performed unilaterally under fluoroscopy guidance with 40 mg triamcinolone and 6cc ropivacaine 0.25%, first on the right side and the next day on the left side in two successive days with the same method and the same drugs. Generation of horner's syndrome and unilateral block side change in the temperature of the upper limb was determined as block success (, -).
After these successful blocks, the patient was symptom-free for about two months. Symptom-free means there was no activity or shocking ICD due to tachyarrythmias. After this time, another event of ICD's shock happened. The patient was admitted, and another session of unilateral SGB was done with the same method and drugs. At this time, such as the previous time, the symptom-free period was also about two months.
Finally, it was decided to perform radiofrequency SGB to increase the duration of the effect. Before initiating the procedure, we consulted with a cardiologist. He visited the patient a few days earlier and came to the operating room at the beginning of the procedure initiation. Monitoring vital signs, including heart rate, blood pressure, and electrocardiogram (six leads) was performed in the operation room, and the cardiologist deactivated the ICD with a magnet before initiating the block. Furthermore, the cardiologist stayed in the operating room all over the time of block until the end and then reactivated the ICD again.
Patient preparation with neck extension and slight head rotation to the opposite side was done in the supine position. The skin was sterilized with betadine and alcohol. By linear ultrasound transducer, 5 - 12 MHz (Sonosite, EDGE2, USA), the anterior tubercle of the transverse process of C6 and, after moving caudally, the C7 transverse was confirmed. Then under the guidance of sonography with a short axial view, the internal jugular vein, the longus colli muscle, and the carotid artery were identified . For better screening of the vessels through the needle course, color Doppler mode was used. After skin infiltration, with a real-time ultrasound guide, an RF sharp needle 22-gauge with a 5 cm length and 5 mm active tip (Cosman, USA) from the lateral side of the probe was introduced in-plane (from the left direction for doing unilateral RF neurolysis). As we first performed PRF, which had no significant pain and irritation, we did not inject any local anesthetic before doing PRF. The needle tip was placed on the longus Colli muscle and under the prevertebral fascia. Aspiration for cerebrospinal fluid, air, or blood was negative, and 1 mL of saline was injected. A neuro-term RF electrode with a 50 mm length was inserted and connected to the generator. The RF needle was positioned perpendicular to the ganglion for performing PRF, and for thermal RF, the needle was placed alongside the SG. In the next step, sensory stimulation was performed with 50 Hz, 0.1 - 0.5 V, with no neural numbness to the upper limbs or other areas. We checked the proximity to recurrent laryngeal nerves, phrenic or the segmental nerve, which are crucial.
For motor stimulation, at 2 Hz, 0.4 - 1.0 V exercise test, no corresponding segmental muscle tremors, and the jumping sensation was observed. Motor stimulation was performed by asking the patient to say "ee" to check for preservation of the motor function and exclude needle malposition. After the negative sensory and motor test, high voltage (60 V) PRF at 42°C for 360 s, 20 ms pulse width, and 2 Hz frequency started. Then before starting RF at 80ºC, we injected 1cc lidocaine 2% to prevent irritation and pain that may result from neurolysis at high temperatures. At 80ºC for 60 seconds, thermal left unilateral RF neurolysis was performed and repeated four times after needle-tip rotation and directed to the most medial site and most ventral aspect of the C6 and C7 transverse process under US guidance, with repeated sensory and motor stimulation before RF lesioning. Thirty minutes after the procedure's termination, a follow-up ultrasound screening was done to exclude any hematoma formation.
From pre- to post-block, there was an increase in the forehead and hands temperature, as recorded by a skin thermometer, which was used as a surrogate for a successful block.
After doing RF neurolysis in multiple time intervals, we visited the patient 1, 3, 6, 12, and 14 months later, and observed no signs of ventricular tachycardia. The patient did not complain about the unpleasant sensation of ICD activity and shock. At this time, she did not have the problem up to 14 months after the procedure and showed no sign of recurrence of the cardiac tachyarrhythmia.