A 19-year-old man presented to our hospital with complaints of fever (39.5 °C), headache, fatigue, night sweats, and lower abdominal pain, which had been present for about 1 month. For 20 days, he had used anti-flatulent medications before presenting to our hospital. He had no history of close contact with pets, he did not travel often, and similar complaints were not present in his social circle. According to the patient’s physical examination on admission, his general health status was good; body temperature, pulse, and blood pressure were 37.2 °C, 102 beats/min, and 106/70 mmHg, respectively. He was alert, oriented, and cooperative. Mobile, painful lymphadenopathies were observed on both sides of the cervical region, of which the largest was 2 × 1.6 cm in size. Bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy was present and involved a posterior group of cervical lymph nodes. Cardiac, respiratory, and neurological examination revealed no abnormality; vegetation was not detected by transthoracic echocardiography. Laboratory investigations showed leukopenia (total leucocyte count: 3200 cells/mm3). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analyses were normal. No positive results that could explain the high body temperature were found during serological testing for Epstein Barr virus (EBV); cytomegalovirus (CMV); hepatitis A, B, and C; parvovirus; human herpesvirus; chlamydia trachomatis; mumps; human immunodeficiency virus; echo virus; coxsackie virus enterovirus; and measles spp. Results of tests for rheumatologic markers (ferritin, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, extractable nuclear antigen antibody panel, anti-double stranded DNA, and rheumatoid factor) were also negative. Results of tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and herpes simplex PCR were also negative in the CSF. Blood and CSF cultures showed no growth after incubation for 6 to 8 weeks. Brain T2-weighted and FLAIR MRI sequences showed a slightly hyperintense signal of about 4 mm in the left temporal lobe , and antibiotics and acyclovir treatment were begun because we could not rule out encephalitis. However, the patient’s body temperature could not be reduced by routine anti-inflammatory drugs and intravenous paracetamol. Thoracic and abdominal computed tomography (CT) and MRI scans revealed a testicular lesion having no contrast effect ; lymph nodes were predominantly located on the right side of the cervical region, with the largest measuring 2 cm in diameter. Thus, one of the lymph nodes located in the right cervical region was removed and sent to pathology for analysis. On the 4th day of hospitalization, an excision biopsy of the cervical lymph node was performed. Microscopic examination showed that the lymph nodes were expressed in paracortical and cortical areas of conspicuous apoptotic necrosis with an abundance of enlarged lymphocytes, which had prominent nucleoli in the absence of neutrophils and a proliferation of macrophages . Results of tests using in situ hybridization to detect EBV with marked paracortical expansion due to a proliferation of immunoblasts were negative. On the 20th day of hospitalization, the patient’s general status suddenly and temporarily worsened. The signal intensity on brain MRI had changed and showed an asymmetrical hyperintense signal in the wider larger left temporal lobe and both basal nuclei with slight Gd-enhancement. CSF protein levels and pleocytosis were increased (protein: 50 mg/dL; pleocytosis: 24 cells/μL), but CSF cultures were negative, and cytology showed no malignant findings. Anti-NMDA, CO, Tr, GAD65, Zic4, Titin, SOX1, Rec, Hu, Yo, Ri, Ma-2/Ta, Cv2, and Amp antibodies associated with auto-immune-mediated encephalomyelitis were all absent. Oligoclonal bands were also not detected in the CSF sample. Since acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) was suspected, the patient was managed with intravenous prednisolone pulse treatment (1 g/day) for 3 days and intravenous immunoglobulin treatment for 5 days, and these therapies were repeated 3 times every 3 weeks. Electroencephalography showed no waves characteristic of epilepsy, but levetiracetam 1000 mg/day was begun. On the 34th day of hospitalization, MRI investigation of the brain revealed that the previous abnormalities were present and had not changed. Since the cervical lymph node biopsy before steroid therapy did not reveal lymphoma, a brain biopsy of the temporal lobe was performed. Steroids can obscure diffuse large B-cell lymphoma or intravascular lymphomatosis; however, no recurrence was experienced. The pathological results revealed many CD68+ macrophages and histiocytes, as in the cervical lymph node, suggestive of KFD . The cervical lymphadenopathies disappeared after 2 months of hospitalization, and the previous abnormalities on MRI became smaller during follow-up. The testicular mass that showed a contrast effect on MRI and CT similarly was smaller ; therefore, we suspected that the testitis had been caused by KFD. His complaints of fever, headache, and fatigue gradually improved; he was discharged on the 90th day of hospitalization. He was followed for more than 3 months in our clinic and did not show any recurrence.