A 61-year-old African American male with past medical history of hypertension and schizophrenia presented to the emergency room following 2 episodes of syncope.
He reported 3 month history of progressive neck mass. Physical examination revealed a temperature of 37.7 degrees, blood pressure of 130/87 mmHg, pulse of 92 bpm, and respiratory rate of 17 bpm. There was extremely large left sided neck mass extending into the left axilla and multiple palpable left and right cervical lymph nodes. The lungs were clear to auscultation, and there was a 2/6 systolic ejection murmur heard best at the bases. The abdomen was soft and nontender, without palpable organomegaly. There was a 5x2 cm right gluteal non-tender, non-mobile mass with central ulceration and also a 2x2 cm spherical mass at the left upper back with small central ulceration. There was 2+ pitting edema of the lower extremities bilaterally. There was differential swelling of left upper extremity. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm, left axis deviation, low voltage and mild t wave inversion in V2–V4 .
Initial CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed diffuse metastatic disease of the visualized lower chest, abdomen and pelvis including superficial soft tissues, left kidney, and probable right kidney. There was diffuse confluent adenopathy and massive right inguinal lymphadenopathy, along with pronounced diffuse anasarca. There are multiple renal masses. There are solid masses arising off of the lateral aspect of the left kidney involving the upper, middle and lower lobe . The left kidney mass was described as an exophytic lesion. There was a mass along the anterior aspect of the heart that measures approximately 5 cm but incompletely visualized. CT head was negative.
Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a large mass measuring 4.8 cm x 3.0 cm extending from the apex to the mid RV cavity, and extending into the RV outflow tract stopping just short of the pulmonic valve . There was deformation of the RV free wall suggesting invasion of the myocardial wall and a malignant growth. There was mild RV enlargement, with normal function of the segments not involved in mass. There RA was mildly dilated with no mass seen, and there was no evidence of thrombus in the IVC. There was a small pericardial effusion without echocardiographic evidence of tamponade. A dedicated CT of the thorax revealed a mildly enlarged heart, and a filling defect in the RV measuring 6 cm extending to the apex and suspicious for malignancy .
A core biopsy of the right superficial gluteal mass revealed a tumor arranged in solid nests having abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, central nucleus and conspicuous nucleoli, with areas of coagulative tumor necrosis, and individual tumor cell exhibiting high-grade atypia with pleomorphism .
On immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells expressed pacytokeratin, PAX 8, vimentin and CD 10 (weakly). The tumor cells are negative for S 100, Melan-A and RCC. Immunostains for CD 117 and CK 7 were performed, however were uninterpretable due to tissue depletion. Morphology and immunohistochemical profile favor a metastatic poorly differentiated carcinoma of likely renal origin, with a possibility of an unclassified RCC. Oncology was consulted and they suggested a diffuse metastatic malignancy of primary renal origin with poor prognosis. Oncology advised that the patient should follow up in outpatient cancer clinic. Due to extent and burden of metastasis, patient and family members agreed to conservative management and patient was placed in hospice and comfort care with no further aggressive management. He was discharged from the hospital to hospice and to follow-up with the cancer clinic, although there were no records that he kept the appointments and he was lost to follow-up.