A 65-year-old male farmer was admitted to the dermatology department of Lishui Central Hospital in April 2016 with the chief complaint of erythema, pruritus, and ulceration of the perianal skin combined with cough, which lasted for 1 year. One year ago, patient had perianal erythema, accompanied by pruritus, ulceration, exudation, and pain. Further questioning revealed that the patient had been coughing several times a day. The patient occasionally had white sputum, without any hemoptysis, chest pain, low grade fever, night sweats, or any other discomfort. The patient had applied a variety of ointments for external use, without improvement. The erythema gradually expanded, affecting half of the hip on both sides of the crissum; an ulcer developed at the center of the erythema. Past medical history included hepatitis B for more than 10 years, and hypertension for about 3 years. The patient had surgical history of cholecystectomy at 39 years of age and denied previous history of TB, tumor, being engaged in risky sexual behaviors, or similar family history. Physical examinations included body temperature of 36.9°C, blood pressure 133/86 mm Hg, pulse rate 86 beats/min, breathing 20 times/min, double pulmonary breath sounded rough without obvious rales. Physical examination by specialist showed a large erythematous plaque of about 20 cm × 15 cm around the anus, skin ulcers could be seen nearly 4 cm range at the perianal area, and the base could be seen with fresh granulation, and few purulent secretions (See Fig. ). Blood routine test, liver and kidney function tests, treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA), toluidine red unheated serum test (TRUST), combined detection of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies, and HIV antigens were all negative or within normal ranges. The detection and screening of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) tumor marker, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC), total prostate specific antigen (TPSA), and free prostate-specific antigen (FPSA) were all normal. Blood sedimentation rate was 50.0 mm/h, TB DNA was positive, and TB antibody was positive. Acid-fast bacillus detection in sputum samples was ++++. Histological examination of perianal skin showed an ulcerative and necrotic area in the perianal skin, and peripheral epidermis had keratosis and hyperkeratosis. The stratum spinosum was proliferated, accompanied by intercellular edema. The whole dermis had epithelial-like cell mass, Langerhans giant cells could be seen, a large number of infiltrating lymphocytes were observed, and anti-acid staining was positive. Pathological diagnosis demonstrated (perianal skin) necrotic granulomatous lesions (TB). Special staining demonstrated acid-fast bacilli using acid-fast staining, periodic acid-Schiff stain (PAS) was negative (−), silver hexosamine stain was negative (−) (See Fig. ). Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed symmetrical thorax, trachea moved to the right, and double lung marking increased and disordered. Diffuse nodular, flocculent, and striped high-density shadow could be seen in both the lungs, the edges were blurred, and the density was uneven. The partial lung tissues in both the upper lungs were consolidated and the cavity was formed. Hilus of the lung and mediastinal lymph nodes were not enlarged. The shape of the heart was not abnormal. There was no pleural effusion in the bilateral pleural cavity. Intrahepatic bile duct showed dilatation. Chest CT scan showed secondary pulmonary TB with cavitation in both upper lobes, and part of the right upper lung was damaged (See Fig. ). The results of abdominal enhanced CT showed intrahepatic bile duct dilatation and pneumobilia, gallbladder was not shown; splenomegaly, and multiple renal cysts in both the kidneys; possibility of duodenal descending diverticulum, and a little pneumatosis as a partial small intestinal obstruction. Admitting diagnosis showed perianal ulcerative skin TB, secondary bilateral pulmonary TB with possible cavity formation in the 2 upper lungs, TB bacillus was positive (+) in sputum smear. The patient was transferred to the infectious disease department for treatment, and was given with regular anti-TB treatment, which included isoniazid tablets 0.1 g/time, 3 times/day; rifampicin capsules 0.45 g/time, 1 time/day; ethambutol tablets 0.75 g/time, 1 time/day; pyrazinamide tablets 0.75 g/time, 2 times/day. The patient was discharged after 8 days of hospital treatment. M. tuberculosis in sputum smear was negative (−) at the time of discharge. Flushing and exudation of perianal skin were better than before. The patient was recommended to take regular anti-TB drugs for 6 months after discharge. After 6 months of discharge, the patient was followed up through telephone and replied that the ulcer had healed.