A 38-year-old woman from Hunan Province, China presented with stiffness of the left hip in abduction, flexion, and external rotation after falling from a 2-meter-tall tree on her left knee 1.5 mo prior.
Pain and swelling of the left knee, and fixed abduction and flexion of the left hip occurred immediately after falling. Rather than going to the hospital, the patient applied a traditional Chinese medicine herbal ointment of unknown composition. The left knee improved within 2 wk but the left hip remained stiff, so she could only walk with the aid of a stick. Due to the lack of improvement in the left hip, an X-ray was performed at a local clinic at 1.5 mo after the fall, which showed dislocation of her left hip. She was subsequently transferred to our hospital.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
The patient experienced compensatory scoliosis to the left, and the pelvis was lower on the left side. The left hip showed elastic fixation in 40° of flexion, 45° of abduction, and 30° of external rotation . The pressure point was examined near the hip joint, and the range of motion of the hip was limited. The Trendelenburg test was positive. The patient could only walk with the aid of a stick and was not able to load any weight on her left leg. The neurovascular status of the left leg was good.
Radiographs at admission revealed dislocation of the left hip and femoral head impaction fracture without any injury of the left knee . Computed tomography showed obturator hip dislocation. The femoral head shifted to the inferior and anterior side of the obturator foramen, with impaction fracture at the superolateral aspect of the left femoral head without associated fracture of the acetabulum .
The treatment options for old unreduced obturator dislocation of the left hip and impaction fracture of the ipsilateral femoral head were discussed with the patient. She decided to undergo open reduction only, and refused further intervention such as bone grafting or total hip arthroplasty because of her low income, even though she was informed that the incidence of posttraumatic arthritis and avascular necrosis would be high with treatment by delayed reduction alone.
The surgery was performed 3 d after admission. After general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the supine position on a radiolucent operating table and the left leg was prepared and draped freely. Open reduction for obturator hip dislocation was performed using the Smith-Peterson approach. Intraoperatively, the femoral head was locked with the superior ramus of the pubis and embedded in the pelvis, so a subtrochanteric Schanz screw parallel to the femoral neck was used as a joystick to help unlock and reduce the femoral head. The acetabulum was completely filled with fibrous tissue, which was separated and removed. After reduction, the anterosuperior aspect of the femoral head showed collapse and articular damage . The hip was completely stabilized without re-dislocation in a full passive range of motion. Intraoperative fluoroscopy was used to evaluate the concentric alignment of the left hip. The hip anterior capsule, subcutaneous tissue, and skin were sutured sequentially. The suction drain was removed 24 h after surgery. After surgery, 6-wk skin traction was applied and the patient was kept in bed for an additional 2 wk. Prophylactic cefazolin was used from 30 min before surgery to 24 h postoperatively. Oral rivaroxaban was applied for 6 wk to prevent deep venous thromboembolism. The patient started toe-touch weight-bearing with crutches 2 mo after surgery. Postoperative X-rays showed satisfactory reduction of the hip .