Our patient is a 64-year-old man who presented to the hematology clinic for evaluation of persistent anemia, weight loss, and fatigue. The patient reported fever, cough, and a significant weight loss of up to 40 kg over 10 months. He was also diagnosed with episcleritis of the left eye and chondritis of the left ear. He reported erythematous circumferential papules on his arms and legs that waxed and waned along with recurrent pain and edema in his right face. He was treated with a course of antibiotic for possible streptococcus infection with no significant improvement of his symptoms.

Initial blood work was significant for macrocytic anemia, with elevated alkaline phosphate. Owing to ongoing low-grade fevers, weight loss, myalgias, and cough, the patient underwent QuantiFERON gold testing. Results were indeterminant, so the patient was referred for computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, which revealed numerous cavitary nodules. The CT-guided biopsy of pulmonary nodules demonstrated caseating granulomas with cryptococcal organisms. Acid-fast bacillus cultures were negative; patient cryptococcal antigen levels were elevated of 1:2560. The patient was treated with a 12-month course of voriconazole without significant improvement in his symptoms. Detailed serologic evaluation for systemic autoimmune diseases was unremarkable besides a positive anti-double-stranded DNA antibody (anti-dsDNA) and positive rheumatoid factor.

Further workup was warranted, whole body CTs demonstrated no signs of solid tumors, and the hemoglobin electrophoresis results were normal. A bone marrow biopsy revealed hypercellular marrow with significant myeloid hyperplasia and well-demarcated small vacuoles in the cytoplasm of a few myeloid and erythroid precursors. Increased stainable storage iron with rare ring sideroblasts was also noted. Concurrent flow cytometry showed no immunophenotypic evidence of a lymphoproliferative disorder or an abnormal blast population. Owing to a declining hemoglobin level down to 8.7 g/dL, the patient was referred for an endoscopic ultrasound and CT enterography, both of which were unremarkable.

The patient presented again to the clinic for a raised, erythematous, non-blanching rash which relapses and remits every 2 weeks. A physical exam showed a rash on his bilateral upper and lower extremities, with occasional upper extremity vesicles that revealed no specific pathology when biopsied. One month later, the patient was admitted due to persistent failure to thrive despite decreasing cryptococcus titers (ratio of 1:10), increased caloric intake, and iron supplementation for anemia. Laboratory evaluation via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) revealed positive double-stranded DNA antibodies (dsDNA) and positive antinuclear (ANA) antibodies, and rheumatology was consulted. Subsequent testing with gold standard immunofluorescence was negative for dsDNA and ANA antibodies. At this time, the patient was taken to Cleveland Clinic for immunology evaluation.

The patient was diagnosed with VEXAS syndrome based on a mutation of ubiquitin-like modifier activating enzyme 1 p.Met41Val (UBA1 p.M41V) detected by Sanger sequencing. He was prescribed prednisone 40 mg daily with a tapering protocol as well as 1 Bactrim 800 to 160 mg tablet 3 days a week.

Rapid improvement of his myalgias, chondritis, and rash was seen. The patient experienced profound hyperglycemia secondary to his steroids and was started on insulin. Currently, the patient is taking prednisone daily and ruxolitinib 10 mg daily.