We present the case of an 81-year-old male patient with a history of a CABG using the RGEA. He had a past medical history of diabetes mellitus and the lower extremity arteriosclerosis obliterans. Preoperative enhanced computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed an enlarged hepatic tumor and a patent RGEA graft was observed on the left lobe of the liver . Subsequent liver biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma as a consequence of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. The tumor was located near the bifurcation of the anterior and posterior hepatic branches , warranting a right hepatectomy. As the percentage of the remaining liver was only 41%, preoperative transhepatic portal vein embolization (PTPE) was initially performed to promote enlargement of the left lobe. This procedure increased the proportion of the remaining liver to 45%, after which an open right hepatectomy was planned. The Child-Pugh classification, which reflects preoperative liver function, was A (5 points), and the indocyanine green(ICG) retention test after 15 minuets was 1.0%.
A median skin incision with right transverse extension was performed. A wound protector was not used to prevent potential damage to the RGEA. The RGEA graft coursed past the ventral side of the stomach to the left of the hepatic falciform ligament and proceeded along the ventral side of the liver into the heart. The RGEA graft tightly adhered to the falciform ligament, meticulously separated from the liver’s surface, and was secured . The RGEA graft was taped, taking the utmost care not only to prevent any intraoperative damage but also to ensure that no unnecessary tension was applied.
Following the detachment of the RGEA graft from the liver, a right hepatectomy was performed . The left lobe was retracted to the new space of the right temporal side, which might have exerted tension on the RGEA graft; therefore, the falciform ligament was anchored to the abdominal wall . Consequently, traction on the RGEA graft was avoided. No cardiac events occurred during the right hepatectomy, with a total intraoperative blood loss of 175 ml over a total operative time of 268 min. The resected specimen weighed 600 g, and the tumor measured 6.0 × 5.0 cm. Histopathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma . Continuous preoperative heparin was administered to ensure optimal circulation through the RGEA graft. Heparin was discontinued 6 h before surgery and resumed the day following the procedure. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, except that diuretics were started due to ascites. The patient was discharged on the 19th postoperative day. One and a half years after the surgery, the patient showed no recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma or cardiovascular events.