A 57-year-old female (body height 156 cm; body weight 64 kg) was referred to our hospital due to abdominal pain caused by a large uterine myoma. Nine years prior, she was diagnosed with polycythemia and an increased erythropoietin level , although she was asymptomatic. At that time, the erythropoietin level soon began decreasing slightly without medication, and thus, the follow-up was completed. However, at the time of admission to our hospital, the patient’s blood test results had worsened. Although she did not report any symptoms other than abdominal pain and her activity level was not impeded, blood tests showed a relatively high level of erythropoietin and a remarkably high level of hemoglobin. Levels of hemoglobin and erythropoietin were 21.9 g/dl (normal 11.5–15 g/dl) and 23.2 IU/ml (normal 4.2–23.7 IU/ml), respectively . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a large uterine myoma measuring 25 cm in diameter. Therefore, she was suspected to have an erythropoietin-producing uterine myoma. There were no apparent symptoms of arterial or venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolism, which were ruled out by contrast computed tomography. Platelet count, coagulation test results, fibrinogen levels, and D-dimer levels were within normal ranges.
Prior to abdominal total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, phlebotomy was scheduled to treat polycythemia; this reduced the risk of arterial and venous thrombosis. The patient was phlebotomized, 300 ml once a week, for up to 3 weeks without any complications. Despite the phlebotomy, hemoglobin levels remained high ; thus, isovolemic hemodilution was planned to be performed immediately following anesthesia induction.
Following placement of an epidural catheter into the epidural space at Th12/L1, general anesthesia was induced with 120 mg propofol, 0.1 mg fentanyl, and 50 mg rocuronium; it was maintained with 1.5% sevoflurane, 0.25 μg/kg/min remifentanil, and 10 mg rocuronium per 30 min. Electrocardiogram, bispectral index, end-tidal CO2, body temperature, and SpO2 were monitored during the surgery. Following induction of general anesthesia, an arterial 22 G catheter was placed in the radial artery, from which approximately 800 ml of blood was collected over 45 min while an equal amount of third-generation 6% hydroxyethyl starch (HES) 130/0.4/9 was infused from a peripheral venous 18 G catheter. As a result, the hemoglobin level dropped to 13.9 g/dl . The surgery was performed with a total blood loss of 285 ml. During surgery, the infusion mainly comprised acetic acid Ringer’s solution and HES 130/0.4/9; the total infusion volume was 3600 ml. Determination of the infusion volume was based on cardiac and stroke volume indexes, measured with a FloTrac™/Vigileo™ system (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA; SVVFloTrac). The patient’s urine volume was 590 ml. At the end of the surgery, the hemoglobin level was within the normal range ; thus, transfusion of autologous blood was not needed. Shortly after the end of the surgery, the trachea was uneventfully extubated, and the patient was transferred to the high care unit.
On postoperative day (POD) 2, following removal of the epidural catheter, a daily subcutaneous injection of fondaparinux 2.5 mg was initiated and continued for 5 days to prevent deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. The postoperative course was uneventful, and there were no symptoms of thrombosis or bleeding. Continuous epidural analgesia with 0.25% levobupivacaine at a rate of 5 ml/h was performed postoperatively, and the patient did not report severe pain. Hemoglobin levels remained within the normal range, and the erythropoietin level dropped dramatically . Pathological examination confirmed the production of erythropoietin from the tumor cell as well as the diagnosis of erythropoietin-producing uterine myoma .