A 74 year-old Caucasian woman with complete heart block had dual chamber pacemaker implanted in 1990. Her initial system included a Medtronic 4504 passive fixation atrial lead and a Medtronic 4004 passive fixation ventricular lead. She subsequently underwent replacement of her pulse generator in 1998 and insertion of a new Medtronic 5568 active fixation atrial lead and a Medtronic 4068 ventricular leads in August 2003 due to lead failure. She underwent a subsequent generator change in June 2011. The original atrial and ventricular leads were abandoned when the new leads were added in 2003. All procedures had been undertaken at a referring institution and she had not had any prior open-heart surgical procedures. The patient presented at her home hospital with a swollen and erythematous pacemaker pocket in February 2014. Blood cultures did not grow any bacterial or fungal organisms. A trans-esophageal echocardiogram was performed to assess for vegetations on the leads. No vegetations were identified, but there was suspicion that one her atrial lead was extravascular. She underwent chest computerized tomographic imaging and this study revealed that one of her right atrial lead tips was approximately 2 cm within the pericardial space . The patient was treated with vancomycin and ceftriaxone based on a diagnosis of suspected pacemaker pocket infection. She underwent pacemaker pocket exploration and debridement, but extraction was not undertaken due to the increased risks involved with the lead being extra-vascular. No organism was identified from samples of fluid cultured during that initial debridement procedure. Despite that debridement procedure and prolonged antibiotics there was clinical recurrence of the infection and the patient was subsequently transferred to our center for complex lead extraction.
To minimize the risk of vascular disruption and tamponade given the chronic right atrial lead perforation, a combined transvenous and open surgical extraction approach was undertaken. Using a dedicated hybrid operating theatre with cardiopulmonary bypass support if necessary, midline sternotomy was performed. Dense adhesions were found within the pericardial space consistent with likely prior pericarditis. Given the location of the RA lead, care was taken to leave the right atrial dissection until all other vascular structures were exposed. With uneventful dissection of the right atrium, direct visualization of the protruding passive fixation lead was obtained . To avoid the risks associated with cardiopulmonary bypass and given the good visualization of the perforating atria lead, an off-pump technique was considered using a “lead-inverting stitch”. To achieve hemostatic control over the region of the atrial wall where the lead exited, a purse-string stitch was placed circumferentially around the lead tip using 3–0 prolene with multiple pledgets . The externalized tip of the perforating atrial lead was then mobilized by cutting a rim of surrounding atrial tissue. This allowed the end of the lead to be dunked within the right atrial chamber while the purse-string suture was tightened for hemostasis . With this “lead inverting stitch”, the lead was free within the right atrium and could now be safely extracted using transvenous laser extraction techniques.
With the heart partially verticalized, the lateral wall of the left ventricle was exposed and an epicardial lead (Medtronic 4968) was placed. It was then tunnelled through the subcutaneous tissue above the rectus sheath, secured and connected to the new pacemaker. The new pacemaker was then placed in a newly created pocket, below the left costal margin. The sternotomy wound was covered with sterile surgical towels.
The infected pacemaker pocket was then opened and direct visualization confirmed the presence of a small amount of murky fluid. This fluid was sent for culture. The pocket was then extensively debrided and the four transvenous pacemaker leads were prepared for complex extraction in a standard manner beginning with retraction of the distal screw to facilitate separation of the active fixation lead tip from the myocardium interface during laser extraction. A purse string suture was subsequently positioned along the pectoral muscle around each lead at its insertion site to avoid any significant bleeding when the leads are completely removed. The lumen of each lead was then probed for patency with a standard stylet to ensure that a lead-locking-stylet can be utilized and advanced deep into the lead lumen for adequate gripping during the extraction process. Appropriate sizing of each lumen and distal delivery of the locking stylets was subsequently performed. A long silk suture thread was then tied to the outside of the lead near its insertion site, extended along the length of the lead, and tied to its end to provide further support along with the lead-locking-stylet when applying traction on the lead during laser extraction. Now that the leads have been prepared, transvenous lead extraction with a #14 French laser sheath was attempted. Due to the presence of multiple biding sites, up-sizing to a #16 laser sheath was required along with the use of a less compliant outer sheath (Visi-sheath). All the leads were removed entirely, with the perforating atrial lead removed last. There was no hemodynamic compromise throughout the procedure and no mechanical complications related to the procedure. The “lead inverting stitch” retained its integrity and hemostasis was preserved throughout the transvenous lead extraction.
Following successful lead extraction, the median sternotomy and old pacemaker pocket incisions were closed in a standard fashion and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for post-operative monitoring. The total procedure time from incision to wound closure was 5 hours and 24 minutes. Post-operative course was complicated with hypoxia secondary to atelectasis and aspiration pneumonia that resolved after 5 days. The patient was discharged back to her home hospital for ongoing rehabilitation.