A 66-year-old man presented with 1-month history of bloody stool and anal pain. His history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, hyperuricemia, traffic trauma, and postoperative right inguinal hernia. He had no history of smoking. The histopathologic evaluation of the biopsy specimen obtained with colonoscopy led to the diagnosis of moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma of the anal canal. The diagnosis was Stage IVa with lymph node and liver metastases (T3, N3 [#263L], M1a [H1]) based on evaluation with computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging . RAS and BRAF gene status were wild type. MSI test was performed postrecurrence and was negative.
After six cycles of systemic chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan (FOLFOXIRI) plus bevacizumab, clinical CR and clinical near-CR were detected in the liver metastatic lesion and the primary tumor, respectively, and surgery was planned . Robot-assisted laparoscopic perineal rectal amputation and left-sided lymph node dissection were performed with no postoperative complications. Pathological diagnosis was ypT0, N0, M0 ypStage0. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered, and the patient was evaluated every 3 months in the outpatient clinic.
Computed tomography performed during 1-year postoperative follow-up revealed thickening of the left bladder wall , requiring cystoscopy, which revealed no significant findings. Repeat cystoscopy was performed 6 months later because of the worsening of the left bladder wall thickening detected by computed tomography . The deformity in the left bladder wall, which was biopsied by transurethral resection, was diagnosed as metastasis of anal cancer. The histopathologic examination of the resected tissue revealed that the tumor cells had invaded the lymphatic vessels of the bladder. The tumor cells did not invade venous vessels, and histology of this tumor was similar to rectal cancer, which is a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma . After two cycles of systemic chemotherapy with FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab, partial resection of the small intestine was performed because of the difficulty in resolving obstruction of the small intestine with conservative therapy . The evaluation of the resected small intestine revealed lymphogenous invasion of the muscularis mucosa and subserosa of all sections, although tumor formation in intestinal mucosa were not observed .
After excluding oxaliplatin, which had to be discontinued due to allergic reaction, the chemotherapy regimen was continued for approximately 10 months. However, ten months after the first surgery for small bowel obstruction, skin nodules extending from the lower abdomen to the thighs were observed ; the nodules gradually worsened over few months. The histopathologic evaluation of the biopsy specimens of the nodules collected at the time of the second surgery for bowel obstruction led to the diagnosis of skin metastasis of anal cancer . Following the administration of panitumumab after surgery, the skin nodules appeared to get smaller . However, four months after the diagnosis of skin metastasis, the patient developed lymphangitis carcinomatosa, discontinued chemotherapy, and died three months later.