A 59-year-old right-handed Japanese woman had difficulty in writing Kanji. She could neither recognize forms of the Kanji characters clearly nor write them. One month later, she developed progressive cognitive impairment; however, her social behavior remained appropriate.
A neurological examination performed two months after the disease onset revealed mild word-finding difficulty and constructive disturbance such as copying simple diagrams. Hyperreflexia was present in her jaw and lower limbs. Her bilateral extensor plantar reflexes were positive, however, she showed no cerebellar ataxia, anopsia, myoclonus, or extrapyramidal signs. Moreover, neither ideomotor apraxia nor ideational apraxia was apparent.
The Standard Language Test of Aphasia, a standardized test for Japanese aphasic patients, performed three months after the disease onset revealed impaired dictation of Kanji words; however, other categories of the test were scored well, that is, dictation of Kana letters, pronunciation of words written in Kanji and Kana, and repetition and auditory comprehension of words and sentences. She scored 24 on the Mini-Mental State Examination with impairments in delayed recall, calculation, and copying interlocking pentagons.
A hematological examination revealed no abnormalities. An investigation of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) disclosed increased levels of 14-3-3 protein (616μg/mL) and total tau protein (1217pg/mL), although cell counts and protein levels were normal. Abnormal conformation of PrPres was detected in the CSF by real-time quaking-induced conversion (RT-QUIC) .
The electroencephalogram showed an 8 to 10 Hz basic wave pattern with no periodic discharges. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse hyperintensity in the bilateral cerebral cortices of the parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes . Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) scans, evaluated using the easy z-score imaging system, displayed hypoperfusion in the bilateral parietal and occipital lobes, the left temporal lobe, and in the left posterior inferior temporal lobe . No mutations were detected in the open reading frame of the PrP gene, and polymorphisms at codons 129 and 219 were homozygous for methionine and glutamine, respectively. Although our patient did not meet the World Health Organization (WHO) clinical diagnostic criteria for sCJD, we clinically diagnosed her with sCJD supposedly an MM2-cortical type, based on the MRI findings, elevation of 14-3-3 and tau protein levels in the CSF, and a positive result upon RT-QUIC [,].
Although her cognitive decline progressed, she had lived more than two years after the disease onset.