An eight-year-old girl was admitted to the emergency department with an acute primary episode of bilateral lower limb paralysis that had begun approximately 9 h prior. There was no history of trauma, loss of consciousness, rapid breathing, fever, seizure, spasm, gastrointestinal tract losses, polyuria, paresthesia, or pain. She had a normal developmental history, normal auditory function, and experienced no leg weakness or sensory loss previously. No family members reported similar medical history or kidney diseases, and her parents were not close relatives. Her physical examination revealed that she was fully alert with normal vital signs. She was well nourished with short stature (height < 3rd percentile) consistent with her genetic potential. She had normal physiological reflexes. Muscle strength was 4/5 for the upper limbs and 3/5 for the lower limbs. No pathological reflexes, clonus, spasticity, or rigidity was found.
The patient had a history of anal atresia with a rectovaginal fistula that was fully corrected when she was 1 year old. She had recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs) caused by high-grade vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) and severe bilateral hydronephrosis. She was treated with prophylactic antibiotics. When she was 6 years old, a bulking agent was used to treat bilateral VUR. She also received tamsulosin (α-1 blocker) at the age of 6 years which was then discontinued after 3 months due to no improvements. Urodynamics were performed and suggested bladder outlet obstruction with a residual urine volume of 150 mL. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spinal cord revealed syringomyelia extending from thoracic spine Th2 to Th7 . Clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) was initiated and maintained until admission. No breakthrough UTIs were noted. After a 2-year follow-up, the hydronephrosis persisted.
Initial laboratory investigations revealed a normal complete blood count and electrolyte imbalances, notably hypokalemia (K 2.4 mEq/L). Urinalysis revealed a UTI . The electrocardiogram (ECG) indicated a normal heart rate and T wave inversions. The patient had decreased kidney function corresponding to an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 25 mL/min per 1.73 m2 . She was treated with intravenous (IV) potassium chloride, sodium chloride, and cefotaxime and investigated for possible etiologies of hypokalemic paralysis. On the third day of hospitalization, her venous blood gasses and electrolytes indicated hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis with hypokalemia and a normal anion gap. The urine pH was 6.5 with a positive urine anion gap. Her urinary pH before this admission has ranged from 7.0 to 7.5. The urinary calcium creatinine ratio was 0.19 mg/g. Thyroid function was within the normal range. Urine osmolal gap (UOG) when she was free from UTI was 1.9 mOsmol/kg . Kidney ultrasonography (US) did not document any nephrocalcinosis.
dRTA was therefore diagnosed. The paralysis resolved completely, the urinalysis normalized, and the patient was discharged with oral bicarbonate 500 mg every 8 h and potassium slow release (KSR) 1200 mg every 12 h.