A 20-year-old woman, gravida 7 para 0060, at 14+3/7 weeks gestation by 8-week ultrasonography with history of depression and bipolar disorder presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of unremitting nausea and vomiting, exacerbated by oral intake, for the past several weeks. She also reported intermittent hematemesis, epigastric abdominal pain, and mild diarrhea. However, she denied headache, fever, chills, chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitations, or dizziness. She also denied vaginal bleeding and discharge, vaginal bleeding, leakage of fluid, contractions, suprapubic or pelvic pain. She was given IV hydration, ondansetron, famotidine, and metoclopramide but continued to vomit without visible blood. She had mild hypokalemia, which was replaced with intravenous (IV) and oral potassium. She slowly improved throughout her hospital course and was able to tolerate oral intake by hospital day 6. The patient had a two-year history of multiple ED visits for the same issue, for which she was diagnosed with hyperemesis gravidarum and managed with hydration and antiemetics.
During the following month, the patient returned several times with the same complaints. She was treated again with IV hydration and antiemetics (oral ondansetron and promethazine suppositories), which resolved her symptoms. She was instructed to continue her home doxylamine succinate-pyridoxine hydrochloride and prescribed ondansetron and promethazine prophylactically.
At 22+4/7 weeks gestation, the patient presented to labor and delivery again with complaint of nausea and vomiting. She reported that she remained free of symptoms for approximately a month with home medications but began vomiting again with inability to keep fluids or solids down for the past 12 hours following consumption of contaminated food. She denied any fever, chills, diarrhea, headache, or blurred vision. She reported good fetal movement and no vaginal bleeding or discharge or contractions. While on the labor and delivery, she continued to vomit with antiemetics (IV ondansetron and promethazine). On the hospital day 2, patient was found in the shower and reported that warm showers are the only relieving factor for nausea and vomiting—concerning for CHS. Urine drug screening (UDS) was performed and was positive for cannabinoids. The patient was informed that this was possibly related to her cannabis exposure. She remained abstinent throughout the hospital stay and was continued on IV fluids and antiemetics. On the hospital day 3, she noted vast improvement and was able to tolerate regular diet. Patient was discharged home with promethazine, ondansetron, and doxylamine succinate-pyridoxine hydrochloride. Patient was counseled on completely discontinuing all exposure to cannabis and voiced understanding. UDS remained negative at subsequent prenatal visits.
At 40+1/7 weeks gestation, the patient delivered vaginally a live female infant weighing 3.19 kg with APGAR score of 8/9 without any complications. The mother and baby were discharged home on the second postpartum day.