An 87-year-old woman with dyspnea on exertion and lower limb pitting edema was referred to our hospital because of suspected heart failure. She also noticed watery melena 3 months before and slight fever and bilateral lower limb pitting edema 2 weeks before admission. She had been diagnosed as having hypertension and had been taking calcium antagonist and angiotensin receptor blocker. She had no history of taking statin-based medicine.

On admission, her vitals were as follows: body temperature, 38.8 °C; heart rate, 70 beats/min; respiration rate, 25 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 186/91 mmHg. Her oxygen saturation was 97% at room air.

Physical examination revealed bilateral lower limb pitting edema and a Levine 2/6 systolic regurgitation murmur at the apex. She had no signs or symptoms that indicated dermatomyositis (i.e., muscle grasping pain, Gottron’s papule, and heliotrope rash). Neurological examinations revealed proximal limb motor weakness (manual muscle test score, 3–4/4), mainly in the neck flexor, deltoid, iliopsoas, gluteus maximus, and quadriceps muscle. We did not observe cranial nerve palsies, muscle pains, fasciculation, sensory disturbances, cerebellar ataxia, or abnormal deep tendon reflexes.

Laboratory examinations revealed high serum levels of the muscle-related enzymes (CK, 4195 mg/dL and CK-Mb, 191.8 ng/mL) and brain natriuretic peptide (285.9 pg/mL). She also showed anemia (hemoglobin level, 10.2 g/dL), hyponatremia (Na, 126 mEq/L), and thyroidal dysfunction (thyroid-stimulating hormone, 8.3 μIU/mL; free T3, 1.5 pg/mL; and free T4, 1.0 ng/dL). Renal function, glycometabolism, and other myocardial markers were within the normal ranges.

Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm with the narrow QRS complex. The p-wave morphology was biphasic. The findings met the criteria of left ventricular high voltage without ST-segment abnormalities. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed diastolic left ventricular dysfunction (E/e′ = 19.2) with well-preserved ejection fraction (73%), along with left ventricular wall hypertrophy (end-diastolic intraventricular septal thickness, 13 mm) and pericardial effusion.

Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral pleural fluid retention and pericardial effusion without lung congestion indicating right heart failure. An abdominopelvic CT scan showed wall thickening of the Ra region on the rectum and lateral lymphadenopathy, indicating advanced rectal cancer. Colonoscopy revealed a type I progressive rectal tumor located 5 cm proximal to the anal verge and a type I primary rectal tumor located 18 cm proximal to the anal verge. In addition, primary colon cancer was found in the ascending colon. Histological results confirmed triple adenocarcinomas of the rectum and ascending colon with no evidence of metastasis.

Femoral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) sequence revealed high-intensity lesions in the left vastus lateralis muscle. A needle electromyographic study (nEMG) showed fibrillation potential, positive sharp wave, and poly-phasic motor unit potential on the right vastus lateralis muscle but not on the right tibialis anterior muscle.

A muscle biopsy from her left vastus lateralis muscle revealed muscle fibers of various sizes accompanied by necrotic and regenerating fibers along with immunopositivity for major histocompatibility complex class I, whereas only slight to mild inflammatory cell infiltration was noted around the muscle fibers. Furthermore, membrane attack complex (MAC) equivocally deposited on some muscular surfaces. The patient’s serum was positive for anti-SRP antibodies, but negative for anti-HMGCR antibodies and other myositis-specific antibodies. On the basis of the pathological findings and additional serum examinations, she was diagnosed as having anti-SRP antibody-positive NM.

The muscle weakness progressed rapidly after admission. The patient underwent laparoscopic lower anterior/ileocecal resection of the rectal/colon cancer and received high-dose methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day × 3 days intravenously) as initial treatment. Prednisolone (50 mg/day [1 mg/kg] orally) was administered after the initial treatment. Although her serum CK level decreased with the prednisolone therapy, her muscle weakness did not improve. After initiating IVIg therapy (400 mg/[kg·day]), her muscle weakness recovered remarkably. She was discharged 94 days after admission. Her prednisolone dose was gradually tapered to 8 mg/day without relapse 12 months after discharge.

For heart failure, administration of diuretics was initiated immediately after admission. During the in-hospital treatment, paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia were observed. Parallel with the improvement in muscle strength, her arrhythmia, diastolic left ventricular dysfunction, and pericardial effusion also improved.

The contrast-enhanced cardiac MRI performed 5 months after discharge revealed a spotty late gadolinium enhancement in the middle inferior wall of the left ventricle. T2-weighted imaging did not show any high-intensity area, suggesting a post-myocarditis change.