51-year-old woman with a 4-month history of recurrent episodes of oppressive precordial pain, dyspnoea and palpitations. She had coronary risk factors (hypertension, dyslipidaemia and smoking 15 packs/year), but no cardiovascular history. She was febrile (36 °C), with a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, heart rate of 72 bpm, respiratory rate of 16 bpm.

The cardiovascular examination was normal. The ECG revealed sinus rhythm and complete right bundle branch block. The two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiogram showed severe pericardial effusion surrounding the entire cardiac silhouette, without cardiac tamponade, and a round mass of 51 mm in diameter, heterogeneous, without flow inside it and without intracardiac protrusion. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the solid, heterogeneous mass compromising the apex of both ventricles, 46 × 36 × 40 mm, compatible with a pericardial tumour. She evolved haemodynamically stable. A chest, abdominal and pelvic CT scan was performed, which did not show extra-cardiac compromise. The diagnostic coronary angiography did not show significant coronary lesions. The positron emission tomography with fluorodeoxyglucose-18 (PET-CT with FDG) ruled out extra-cardiac metastases. The tumour and the apex of both ventricles were surgically removed, with the placement of a pericardium patch. The resection was incomplete, because the tumour compromised the myocardium. The histological analysis with immunohistochemical techniques reported a primary synovial sarcoma of the pericardium with infiltration of the myocardium (vimentin +, EMA + and CD 99+) and the infiltration of the anterior wall of the right atrium presented an intracavitary protrusion (18 mm × 22 mm) and the infiltration of the interventricular septum showed a spherical mass protruding towards the left ventricle, 8 × 8 mm. The endomyocardial biopsy of the tumour was ruled out due to the risk of embolism and the poor surgical bed due to the history of previous surgery and radiotherapy. She received chemotherapy using liposomal doxorubicin and the echocardiogram at 9 months confirmed the complete resolution of the metastasis. She remained asymptomatic until 2 years later, when she died due to intestinal metastasis.
