A 29-year-old male complaining of bilateral forearm tingling and bilateral upper extremity weakness visited the outpatient clinic of our department.
His primary symptoms were bilateral forearm tingling and pain. These symptoms began 6 mo prior to the visit. Within a few days, bilateral upper extremity weakness also began. There was no improvement in symptoms for several weeks. Thus, he visited the neurology department of another hospital. Under suspicion of radiculopathy, cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with enhancement and electrodiagnostic study were performed. However, abnormalities were not found. During the follow-up period at that hospital, brain MRI, computed tomography, and arteriography of the left upper extremity were performed, but a diagnosis could not be made.
Later, when the patient visited the hospital, he complained of bilateral forearm tingling, weakness, and bilateral arm muscle spasms.
The patient was not taking any medications and had no previous diagnoses. The patient did not have any history of hospitalization or surgery.
He had no familial history of congenital, allergic, or systemic disease. The patient smoked approximately half a pack of cigarettes a day for 5 years and did not drink alcohol.
On physical examination, no external wound was observed. The circumference of both arms was not different and distinct atrophy of biceps or deltoid muscles was not present. The range of motion for both shoulders and elbow joints was not limited. The pain was not aggravated by movement.
Paresthesia was present in both forearms, but the symptom site did not match with peripheral nerve distribution or cervical root dermatome. Manual muscle testing was grade 5 throughout the right and left upper extremities except in bilateral elbow and shoulder flexion. Manual muscle test of bilateral elbow and shoulder flexion showed grade 4. The patient could flex both his elbows with a 2 kg dumbbell but not with a 5 kg. The deep tendon reflex of both bicep muscles was symmetrically decreased.
Before the symptoms began, he started working out at a fitness center. He did weight training, which is commonly practiced. However, he extensively stretched his pectoralis minor muscles. Figure shows the stretching exercise of the pectoralis minor that the patient described. Both shoulder joints were mildly extended, 90° externally rotated, and 45° abducted. Both scapulae were retracted, and the elbow joints were bent approximately 90°. The patient placed his elbows on the wall right next to the door and pushed his trunk forward.
There were no abnormalities in laboratory tests including complete blood count, electro profile, liver function test, kidney function test, routine urine analysis, blood coagulation test, and thyroid function test. Acetylcholine receptor antibody, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, vitamin B12, and folate were within normal limits. In addition, blood calcium, ionized calcium, creatine kinase, and phosphate were within normal limits.
Tables and show the electrodiagnostic study of the patient. Bilateral axillary, musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar compound motor action potential (CMAP) were within normal limits. Bilateral median, ulnar, and bilateral lateral antebrachial cutaneous SNAP were within normal limits. Bilateral median F-waves were within normal limits. Electromyography of the bilateral upper extremities showed abnormal spontaneous activities in the bilateral biceps and brachialis muscles with reduced recruitment and interference pattern. These electrophysiologic findings were indicative of bilateral musculocutaneous neuropathy.
Tables and show the patient’s electrodiagnostic study performed at a previous hospital approximately 4 mo before the follow-up study. Compared with Table , Table shows that amplitude of each musculocutaneous CMAP was decreased.
As mentioned above, electrophysiologic findings were indicative of bilateral musculocutaneous neuropathy. To confirm the diagnosis, MRI of both arms was performed.
Figures and showed the MRI of both arms and brachial plexus of the patient. Significant abnormality was not observed in either brachial plexus and distal peripheral nerves.
Figure showed the patient’s cervical spine MRI performed at a previous hospital approximately 6 mo before the visit to our clinic. Specific abnormalities were not observed on cervical spine MRI.