A 44-year-old man presented to the Department of Oncology in our hospital with a 2-month history of local pain of the left shoulder joint. He initially visited a local hospital, where magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed . A 70 × 40 mm mass with an unclear boundary, a mixed hyperintense signal on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), and a hyperintense signal on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) of the proximal left humerus was observed. In addition, the adjacent bone was damaged, and a patchy bone marrow oedema signal was observed. This mass presented a state of expansion growth and cortical osteolysis. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with a malignant bone tumour by a local doctor. For further treatment, the patient was referred to a superior hospital.
His physical examination on admission revealed that the left shoulder joint and proximal superior arm were slightly swollen and tender, and the local skin temperature was normal. Shoulder lifting was limited. The patient’s body mass index was 21.4 kg/m2. His blood investigations revealed the following: calcaemia, 3.09 mmol/L (2.11–2.52 mmol/L); phosphoraemia, 0.55 mmol/L (0.85–1.51 mmol/L); and alkaline phosphatase level, 461 U/L (45–125 U/L). The other investigation results were normal. Standard anteroposterior and oblique radiographs of the left shoulder joint showed large osteolytic lesions involving the proximal humerus and humeral head without any joint involvement . Subsequent computed tomography (CT) of the left shoulder joint showed a soft tissue mass of approximately 34 × 70 mm in the medullary cavity . These imaging findings were suggestive of a bone malignancy. For further diagnosis, a colour ultrasound-guided puncture biopsy of the proximal left humerus was performed, and a brown spongy material consisting of several multinucleated giant cells without atypia was observed. This was suggestive of an aneurysmal bone cyst .
After discussion about the choice of treatment, tumour resection with postoperative pathological examination of the lesions was recommended. Therefore, the patient underwent surgery. Intraoperatively, we noticed that the cortical bone of the proximal humerus was thin and brittle. In addition, several cystic cavities filled with brown viscous substances were observed in the medullary cavity, showing honeycomb changes. We excised all the lesions, and an autologous bone was implanted in the cavity. Subsequently, proper internal fixations were installed to stabilise the bone . A postoperative pathological examination was performed again, and the findings were suggestive of a malignant fibrous histiocytoma of the left humerus . Systemic radionuclide bone scanning was performed to further exclude other bone diseases as the pre- and postoperative diagnoses differed. It showed active metabolism of the superior part of the left humerus, sternum, and left femoral neck . CT revealed multiple osteolytic lesions in the sternum and left femoral neck .
Due to the limited diagnostic level in our hospital, we sent the pathological sections and clinical data to the Department of Pathology of the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University; the suggested diagnosis was brown tumour. They suggested we perform further parathyroid function tests. His blood PTH level was 577 pg/ml (15–65 pg/ml). Colour Doppler ultrasonography of the parathyroid gland showed that the left dorsal thyroid was hypoechogenic, 17 × 12 mm, with unclear boundaries and an irregular shape, which was considered as a parathyroid adenoma . Ultimately, the confirmed diagnosis was a brown tumour caused by PHPT.
Regarding the treatment of PHPT, the patient was transferred to the Department of Otolaryngology for surgery. The left parathyroid adenoma was removed by axillary endoscopic resection. Intraoperatively, 20 × 10 mm solid yellow nodules with clear boundaries were observed at the left dorsal lobe of the thyroid gland . The parathyroid adenoma was completely removed after separation. A postoperative pathologic examination was conducted, which proved to be a parathyroid adenoma . The PTH levels dropped to 29 pg/ml (15–65 pg/ml) 4 days after surgery.
One year after the surgery , the left humerus lesions had healed completely, and the left shoulder joint had a good range of movement.