A 31-year-old Asian man who was a schoolmaster presented with lower abdominal pain and was diagnosed with an acute perforation of the sigmoid colon by computed tomography (CT) at an outside hospital . He has neither past medical history nor family history. He was morbidly obese, weighing 150 kg (BMI 50 kg/m2), and laboratory data showed acute renal failure (creatinine 2.59 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen 26.8 mg/dL) and uncontrolled diabetes (DM) (blood glucose level 345 mg/dL). After initial outside admission into the intensive care unit (ICU), he was transferred to our hospital and consented to undergo emergency surgery.
The patient was placed in the supine position and was induced under general anesthesia . A 12-mm trocar for a 10-mm flexible laparoscope was inserted through the umbilicus using an open technique. Pneumoperitoneum was maintained at 12 mmHg with carbon dioxide. Next, one 12-mm and three 5-mm long trocars were placed under laparoscopic visualization, and the abdominal cavity was explored. We performed LLD and diverting ileostomy as the first-stage surgery. After adhesions of the peritoneum and greater omentum were dissected from the pelvis, purulence was drained from the rectovesical pouch . A large amount of purulence was also drained from the mesentery after exposure of an abscess cavity . After peritoneal lavage using 36 L of saline, no gross fecal contamination was noted. After placement of drainage tubes into the abscess cavity, the right and left subphrenic spaces, the right pararectal fossa, and the rectovesical pouch, we created a diverting loop ileostomy. The operation time was 372 min and blood loss was 240 mL without any major complications during the first operation. He started oral intake from post-operation day (POD) 3. He was transferred to another hospital to receive medical treatment with drainage tube and wound in POD17. The drainage tube was removed in POD33. There were no complications after surgery in all hospitalizations.
One year later, the patient was seen in follow-up after losing approximately 70 kg. He safely and successfully lost his weight by the educational admission to the diabetic tract medicine. Barium enema examination revealed numerous diverticulum of the sigmoid colon. We performed laparoscopic sigmoidectomy in the lithotomy position as the second-stage surgery. After inserting six trocars, the abdominal cavity was explored. The sigmoid colon was densely adherent to the pelvic cavity, and an incisional hernia around the ileostomy was detected without surrounding adhesions. After displacing the small intestine towards the right upper quadrant of the abdomen, a medial to lateral approach for the mesenteric dissection was undertaken. The specimen was extracted from the abdomen through the umbilical incision. An intra-corporeal double stapling technique was used to complete the anastomosis. At the end of the operation, a drain was inserted behind the colonic anastomosis. Pathological examination revealed diverticula with panniculitis of the sigmoid colon . He was discharged 7 days postoperatively after an uneventful hospital course.
Five months after the second-stage surgery, we performed ileostomy closure and incisional hernia repair as the third-stage surgery. He suffered a postoperative ileus, which resolved with conservative treatment. No other postoperative complications occurred.