The patient was a 27-year-old woman who first visited our hospital 4 years prior because of pain in the left femur. She was diagnosed with a left femoral synovial sarcoma with simultaneous multiple lung metastases. After chemotherapy, the primary lesion and lung metastasis decreased, and she underwent extensive resection of the primary lesion and lung metastases. During follow-up, abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass in the pancreatic tail. Before that time, only a chest CT was performed, and the abdomen was not evaluated. No notable hematology abnormalities were observed, and tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen: 0.7 ng/mL and carbohydrate antigen: 19–9: 7 U/mL) were within the normal ranges.
Contrast-enhanced thoracoabdominal CT revealed a large, 35-mm tumor in the pancreatic tail showing heterogeneous contrast enhancement without calcification or bleeding. Lymphadenopathy and distant metastases were not observed.
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the tumor in the pancreatic tail was similar to that in the primary left femoral lesion, showing a low signal on the T1-weighted image, a slightly hyperintense tumor containing multiple cystic components on the T2-weighted image, and a high signal on the diffusion-weighted image. The inside of the pancreatic tail tumor was heterogeneous and partly showed a water signal that was indicative of necrosis. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography CT revealed abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation only in the tumor of the pancreatic tail, with no other metastatic findings .
The preoperative diagnosis was synovial sarcoma recurrence of pancreatic tail metastasis, and laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy was planned. However, 2 weeks after the outpatient consultation, she developed left upper quadrant abdominal pain at night after drinking a small amount of alcohol, and she visited our emergency department. Her vital signs were as follows: pulse, 66 beats/min; respiration, 18 breaths/min; blood pressure, 100/60 mmHg; and temperature, 36.8 °C. Physical examination revealed tenderness and rebound pain in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. Hematology findings revealed leukocytosis (13,400 cells/mm3) and anemia (hemoglobin: 11.0 g/dL).
Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT performed in the emergency department revealed ascites with high CT values in the liver surface and pelvis , and leakage of contrast medium in the anterior of the pancreatic tail tumor to the omental bursa . The diagnosis was intra-abdominal hemorrhage due to a ruptured metastatic pancreatic tail tumor, and an urgent distal pancreatectomy was, therefore, performed.
During the emergency surgery, approximately 1500 mL of hematoma was observed during laparotomy, and bleeding from the tumor of the pancreatic tail was identified after opening the omentum . The splenic artery and vein were isolated and individually ligated to control the bleeding. The pancreas was dissected with linear stapling devices for over 15 min, and distal pancreatectomy was performed . The operation time was 123 min, including the hematoma suctioning, and the amount of bleeding was 1530 mL; the patient required four units of concentrated red blood cell transfusion.
Ascites cytology was performed during the emergency surgery and after surgery, and the results were negative.
According to the International Study Group of Pancreatic Fistula classification, a pancreatic fistula of the grade “biochemical leak” was observed, and she was discharged on postoperative day 18.
Analysis of the resected specimen showed that the capsule of the pancreas tail tumor was ruptured, and the tumor parenchyma was exposed . Upon histological examination, hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed the presence of monophasic spindle cells that grew solidly with stag horn-like vessels. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells were positive for B-cell lymphoma 2 and CD99 but lacked expression of CD34, alpha-smooth muscle actin, desmin, and S100. Some of the tumor cells tested positive for epithelial membrane antigen. The MIB-1 proliferation index identified via MIB-1 staining was approximately 70%, indicating a high-grade sarcoma, and the tumor was compatible with synovial sarcoma metastasis to the pancreas . The resection margin of the pancreas was negative; however, tumor cells were exposed from the capsule owing to tumor rupture, and tumor cells were observed in the hematoma.
Regarding the follow-up after discharge, the patient has been carefully monitored without chemotherapy, because the target lesion has been previously resected, and confirmed to be in relapse-free survival for 6 months.