A 33-year-old woman with no medical history was admitted to the obstetrics department because of pregnancy with uterine fibroids. She delivered naturally without anesthesia. This was the patient’s first delivery. She had no hypertension during pregnancy, but the systolic blood pressure sometimes exceeded 150 mmHg from the fourth postpartum day onward. She was discharged on the fifth postpartum day (the first day of sickness) with a morning blood pressure of 158/82 mmHg. Upon returning home, the patient experienced a mild headache. At approximately 22:00 that night, 10 min after getting into bed, she suddenly felt chills and had a severe, pulsating headache that peaked in approximately 10 s. Nausea was accompanied by headache, but there were no scintillating scotomas or ophthalmic symptoms. Her blood pressure was 159/100 mmHg. The headache resolved in the standing position but worsened and became unbearable within a few seconds when she was in the supine position. Therefore, she was unable to lie down all night. The following day, the patient visited our hospital. Her blood pressure was 156/110 mmHg at the time of examination. Acetaminophen and diazepam did not improve the headache, and she was admitted on the same day.
On admission, her body temperature was 35.6 °C, and her blood pressure was 178/110 mmHg. No abnormalities were found upon physical examination of the chest or abdomen. Consciousness was clear, and there were no neurological symptoms, including nuchal rigidity. Laboratory findings showed a white blood cell count of 7390/µl, C-reactive protein 0.94 mg/dl, and no anemia. Liver and renal function were normal, and electrolyte levels were within the normal range. D-dimer was elevated at 8.1 µg/ml, but there was no other abnormality in the coagulation system. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the brain on admission (day 2) at the time of headache relief showed no abnormalities, and computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed no vascular stenosis or venous occlusion .
After admission, the headache pulsated over the entire head and became extremely severe within 10 s in the supine position. The headache resolved within a few seconds in the standing or sitting position but did not disappear. Headache intensity was variable and exacerbated for approximately 10 min/h. Scintillating scotomas were not observed. One hour after nifedipine administration, the headache decreased, and she was able to sleep in a sitting position for a short time on day 2. On the third day after discharge, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no direct thrombosed vein sign and no other abnormalities , but magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed poor visualization of peripheral arteries . We suspected RCVS and prescribed verapamil 120 mg/day (in three divided doses). After taking verapamil at night, her headache resolved approximately 1 h later and she was able to lie in a supine position. On day 4, she experienced a thunderclap headache preceded by chills when she got to bed; however, she did not experience any subsequent thunderclap headache. On day 10, brain MRA showed diffuse and segmental stenoses in the bilateral middle and posterior cerebral arteries and basilar artery. Thereafter, she experienced a mild headache once a week for several hours; however, the headache did not exacerbate in the supine position. The headaches completely disappeared by day 42. MRA performed on day 43 showed an improvement in vascular stenosis. Verapamil was discontinued on day 62; however, the headache did not relapse.