A 49-year-old immunocompetent Caucasian woman presented with a 3 week history of fever, shivers, breathlessness and weakness. These symptoms started 2 days after she returned from a trip to South Africa and Zambia, which included a visit to Kruger National Park. During this period, she had been fully compliant with anti-malarial prophylaxis (Malarone). She complained of headaches and light-headedness, which were worse in the evenings and substantially impaired her ability to concentrate.
On the first day of symptoms she noticed a painful swelling in the right side of her groin, which gradually increased in size. A large lesion on her left lower abdomen was also observed, which evolved from an initial 'white head' to reveal an eschar that gradually increased in size . On the next 2 weeks several vesicular skin lesions emerged on her legs, right arm and abdomen. She manifested profound anorexia and discomfort in the left hypochondrium. Musculoskeletal pain and insomnia were very prominent at this stage.
When seen at our hospital, a left lower abdominal wall tache noire lesion was noted. In addition, there were 20 small vesicular lesions on her trunk, and she had right sided painful inguinal lymphadenopathy. Routine bloods were all normal and malarial films were negative. C-reactive protein was slightly raised at 29. Blood samples were collected for serological studies on initial presentation and 2 weeks later . A working diagnosis of African tick bite fever was made and the patient was started on doxycycline 100 mg twice daily. On the 3rd day of treatment new skin lesions on both her lower limbs were observed, fever and lassitude persisted and new visual floaters occurred. Therapy was switched to ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily. She responded within 24 hours and her symptoms resolved completely after 7 days of therapy. Retrospective serology performed with a commercial immunofluorescence assay confirmed recent rickettsial infection. Serological tests for individual Rickettsia species were not available.