A 46 year-old man with HIV/AIDS (CD4 T-cell 115 × 106/l) presented with two weeks of left 5th digit pain and swelling. He denied any history of recent trauma to the hand, fever, weight loss, or other systemic symptoms, but did note an occasional dry cough. He had traveled repeatedly between his native country Ivory Coast, West Africa and the United States. He was not taking antiretroviral medications at the time of presentation. On physical exam his fifth digit was swollen and erythematous at the proximal intraphalangeal joint [figure ]. His laboratory values on admission were as follows: white blood cell count 5000 cells/mm3, hemoglobin 11.6 grams/dl, hematocrit 33.9%, platelets 280,000 platelets/mm3, eosinophils 9.0%, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 60 mm/hour. Left hand radiography was significant for soft tissue swelling over the left finger with joint space narrowing and cortical lucencies with cystic degenerative changes in the proximal phalanx [figure ]. Admission chest radiography demonstrated right hilar lymph node enlargement with multiple scattered nodules and a resolving right lower lobe infiltrate. Computed tomography scan of the chest revealed multiple pulmonary nodules [figure ], necrotic lymph nodes, and splenomegaly. The patient underwent incision, drainage, and biopsy of the affected finger. Operative findings were significant for purulent, mottled, soft, yellow bone.
Rare acid-fast bacilli were demonstrated on biopsy of the both phalanx and synovial fluid samples [figure ]. We used the Gen-PROBE® Amplified Mycobacterium tuberculosis Direct Test which employs a transcription-mediated amplification and hybridization protection assay to qualitatively detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Several weeks later cultures of all surgical material grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis [figure ]. Multiple Ziehl-Neelsen stains of induced sputum samples were negative for acid-fast bacilli, but all specimens sent for sputum culture grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Antituberculous treatment was initiated with rifampin, isoniazid, pyrizinamide, and ethambutol prior to culture results. After 12 weeks of treatment, marked improvement in the finger lesion was noted [figure ].