A 83-year-old hypertensive man presented to the Emergency Department for dizziness and hypotension. He was treated by β-blockers (bisoprolol), diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide), ACE inhibitors (valsartan) and platelet inhibitors (lysine acetylsalicylate) for hypertension and arythmia. The patient denied any thoracic pain or recent trauma. Upon admission, blood pressure was 60/40 mmHg on both arms, and hypotension persisted despite a fluid loading of 2.5 L. A vasopressor support was promptly initiated (norepinephrin: 1,2 μg/kg/min). A bradycardia (54 bpm) with decreased cardiac sounds and distended jugular veins were noted. The patient had oliguria and mottled skin. A severe metabolic acidosis was observed (pH: 7.31; BD: -10.4 mmol/L; lactate: 6.76 mmol/L). ALAT level was moderately increased (62 UI/L) without increase in bilirubin or troponin. The electrocardiogram recorded a normal sinus rhythm with an incomplete left bundle branch block. Transthoracic echocardiography disclosed a circumferential pericardial effusion with a compressed right atrium and increased respiratory variations of tricuspidal mitral Doppler velocities. Left ventricular systolic function was normal, without regional wall motion abnormality. Contrast-enhanced thoracic CT scan ruled out an acute dissection of the ascending aorta and confirmed the presence of the circumferential pericardial effusion . A pig-tail catheter was placed within the pericardial sac using the subcostal approach under echocardiographic guidance. There were withdrawn 500 ml of blood, which resulted in a transient improvement of hemodynamics. Rapidly, hypotension resumed despite increasing doses of Norepinephrine (up to 0,7 μg/kg/min) and the pericardial drainage remained productive (450 ml/hour of fresh blood). This prompted a reoperation under extracorporeal circulation. The surgeon confirmed the presence of a hemopericardium with numerous clots in the dependent region of the pericardial sac. An active bleeding was identified at the level of the retroventricular coronary artery and of the epicardial surface which was related to a superficial laceration of the posterolateral wall of the left ventricle. The pericardium was thickened with several "sharping" calcified plaques in the vicinity of the bleeding areas. Hemostatic patches were placed and the posterior aspect of the pericardium was resected and replaced by a pericardial patch. The postoperative course was uneventful. On day 2, vasopressors were stopped and the patient was successfully extubated. The pathologic examination of pericardial plaques disclosed a calcified pericardium without specific tumoral infiltration or inflammatory process . No any sign of a tuberculosis origin was evidenced. One month later, the patient remained asymptomatic. Final diagnosis was a spontaneous cardiac tamponade secondary to a coronary artery injury attributed to a "sharping"calcified pericardial plaque.