A four-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) with a five-day history of severe, intermittent abdominal pain. She initially had several bouts of non-bloody, non bilious emesis that resolved after one day. Two days later, she had intermittent, crampy abdominal pain and tactile fevers. She was seen by her primary medical doctor who treated her for presumed constipation. Two days later, she continued to have episodic severe abdominal pain, recurrence of vomiting and a decrease in appetite and urine output. Upon presentation to the ED, the patient was witnessed to have several bouts of severe abdominal pain.
The patient’s medical history was significant for chronic otitis media requiring myringotomy tubes. She had no recent travel and no pets at home. Her brother at home had nausea and vomiting. The patient was born full-term by an uncomplicated repeat C-section. Medications included milk of magnesia, polyethylene glycol, and acetaminophen. She had no known drug allergies, and her immunizations were up to date.
On examination her vital signs were within normal limits. She appeared non-toxic and playful. On abdominal examination there was mild distention, diffuse tenderness, and mild guarding in the left lower quadrant. Rectal examination was negative for occult blood. While in the ED, the patient continued to have recurrent episodes of colicky abdominal pain.
Abnormal laboratory results were limited to an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count of 17.2 103/μL, elevated neutrophils of 12.4 103/μL, a urinalysis with WBC 22/HPF, and a low serum chloride level of 99 mEq/L. An acute abdominal series was unremarkable. A limited pelvic ultrasound (US) demonstrated a mass, measuring 2.9×2.7×2.4 cm, posterior to the bladder and left of midline, without peristalsis or internal vascularity . The radiologist reported the US as highly suspicious for intussusception because it demonstrated the classic target sign. A normal appendix was identified. The sonographic examination was limited due to sudden intense patient pain and consequently the ovaries were not visualized.
The pediatric surgical team was consulted, and the patient underwent diagnositic laparoscopy for treatment of a presumed intussusception with a lead point. Laparoscopy, however, showed no bowel pathology but instead revealed a complete 720° ovarian torsion with necrosis of the entire right fallopian tube and presence of an ovarian mass . On inspection, the liver, diaphragm, peritoneal surfaces, omentum, and pelvis were without evidence of tumor involvement. A laparoscopic right salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The mass was placed in an endobag and removed piecemeal through a 12 mm trocar. Hair and sebaceous material were noted in the mass, supporting the gross diagnosis of an ovarian teratoma. Pathology confirmed the diagnosis of a benign, mature teratoma. Tumor markers including beta-HCG and alpha-fetoprotein were normal. The patient recovered without complications, and was discharged the following day. She will be followed with an annual examination and US of the contralateral ovary.