A 12-year-old boy complained headache for 6 months. MRI revealed a D-shaped mass adjacent to the superior sagittal sinus and falx in the right parietal lobe. The mass was well-circumscribed and dura-based, with a size of 15 × 27 × 22 mm. No necrosis, cysts or hemorrhage was found. MRI also showed isointense with cortex on the T1-weighted imaging and hyperintense on the T2WI sequence, lightly hyperintense on the T2-Flair weighted imaging, but MRI enhanced homogeneously and intensely after intravenous administration of the contrast with gadolinium . The gray matter next to the central gyrus was buckled. Dural tail sign was observed, suggesting a meningioma “en plaque”, but peritumoral edema was indistinct. Computerized tomography perfusion imaging further showed prolonged time to peak and mean transit time, as well as increased relative cerebral blood volume and flow.
Simpson grade II gross total resection was performed in a right decubitus position. Through a craniotomy of 5.5 × 6.5 cm, we found his dural arteries and veins enlarged abnormally, while the bone flap had no signs of invasion . The tumor was close to the centerline, its anterior edge adhered to the right vein of Trolard, and the right wall of the superior sagittal sinus and falx was invaded. The central sulcus in close to the tumor was located by the somatosensory evoked potential with cortical electrode on the cortex surface, and the epilepsy wave detected by the electroencephalogram was not found during the operation. The lobulated tumor with the size of 3 × 2.5 cm had a clear boundary with many nodules on the surface and adhered to the normal brain tissue, without full arachnoid membrane between the tumor and the brain. The strata externum of the sagittal sinus and falx was removed, and the inner of the sinus was kept intact. The bone flap was returned to the patient. No neurological adverse events occurred during the follow-up.
KF-PRO serial scanner was used, and pathological assessment was performed using K-Viewer software. Pathologically, the tumor cells manifested nested, sheet-like or whorled aggregates of spindle to epithelioid cells prominently with indistinct cell borders. Mitotic count was less than 1 per 10 high-power fields. Focally, rhabdoid cells were identified, accounting for 10% of the tumor . Rhabdoid morphology was characterized by incomplete differentiation and intercellular adhesion, not accompanied by paranuclear inclusion body. Atypical features including brain invasion, hypercellularity, small cell formation, macronucleoli, sheeting architecture and spontaneous necrosis, were not identified in this tumor. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as WHO grade I meningioma with focal rhabdoid features. The tumor cells showed diffuse and strong EMA and SSTR2 immunoreactivity. Immunohistochemistry for CD34, S100, STAT6, CK and SOX10 were negative in all tumor cells. Most tumor cells showed diffuse expression for SMARCB1/INI-1. The Ki-67 index was less than 1%.
To determine molecular features and seek potential treatments, a next-generation sequencing-based gene panel (Simceredx, Nanjing, China) was used for genomic profiling in primary tumor tissue and matched blood. Except for a novel MAML2-YAP1 fusion break point (5’ MAML2 exon 1 fused to 3’ YAP1 exons 7–9) identified , no other mutations like single nucleotide polymorphism, InDel and copy number variations were detected.