A 44-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department with a 3-week history of melena and abdominal pain. She was hemodynamically unstable with a mean arterial pressure of 60 mmHg and a heart rate of 95 bpm. In the laboratory, a baseline Hb of 4.8 g/dL was noted. Supportive measures were initiated and an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, which revealed a submucosal gastric tumor without active bleeding, but intractable by this means. The patient was hospitalized and the study was complemented with an abdominal CT scan, which reported a solid exophytic mass dependent on the gastric fundus of 11.3 cm in major diameter, of heterogeneous density and a 24 mm ulcer on the anterior face, suggestive of a gastric gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST).

After the patient was stabilized, a surgical resection was planned. On examination, the tumor was a large exophytic lesion of the proximal third and posterior aspect of the stomach, 12 cm in diameter, with extensive adhesive and infiltrative process to the splenic hilum, including the pancreatic tail and part of the left Gerota's fascia; however, the adjacent pancreatic tissue was normal in appearance. There was no evidence of lymphatic, visceral, or peritoneal metastases.

A vertical wedge gastrectomy was performed with a corporodistal pancreatectomy and a splenectomy en bloc. The histological study showed a tumour with a neoplastic, anaplastic, poorly differentiated, malignant proliferation with cells arranged in a solid pattern with increased nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, hyperchromatic, pleomorphic, anisocaryotic nuclei with numerous mitoses and some multinucleated giant cells of osteoclastic type, circumferential surgical margins and a pancreatic margin of 0.5 cm. There was no evidence of perineural or lymphovascular invasion. Immunohistochemistry for vimentin, keratin and CD68 were positive. Immunohistochemistry for DOG, S100, CD34 and DOG1 was negative. These findings were consistent with an anaplastic cancer of the pancreas.

The patient evolved in the immediate postoperative period in a good way. The only notable complication was a pancreatic biochemical leakage (fistula type A) without clinical repercussions, so it was kept drained for 6 weeks and then removed without incident. She subsequently evolved in a favorable way, receiving chemotherapy effectively with Oxaliplatino, 5-Fluorouracil and Leucovorin, with a serial follow-up with PET/CT without metastases at 5 years, in good general condition and with a good quality of life.