A 67 years-old Tujia nationality man was admitted to our institution in June 2022 with a history of dysphagia, slight chest pain when obstruction, and dyspnea when climbing stairs or going uphill. Gastroscope showed that a new organism which was 29 to 35 cm away from the esophagus could be seen protruding from the lumen, with rigid wall, central ulceration, covered with filthy moss, brittle texture, and easy to bleed when touched. Then he was diagnosed with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by endoscopic biopsy. On June 14th, echocardiography revealed the presence of an intracardiac mass inside the right ventricle . The echocardiography showed there is a slight increase in echogenicity in the right ventricle, and considering the possibility of an embolus based on medical history, a space occupying lesion needs to be excluded, further examination is recommended; widening of the aortic sinus and ascending part; mild symmetrical thickening of the left ventricular wall; mitral valve, tricuspid valve, aortic valve, pulmonary valve local regurgitation; left ventricular diastolic dysfunction. Then thoracic computed tomography was requested for a better assessment about the mass intracardiac . The thoracic computed tomography results were as follows: Space occupying lesions in the middle and lower thoracic segments of the esophagus. Considering the possibility of esophageal cancer, multiple lymph nodes in the mediastinum are shown, follow-up is recommended. There are scattered solid and sub-solid nodules in both lungs, and metastatic tumors need to be excluded. It is recommended to follow up closely. Double emphysema; there is a little chronic inflammation in the medial segment of the middle lobe of the right lung, the lower lingual segment of the upper lobe of the left lung, and the lower lobe of both lungs. Right ventricular filling defect shadow, considering thrombosis, reexamination is recommended.
Overall, the mass was suspected to be tumor or embolus. Hypersensitive D dimer is 543 ng/mL and Color Doppler ultrasound of blood vessels in extremities showed no thrombus. We chose to treat esophageal cancer first after multi-department consultation and communication with the patient family. On June 17th, 2022, single drug chemotherapy of pabolizumab 200 mg + albumin paclitaxel 400 mg was performed successfully. After treatment, swallowing obstruction and chest pain slightly improved but the patient developed skin itching and rash.
On June 21st, Review color ultrasound showed a right intraventricular mass (48 × 17 mm) , the boundary is clear, the shape is regular, and the base is wide. It swings with the heart beating. Part of the echo located in the outflow tract of the right ventricle, and part of the outflow tract is about 10.3 mm wide. After the consultation of cardiac surgery in our hospital, the patient underwent cardiac tumor resection and intraoperative frozen biopsy on June 27, 2022. The surgical process is as follows: after successful tracheal intubation under general anesthesia, the patient is placed in a flat position, with a jugular vein catheter, a radial artery catheter, and a urinary catheter. After routine iodine disinfection, the patient is covered with a cloth. The sternum is incised in the middle of the sternum, and the skin is cut subcutaneously. The sternum is longitudinally sawn, bone wax is used to stop bleeding, the sternum is opened, and a pericardium is cut. The patient is suspended, and the ascending aorta is intubated, the superior and inferior vena cava is intubated, and the left atrium is intubated. Extracorporeal circulation is established routinely. After cardiac arrest, cut open the right atrium and conduct intracardiac exploration: The tumor is located on the anterior wall of the right ventricle, widely distributed from the apex to the distal end of the right ventricular outflow tract. The surface of the tumor is uneven, crispy, and the base is wide. The pulmonary artery trunk is blocked, and the tumor is gradually removed. A small amount of tumor tissue is taken and sent for intraoperative frozen pathological examination. The heart cavity is repeatedly rinsed with ice and saline, and the pulmonary artery blocking forceps are removed. No tumor tissue is found in the pulmonary artery during exploration. The intraoperative frozen pathological report is “metastatic malignant tumor.” The tricuspid valve was well closed during the right ventricular injection test, and the right atrial incision was sutured. After rewarming, the ascending aorta was opened. The heart was defibrillated once and the cardiopulmonary bypass was paralleled, gradually stopping the extracorporeal circulation. After removing the extracorporeal circulation, a temporary cardiac pacing lead was placed on the surface of the right ventricle, and a pericardial mediastinal drainage tube was placed to completely stop bleeding. After counting the number of pairs, the chest closure surgery was completed layer by layer. Return to the CCU ward safely.
Pathological examination (frozen section) on June 27, 2022 was reported: Cardiac space-occupying, malignant tumor with massive necrosis, consistent with the metastasis of poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, it is recommended to examine the esophagus. Immunohistochemistry: 35BH11 (−), CK (+++), P63 (+++). KI-67 35% (+), P40 (+++) . Besides that, the reason the mass has been considered as an esophagus metastasis is that intracardiac lesions from esophagus cancer are described in the literature.[
The second and third cycles of anti-tumor treatment were performed on August 4, 2022 and August 30, 2022. Review SD (stable disease). From September 26, 2022 to November 10, 2022, he was given palliative chest radiotherapy, prescription dose: PGTVnd: 69.0 Gy/30f. PCTV: 51.0 Gy/30f, PGTV: 60.0 Gy/30f. The patient maintained a stable weight during radiotherapy . By the computed tomography and enhanced CT, it can be seen that the treatment in the 3 months has significantly improved the patient condition .
It is pity that, due to the outbreak of COVID-19, the patient eventually suffered from severe pulmonary infection on Dec 19th. The infection rapidly progressed and worsened under the influence of various inflammatory factors. And the patient was died of the acute respiratory distress syndrome 2 weeks later.