A 19-year-old man developed blurry vision with new headaches in November 2014. He had bilateral papilledema. A MRI brain showed a large right-sided lesion involving the parieto-temporal lobes, hyperintense on T1 and T2-weighted sequences, with significant surrounding vasogenic edema on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), contrast enhancement post-gadolinium, and a right-to-left midline shift . The overall appearance of this lesion looked a bit unusual for a classical GBM. He had a subtotal resection on January 30th, 2015, and was diagnosed by a local pathologist with a “GBM”. He completed 6 weeks of radiation therapy (RT) and temozolomide (TMZ). Four months later, a follow-up MRI showed an increase in the size of the enhancing tumor and, despite the possibility of pseudoprogression, a second surgical resection was performed on June 2nd, 2015 and showed “GBM”. Maintenance TMZ was started and follow-up imaging showed stable disease .
The patient was referred to the Neuro-Oncology clinic at MCC in June 2015. Histology review showed that he had a malignant PXA grade III–IV, rather than a GBM. It had multinucleated giant cells, prominent nucleoli, and eosinophilic granular bodies on 600 × HPF, and a high mitotic index with dysplastic neurons on 200 × HPF . Histological samples were GFAP positive, with necrosis, ATRX retained, had a proliferation rate of 2% by Ki-67, and was positive for BRAF V600E on IHC . Foundation one testing confirmed the BRAF V600E mutation, IDH1 wild-type, and no EGFRviii. Other testing showed that the tumor was negative for 1p/19q co-deletion and was O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter unmethylated.
After an initial 17 months of stable disease, on his MRI, there was a small increase in the size of his tumor . Accordingly, combination therapy with BRAF kinase and MEK inhibitors, Dabrafenib 150 mg PO BID and Trametinib 2 mg PO OD, was started on November 2016. As soon as 2 months after starting treatment, there was radiographic evidence of disease regression, though it did not meet the criteria for a Partial Response because of its small size. The patient was continued on this treatment regimen for 10 months and further serial imaging showed stable disease.
After 8 months of treatment, in July 2017, treatment was held to give the patient a “drug holiday,” but, 2 months later, his MRI showed disease progression. Dabrafenib and Trametinib were re-started, and he remained stable until January 2018 when he had disease progression with BRAF MEKi. Since resistance to BRAF inhibition can be overcome by autophagy inhibition [–], we added the autophagy inhibitor chloroquine (500 mg PO daily) to his BRAF MEKi therapy. Each tablet of chloroquine contains 500 mg of chloroquine phosphate USP and the equivalent to 300 mg chloroquine base, which is the standard, maximal safe dose that is FDA-approved for adults .
Based on the Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology (RANO) criteria, the lesion size was measured, the sum of the perpendicular diameters (SPD) calculated and plotted . The tumor decreased by more than 25% after BRAF MEKi was started but unfortunately increased after a drug holiday , and continued to grow despite re-starting therapy with BRAF MEKi , at which point the autophagy inhibitor chloroquine was added halting the rate of tumor progression and even causing a slight decrease in the lesion size .
There are no reported potential interactions between chloroquine and Dabrafenib and/or Trametinib. Chloroquine’s adverse effects can be multisystemic affecting the eyes (e.g., retinopathy, visual disturbances), hearing, liver, gastrointestinal system (e.g., nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps), muscles (e.g., myopathy), skin (e.g., erythema multiforme, Stevens–Johnson syndrome), cardiac (e.g., prolonged QT interval), hematologic system (e.g., pancytopenia), and nervous system (e.g., seizures, extrapyramidal signs) . Given these side effects, we had taken precautionary measures with close monitoring every 1–2 months since started triple therapy, checking complete blood cells counts, complete metabolic panels, electrocardiogram, and echocardiograms. Overall, our patient tolerated the triple therapy well for 17 months until recently, when he complained of mild nausea, diarrhea, and a skin rash. The decision was made to hold chloroquine, while continuing Dabrafenib and Trametinib, with plans to re-assess him in 2 months.
In summary, radiographically, he has had Stable Disease with BRAF MEKi for 14 months, and later with the addition of chloroquine for a total of > 2.5 years of treatment (triple therapy for 17 months), without major side effects from the treatment, until recently for which he is receiving a drug holiday from chloroquine.