A 75-year-old man was diagnosed with gastric cancer through a medical check-up and was referred to our department. The patient had no subjective symptoms or remarkable past medical history. The tumor marker carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) was elevated, with a value of 231.5 U/ml . Upper endoscopy demonstrated a 5-cm circumferential ulcerated lesion at the cardia . Biopsy showed a poorly differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) showed a wall thickening of the lesser curvature side of the upper gastric body . The patient underwent laparoscopic total gastrectomy with lymph node dissection, and the pathological diagnosis was consistent with a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, pathological stage T4aN1M0, and IIIA according to the UICC classification . The postoperative course was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged. He refused adjuvant chemotherapy and was under close observation. The patient was regularly followed up with laboratory tests and imaging studies. Twenty-three months after the primary gastrectomy, a CT scan revealed an irregular mass near the port site wounds . The mass continued growing over time, and port site recurrence was suspected. The CA19-9 level increased to 142.2 U/ml . The patient underwent mass resection, and the pathological diagnosis was consistent with metastatic adenocarcinoma in the subcutaneous tissue at the port site . In the operative findings, there were no ascites and disseminated nodules in the abdominal cavity. Macroscopic findings of the resected specimen revealed that the center of the tumor was not in the peritoneum, but the abdominal wall. Therefore, it was considered to be a PSM rather than peritoneal dissemination. Thirteen months after the second surgery, CT revealed an enhanced mass in the abdominal wall. Furthermore, PET-CT showed an elevated uptake in the rectus abdominis muscle and a SUV of 3.1 . Fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the lesion detected malignant cells with suspected metastatic adenocarcinoma. The CA19-9 level was elevated to 53.6 U/ml again . The patient underwent mass resection again. The mass had macroscopically infiltrated into the rectus abdominis muscle . Similar to the first recurrence, there were no ascites or disseminated nodules in the abdominal cavity. The pathological diagnosis was identical to that of a gastric metastatic adenocarcinoma in the rectus abdominis muscle . After thirty-five months from the third surgery, CT revealed a mass in the left gluteal region. PET-CT revealed a 35-mm mass in the lateral subcutaneous area of the left iliocostalis lumborum muscle, which showed an elevated SUV of 9.6 . Percutaneous biopsy of the lesion revealed a metastatic adenocarcinoma, and the CA19-9 level was 111 U/ml . Another mass resection procedure was performed, and the pathological diagnosis was consistent with subcutaneous metastasis from the gastric adenocarcinoma . Since tumor cells were present at the resection margin, additional radiation therapy was performed. After each recurrence, the patient did not undergo adjuvant chemotherapy. The patient has survived 78 months after primary gastrectomy.