A 78-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital following a 1-month history of unexplained fever, thrill, weight-loss and general malaise, and a 1-week complaint of pollakiuria.
Twelve years prior to this episode, the patient was diagnosed with a non-muscle-invasive bladder carcinoma that was treated by transurethral resection followed by BCG instillations (Oncotice, Merck, USA). These instillations were repeated after 7, 8 and 11 years due to oncological relapse. The last BCG instillation was administered 5 months before admission.
The medical history of the patient further included hypertension, and atrial fibrillation for which he received anti-vitamin K therapy. He was in remission of a prostate cancer for which he had received radiotherapy and anti-androgen therapy 4 years earlier.
On admission, clinical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory workup revealed inflammation (CRP elevated at 5.7 mg/dL), hematuria and leucocyturia. Urine culture was positive for Escherichia coli and cefuroxime antibiotherapy was initiated according to the drug susceptibility profile.
As fever was persisting 72 h after initiation of antibiotic therapy, a urinary tract ultrasound (US) was performed in order to exclude an obstacle or an abcess. US revealed a large abdominal aortic aneurysm, which was subsequently confirmed by computed tomography (CT). The size of the aneurysm was measured at 7 × 7 × 7.3 cm and located in the infra-renal region . This image was not present on a CT performed 3 years earlier. Antibiotic therapy was stopped and blood cultures were collected.
Four days after admission, the patient fell during the night. A second abdominal CT revealed a large retroperitoneal hematoma but no sign of rupture was observed. After multi-disciplinary discussion, the patient underwent surgery. Perioperative samples were sent to the bacteriology laboratory for conventional and mycobacterial cultures.
Direct smear of the aneurysm was positive for acid-fast bacilli. Direct PCR was not performed, as current Belgian guidelines do not recommend to perform this test on non-pulmonary samples. Both liquid cultures (MGIT, Becton–Dickinson, Baltimore, MD, USA) and solid cultures (Löwenstein-Jensen media, Beckton Dickison, Baltimore, MD, USA) were positive. Following internal procedures and the manufacturer’s instructions, rapid identification of the positive mycobacterial culture was performed using the BD MGIT TBc Identification Test© (Beckton Dickinson Diagnostic, USA), an immunochromatographic assay based on the detection of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis MPB 64 antigen. The result was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. After review of the medical record, BCGosis was suspected, and the PCR-based Xpert MTB/Rif assay (Cepheid, USA) was performed on the positive culture and gave a positive result for M. tuberculosis complex. M.bovis BCG identification was later confirmed by the Belgian national reference center which performed a second PCR targeting CSB and RD1 .
Management of M. bovis mycotic aneurysms include both surgical replacement with an aortic graft material and 9–12 months antimycobacterial therapy including isoniazid, rifampicine and ethambutol . Pyrazinamide is not used due to intrinsic resistance of M. bovis to this drug. Antimycobacterial therapy decreases the risk of relapse following surgery .
As a result, anti-tuberculosis therapy with rifampicine, ethambutol, isoniazide and pyrazinamide was started in our patient. Pyrazinamide was discontinued upon definitive identification of BCG. After 2 months, ethambutol was discontinued and rifampicin and isoniazide were pursued for additional 7 months. The patient showed no signs of relapse after two-years of follow up. The clinical examination and the CT were normal at that time.