A 63-year-old man having received a heart transplant due to dilated cardiomyopathy (May 2012) was hospitalized at the Department of Internal Medicine in Ilava hospital, Slovakia (December 2012). The patient had dyspnoea, left-sided bronchopneumonia and fevers. He was treated with amoxicillin/clavulanate and ciprofloxacin. The left-sided hemiparesis becoming hemiplegia evolved during the hospitalization. The CT (computed tomography) of the brain revealed numerous focal changes in the brain parenchyma, and suspected infra- and supratentorial metastatic lesions.
The patient was transferred to the ICU (Intensive Care Unit) of the Clinic of Infectology and Geographic Medicine (January 2013). His pulse was 75 BPM and blood pressure was 125/70 mm mercury. The patient had a headache, cough and he was afebrile, with hemiparesis on the left lower limb. Anti-oedemotous and switched antibiotic therapy by third-generation cephalosporin and metronidazole was initiated. The investigations were complemented by MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) of the brain, which did not prove metastases and showed numerous abscesses with a strong oedema supra- and infratentorially in the posterior cranial fossa. In the quest for the brain abscess etiology, biological materials were collected for serological and microbiological tests. Blood culture was sterile. The cerebrospinal fluid was negative for any bacteria and bacterial antigens (Neisseria meningitidis serotypes a, b, c, y, w135; Streptococcus group B; Haemophilus influenzae serotype b; Streptococcus pneumoniae; Escherichia coli K1). The mycological serology, antigens of Cryptococcus neoformans, Aspergillus spp. and Candida spp., was negative as well. The pus from the skin lesion was examined by the Gram staining technique, showing the presence of Gram-positive hyphae. Native preparation and Lactophenol Cotton Blue staining of the material from the skin biopsy revealed the same observation – numerous darkly pigmented fungal elements with septa. As a bacteriological examination was negative, the samples were further cultured on Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) (HPL SERVIS Ltd. Nesvady, Slovak Republic) or Sabouraud dextrose broth (SDB) (HPL SERVIS Ltd. Nesvady, Slovak Republic) with antibiotics. The SDA and SDB were incubated at both 25 °C and 37 °C. The growth rate was moderate and it took about 4–5 days of incubation. After that time, velvety, olivaceous, grey colonies with olivaceous, black reverse could be observed . Colonies did not produce any diffusible pigment. The slide culture of the mould was incubated at 25 °C and after 5–7 days showed dark-walled, septate hyphae with poor branching. The one-celled oval conidia (7.5–11 µm×2.5–4 µm) were smooth-walled and pale brown without pigmented hila. They formed long, coherent, sessile, lateral or terminal chains on undifferentiated hyphae . The fungus grew on SDA and malt agar at 42 °C, with the optimal growth temperature between 35 and 37 °C. The mould was urease positive, growth on 10% NaCl agar was negative and colonies could grow on media containing cycloheximide. Based on these results, the isolate was identified in our laboratory as C. bantiana. To confirm this observation, we performed DNA sequencing-based identification. DNA was extracted using a Qiagen kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol and used for PCR with a specific set of primers for the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of the fungal rRNA gene ITS1 (5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCG-3′) and ITS4 (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′) (Invitrogen) according to . The PCR products were sequenced twice in both directions and the consensus sequence (596 nt) was used for subsequent blastn analysis against the nucleotide database with standard blast settings. The consensus obtained was aligned with the sequence of the ITS1 and ITS2 region of C. bantiana strain 1394 (sequence ID GQ258793), which had the highest score (1037 bits). Over 578 nt of the alignment, 99% identity, 2 gaps and 8 mismatching nucleotides were observed. Other C. bantiana strain ITS sequences represented all 13 highest-scoring blast matches. Finally, the isolate was identified as C. bantiana based on morphological and physiological features, and on the DNA sequence analysis. The sequence obtained was registered in the genetic sequence database GenBank under accession number KM525668.
Susceptibility testing to selected antimycotics was performed on RPMI medium by quantitative assay for determining the MIC (MIC Test Strip; Liofilchem). After 48–72 h of cultivation at 30 °C, the MICs of 0.006 mg posaconazole l−1, 0.125 mg voriconazole l−1, 0.016 mg itraconazole l−1 and 0.75 mg amphotericin B l−1, were evaluated. There are no standard guidelines for antifungal therapy and until now, it has not been confirmed that therapy alone can improve survival . The current recommendation for eradication of disease associated with dematiaceous fungi is a combination of total surgical excision followed by systemic antifungal therapy . Our patient received an intravenous administration of amphotericin B and intense anti-oedematous therapy. The status of the patient was not improved, retrograded neurological complications and accelerated respiratory insufficiency resulted in the patient’s death one month later (February 2013). As the death of the patient was classified as being due to systemic fungal infection, a pathological-anatomic autopsy was recommended. Finally, C. bantiana was isolated from autopsy material taken from the lung, brain and skin.