The patient was a 47-year-old male with non-contributory past medical history. He noticed weakness in the left lower extremity upon rising from bed in the morning, but the symptom gradually resolved. On the night of the same day, he suddenly developed headache and mild paralysis of the left lower extremity and presented to our hospital. On admission, the patient was alert and had mild paralysis of the left lower extremity. His blood pressure was 138/78 mm Hg. There were no abnormalities in the blood biochemistry tests taken upon arrival. The head CT and MRI showed cerebral infarctions in the right frontal lobe and subarachnoid hemorrhage in the frontal convexity and anterior interhemispheric fissure. In MRA, DAs were observed in the bilateral anterior cerebral arteries. In the 3D-CT angiography, dissecting intima was observed in the area with saccular enlargement . The patient was diagnosed with a combination of cerebral infarction and subarachnoid hemorrhage caused by the rupture of the DAs in the bilateral anterior cerebral arteries. In the left internal carotid angiography, saccular cerebral aneurysm was observed in the left A1–A2 junction . In addition, stenosis was seen in the left A2 segment and opaque vascular bulging was seen in its peripheral in the late arterial phase. Right internal carotid angiography showed cerebral aneurysm at the left A1–A2 junction . The right A2 segment was occluded and its peripheral vessels showed retrograde flow during the venous phase. The treatment plan included surgery to prevent recurrent hemorrhage and to reinforce the walls of the DAs in the anterior cerebral arteries. Surgery was performed on the fifteenth day after admission when the patient’s neurological symptoms stabilized. First, anterior interhemispheric approach in a supine position was used to confirm the presence of aneurysms in the bilateral areas from A2 to A3 segments. The arterial wall was dark purple, and the vascular diameters were irregular with bulging in one area. Wrapping was performed from A2 to A3 segments for the left anterior cerebral artery. The right peripheral vessels had weak walls and vascular anastomosis was difficult. Therefore, trapping was performed at the A2 segment. In the postoperative course, the patient had no apparent neurological deterioration. One month after the surgery his symptoms had resolved completely, and he could return to work.