A 3-year-old girl was brought by her parents to the neurosurgery department with complaints of difficulty walking for 4 months. The patient had a backward bending posture while walking. She swayed to one side and dragged her right lower limb. She also had difficulty wearing her slippers. She was not able to bend forward or sit for a long duration of time. Ten months ago, she had a history of headaches that lasted for a week. The patient also had urinary incontinence for 4 months. The patient had one episode of seizures post which she developed lower limb weakness. There was no history of trauma to the spine and no history of coming in contact with a patient who had TB. The patient was vaccinated according to the World Health Organization schedule. The patient had a history of pneumonia at the age of 1 month, following which she was admitted to the intensive care unit for 1 week.
On examination, vitals were stable. Neurological examination showed that the tone of both lower limbs was increased. Plantar reflexes were extensor bilaterally. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) from an outside clinic showed a hyperintense intramedullary lesion, on T2W imaging, from T6 to T9 . On sagittal T1W imaging, with contrast, there was a fusiform dilation of the cord at the same levels with no enhancement. A similar finding was present on the axial cuts . The scan also showed hydrocephalus. However, on examination, there were no signs of raised intracranial pressure (ICP). The child underwent a T6 to T9 laminoplasty with intramedullary lesion decompression under neuromonitoring. Intraoperatively, the lesion was yellowish, fibrous, and densely adherent to underlying cord and nerve roots. Hence, only debulking of the lesion was performed. Postoperatively, mild deterioration of motor power in both lower limbs was noted. Histopathological examination of the lesion showed features suggestive of tuberculous granulomatous inflammation .
The diagnosis was then established. A pulmonology consultation for initiation of antitubercular treatment (ATT) was taken. The child was started on ATT and was subsequently discharged after being symptomatically better. The patient was reviewed 8 months after her initial visit while still on ATT, and she showed improvement in her gait abnormalities and is walking with support. The review scans showed complete resolution of the lower lesion but now showed evidence of chronic arachnoid adhesions at the T3 level. A CT brain performed at the same time showed evidence of hydrocephalus, most likely noncommunicating in nature . This may be due to tubercular meningitis or arachnoiditis. The patient was advised to continue her ATT and was discharged.