In January 2004 previously healthy 38-year-old man was admitted to hospital with fever (40°C) and arthralgia of upper and lower extremities. He was not addicted to drugs or alcohol. He smoked about 20 cigarettes per day. Physical examination revealed mild tachycardia with normal cardiac sounds and normal blood pressure. Oral cavity examination showed poor dentition. He presented generalized arthralgia and edema and redness of involved joints. Also there was a 3 day history of papulomacular haemorrhagic rash on his lower extremities. The patient had no symptoms of respiratory tract infection and X-ray examination showed no evidence of pneumonia. Laboratory evaluation revealed elevated white blood cell count (17,8 × 103/μl) with 34% of band neutrophils and 51% of granulocytes, decreased platelet count (29 × 103/μl), slightly elevated liver enzymes (AST 52 U/L, ALT 41 U/L, LDH 589 U/L, alkaline phosphate 150 U/L), hyperbilirubinemia (2,69 mg%), elevetad creatinine concentration (1,51 mg%), mild proteinuria, leucocyturia and erythrocyturia. The initial diagnosis was septicemia. Three blood samples were drawn during two first days of hospitalization for microbiological evaluation and empirical therapy with ceftazidime and teicoplanin was started.
Nontoxigenic C. diphtheriae biotype gravis was isolated from all blood cultures. On the third day of treatment the antibiotics were changed to amikacin and ciprofloxacin according to antibiogram. Despite resolution of most symptoms and negative blood and throat swab cultures after eight days of treatment the patient was still febrile. For that reason ciprofloxacin was changed to clindamycin.
Transthoracic and transoesopharyngeal echocardiography performed on the 13th day of treatment showed two vegetations attached to the mitral and aortal valves. The patient underwent surgery for replacement of both valves. The cultures from vegetations were negative. After the operation the patient recovered. Although the cultures were negative we have supposed that the vegetations were caused by C. diphtheriae because the patient had no cardiac troubles before bacteremia.
Nontoxigenic C. diphtheriae biotype gravis isolated from blood cultures was identified and biotyped with use of morphological and biochemical methods as described elsewhere. Toxin production was examined in vitro by the conventional and modified Elek test . Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used for the detection of diphtheria toxin gene [,] and the PCR result was negative.
The susceptibility of isolates to 13 antibiotics was determined by the disk diffusion method accordingly to the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards guidelines on Mueller-Hinton II blood agar (supplemented with 5% sheep blood). However NCCLS does not define breakpoints for Corynebacterium sp. For that reason interpretation was done comparatively as for Streptococcus spp. and Staphylococcus spp., because some breakpoints are different for that genera. The antimicrobial disks contained penicillin, cefaclor, cefuroxime axetil, cefazolin, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, cefepime, amikacin, meropenem, azithromycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, vancomycin and teicoplanin. Determination of MIC (results are shown in brackets) for ampicillin (0.5 mg/L), gentamicin (0.38 mg/L), ciprofloxacin (0.125 mg/L), clindamycin (0.25 mg/L), erythromycin (0.016 mg/L), chloramphenicol (2 mg/L) and tetracycline (0.5 mg/L) was done using E-test strips. Clindamycin and erythromycin MIC breakpoints for Streptococcus spp. are lower than for Staphylococcus spp. but both interpretations showed susceptibility of examined C. diphtheriae strain. Ampicillin MIC breakpoints pointed to investigated strain as ampicillin resistant. The strain was also resistant to penicillin and ceftazidime and intermediate to cefuroxime axetil and ceftriaxone.