A 45-year-old male presented to the emergency department complaining of a cough for more than a week. This cough was not relieved by any medications. It was followed by dyspnoea for 2 days. From the patient's history, we found that he is a schoolteacher from a middle-class family. The living conditions of the family are at subpar levels. He is a non-smoker and an occasional alcohol consumer. There is no evidence of contact with domestic animals like dogs, sheep, or cows. The patient lives with his wife and two children in his home with no domestic animals as pets or livestock. Contamination of food and water are a few environmental risk factors that the patient has.
On physical examination, the patient had a normal heart rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and temperature. His respiratory rate was significant for tachypnoea with 25 cycles per minute. On clinical examination, breath sounds were decreased on the left side, also vocal fremitus was found to be decreased, along with dullness on percussion on the left side of the chest. The right side of the chest showed normal clinical examination. Laboratory findings were significant for eosinophilia (12 %). A routine chest X-ray revealed rounded opacities and a large left-sided pleural effusion with a right-sided mediastinal shift. It did not reveal consolidation of the upper zone with ipsilateral hilar enlargement or any features suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis.
The patient was hospitalized urgently and was referred to the Respiratory Medicine Department for further evaluation and management. The patient was scheduled for a pleural drainage procedure. A pleural drainage was inserted in the 5th intercostal space anterior to the mid-axillary line on the left side of the chest. 2600 ml of cloudy yellowish fluid was drained within 24 h. A differential diagnosis of tuberculosis, malignancy, and parapneumonia was considered based on the imaging which showed large left-sided pleural effusion and exudative pleural effusion on seeing the cloudy yellowish fluid on drainage. The fluid drained was sent for protein, lactate dehydrogenase, Gram stain, cytology, and microbiological culture. The pleural fluid analysis confirmed an exudative pleural effusion.
Computed tomography was done to confirm the suspicion of hydatid disease. The CT revealed multiple small cysts which are round in shape filling up the entire left pleural cavity. Left-sided pleural effusion was associated with left lung atelectasis and right mediastinal shift. Abdominal CT was done which showed no lesion in the liver suggestive of the absence of a primary foci of hydatidosis in the liver. The patient was referred to the Surgery Department for further management of the case. Preoperative antihelminthic treatment with Albendazole 15 mg/kg/day for 6 days was completed. He completed the pre-anesthetic check-ups and was posted for surgery by the Chief Surgeon.
The patient was taken to the operation room for a left-sided posterolateral thoracotomy in the 5th intercostal space. The pleural space was then irrigated with hypertonic saline to kill the scolices. Multiple daughter cysts were removed, and a thorough inspection showed no other cysts in the pleural space, lung, diaphragm, or mediastinum .
A pleurectomy and an empymectomy were done in view of infection-induced pleural effusion. After the procedure was done, the collapsed lung was expanded fully, and no air leakage was found. Additionally, there was no sign of parenchyma damage to the lung. It was followed by the closure of the thoracotomy. The patient was shifted to the Intensive Care Unit and was then discharged when he was hemodynamically stable and symptomatically better with 10 mg/kg/day of oral Albendazole for 1 year. The patient was asymptomatic and showed normal chest X-rays in the follow-up visits done monthly and yearly.