A 69-year-old woman was seen in follow-up at an outpatient orthopaedic clinic approximately 10 weeks after completing a 3-month course of antibiotic therapy for a right knee PJI due to Brucella suis, as reported previously . She completely recovered following treatment of her B. suis PJI, but noted onset of acutely worsening right knee pain, warmth, and overlying redness 1 day prior to her scheduled follow-up. She was afebrile and systemically well.
An original total arthroplasty of the right knee was performed 12 years prior and she was diagnosed with a B. suis PJI after multiple synovial fluid aspirates grew the organism in 2015. She underwent irrigation and debridement with removal of all prosthetic components and implantation of a gentamicin, vancomycin, and ceftazidime impregnated static cement spacer. She completed 10 days of intravenous aminoglycoside therapy (initially tobramycin and then gentamicin) combined with oral doxycycline and rifampin. Oral antibiotics were continued for a total of 12 weeks. On initial follow-up, she had improved knee pain, no fever, normalization of inflammatory markers and a healed surgical wound.
The patient’s past medical history was otherwise significant for obesity, hypertension, gastroesophageal reflux disease and osteoarthritis with chronic back pain. Her medications were hydrochlorothiazide, ramipril, and pantoprazole. She had no known allergies. The patient lives on a remote island in the Canadian Arctic and works as an artist. She would regularly butcher wild meat (including caribou, muskox, seal and fish) and often consumed the meat and fish raw.
On physical examination, she was non-toxic and afebrile. Her right knee was swollen and erythematous. She had a static cement spacer at the time of this assessment and was not able to perform range of motion. There was no apparent drainage or visible sinus tracts on the right knee. The remainder of her physical examination was unremarkable.
Radiographs of the right knee revealed that the position of the intramedullary pins and large spacer was unchanged with no skeletal changes, however diffuse soft tissue swelling was evident. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) had risen from normal levels 3 months earlier to 49 mm/h and 171.4 mg/L respectively. Complete blood count did not show leukocytosis or neutrophilia. Serum creatinine was 66 μmol/L. A repeat Brucella IgG plus IgM standard agglutination assay performed in the previous month was negative with a titre of < 1:40. Given the clinical suspicion for recurrent PJI, a right knee arthrocentesis was performed in the orthopaedic outpatient clinic, which revealed a synovial fluid white blood cell count of 25,330 × 106/L comprised of 87% polymorphonuclear cells. No organisms were seen on direct gram stain of the fluid.
A gram-positive bacillus was reported to be growing from liquid media culture 2 days after collection. The patient was taken back to the operating room the following day where she had irrigation and debridement of the right knee with removal of the previous prosthetic components and reinsertion of a static cement spacer with 3.6 g of tobramycin per bag of polymethylmethacrylate bone cement. Three bags of cement were used. No preoperative antibiotics were given. Once intra-operative tissue specimens had been collected, 2 g of cefazolin IV were given.
The organism recovered from the pre-operative knee aspirate was confirmed as E. rhusiopathiae by 16S rRNA sequencing at the Provincial Laboratory for Public Health in Edmonton, Canada. This organism was also seen on direct gram stain and eventually isolated from all 5 intraoperative tissue specimens. Whole genome sequencing was performed on two of these isolates using the Illumina MiSeq platform. The 250 bp paired-end reads were assembled de novo using SPAdes (v3.10.1), and the assemblies compared to sequence data from previously isolated E. rhusiopathiae from various mammal carcasses from the Canadian Arctic, isolates from domestic swine and poultry as well as wild birds, mammals, and fish originating from various locations in North America and Europe . This was done by generating a core genome alignment and phylogenetic tree using parsnp (Harvest Tools v1.2) .
The isolate tested susceptible in vitro by E-test methods to ampicillin (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) 0.094 μg/mL), ciprofloxacin (MIC 0.047 μg/mL), and erythromycin (MIC 0.032 μg/mL) (interpreted according to the current M45 Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute clinical breakpoints) and was reported resistant to vancomycin as this is an intrinsic characteristic. Four blood cultures, which were collected on the same day of this visit to the orthopedic outpatient clinic and prior to the administration of antibiotics, remained negative after 5 days of incubation. An echocardiogram was not performed as it was felt that the patient was unlikely to have endocarditis. She was initially treated with intravenous ceftriaxone 1 g daily but was switched to intravenous penicillin G once susceptibility results were available. She completed 6 weeks of intravenous antibiotic therapy and subsequently completed an additional 6 weeks of oral amoxicillin 1 g three times daily.
On the last day of her oral antibiotic therapy she was reviewed as an outpatient and was clinically well with no fever and resolution of knee pain. Her surgical wound had healed well with no evidence of recurrent infection on physical examination. Her CRP and ESR had normalized to 1.4 mg/L and 13 mm/h respectively. She was again seen in follow-up 4 months later (approximately 8 months after her last surgery) and remained well with no clinical evidence of relapse and CRP and ESR remaining within normal limits at 0.9 mg/L and 15 mm/h respectively. The patient declined a second stage revision procedure and remained clinically well 1 year after her last surgery.