A 60- year-old Aboriginal female, presented to our emergency department following collapse at home. She was on Warfarin for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and mitral regurgitation and her past medical history included hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, depression and cerebro vascular accident without any residual effect.
On presentation, she was agitated; her heart rate was 96/minute and systolic blood pressure was 70 mm of mercury. Clinical examination showed a distended abdomen with generalized tenderness. Laboratory investigation revealed Haemoglobin of 48 g/L, White blood count of 19.3 × 10/L and International Normalised Ratio (INR) of 1.7. Venous blood gases showed PH of 7.3, and a lactate of 6.03.
She was resuscitated with intravenous fluids, red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma. She had a cardiac arrest during resuscitation and Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation was performed with good outcome. An urgent laparotomy was performed for apparent intra- abdominal bleeding.
Laparotomy showed 3 litres of free intraperitoneal blood and a large haematoma involving the lesser curve, upper body of stomach and the gastro oesophageal junction. The haematoma was expanding with active bleeding from the left gastric artery and its branches. Local measures to control the bleeding in this unstable patient failed and a total gastrectomy had to be performed.
Damage control principles were applied due to hemodynamic instability and reconstruction deferred with stapling of her oesophageal stump. An abdominal vacuum assisted closure (VAC™) dressing was applied and she was transferred to the Intensive care unit, where she was stabilised and her coagulopathy corrected.
A Roux-en-Y oesophago- jejunal anastomosis with Hunt - Lawrence pouch reconstruction and a feeding jejunostomy was undertaken thirty six hours later. Five days later, a gastrograffin swallow demonstrated anastomotic integrity; she was commenced on a diet and discharged 14 days after admission.
Histological evaluation of the gastrectomy specimen and extensive sampling of the vessels revealed the diagnostic clues. Figures A, B and show SAM in the reparative phase with significant segmental disruption of the media by pronounced fibromyxoid proliferation and marked expansion of the intima in the moderate-sized arteries, with granulation tissue filling gaps and extending over the intima of arterial wall islands. In other areas of the arteries, there is often marked attenuation of media with gap formation only prevented by retained internal elastic and intima . The lesions showed only scanty inflammation characterized by some occasional sparse lymphocytes and collection of haemosiderin containing histiocytes . Focally, there was abrupt disruption of media with recoil of the internal elastic lamina, fibromyxoid tissue herniation into the adventitia and microaneurysmal appearances . Occasional small arteries showed intimal thickening, internal elastic lamina fragmentation, and attenuation of media. There was no evident feature of fibrosis and scarring.
Follow-up Computerised Tomography (CT) Mesenteric Angiogram scan 3 months later showed no significant vascular structure abnormality. Twelve months later, the patient remains asymptomatic.