We present the case of a 72-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of childhood encephalitis with motor sequelae, who presented with a 10-year history of full-thickness rectal prolapse that had progressively worsened despite two surgical procedures, namely, anal encirclement 13 years before presentation and a new encirclement associated with stapler mucous prolapsectomy 6 years before presentation. For 2 years, severe fecal incontinence associated with repeated rectal bleeding had prevented her from sitting down, had severely impeded her walking and induced pain. The patient's Wexner incontinence score was 19, and anorectal manometry showed marked hypotonia of the anal canal at rest (20 mmHg) and during contraction (40 mmHg). Endorectal ultrasonographic examination revealed no documentable sphincter lesions although the muscle fibers appeared markedly thinned. Electromyographic (EMG) recordings disclosed severe neurogenic damage to her external anal sphincter. The patient declined to undergo construction of a definitive colostomy.
The operation proceeded in three steps. First, the full-thickness rectal wall was incised circumferentially at 2 cm from the pectinate line. The pouch of Douglas was opened and about 20 cm of bowel was prepared before the peritoneal fossa was reconstructed. Once the bowel was resected a coloanal anastomosis was constructed with a 29 circular stapler. The operation proceeded with dynamic graciloplasty. Through two longitudinal incisions on the medial face of the right thigh, the gracile muscle was mobilized down to its insertion on the tibial tuberosity. Once the muscle was prepared for tunneling, electrical stimuli were delivered to identify the neurovascular peduncle. This step is crucial to identify the site for definitive intramuscular electrode implantation that guarantees an effective gracilis muscle contraction.
Second, the gracile muscle was tunnelled and wrapped around the sigmoid colon anastomosed to the residual rectum after preparing the peri-anastomotic space using two longitudinal perianal incisions. This fixed the muscle tendon on the perineal skin.
Finally, a subcutaneous pouch was created in the right iliac fossa to house the neurostimulator. The leads connecting the neurostimulator to the gracile muscle were then tunnelled subcutaneously. This entailed constructing a temporary transverse colostomy to minimize the risk of infections involving the perianal accesses that can damage the neosphincter or cause its disinsertion.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course, and on day 7 began regular leg gymnastics with a soft balloon placed between her knees. Neurostimulation delivered at low frequency began on day 20 and continued for about 2 months before the frequency was increased. In the sixth month, clinical examination and manometric evaluation showed a slight improvement in sphincter tone, that is, pressure at 30 mmHg without electrical stimulation and 55 mmHg with electrical stimulation. One year after the operation, the colostomy was closed under manometric evaluation (pressure at 40 mmHg without electrical stimulation and 65 mmHg with electrical stimulation).
Two years after the combined operation, no further recurrent rectal prolapse was visible. The patient was already continent for solids (Wexner incontinence score 9) and could switch the pacemaker device on and off without help.