A 54-year-old African American man initially presented to his primary care provider (PCP) with a two-week history of a non-productive cough and night sweats. The patient was a former smoker (~ 25 pack years) but otherwise had no other significant medical history and his HIV status was negative. Additionally, patient’s travel history as well as pet, home, and occupational exposures were non-contributory. The patient’s PCP prescribed a five-day course of azithromycin for acute bronchitis but he reported no improvement in symptoms. He was subsequently prescribed prednisone and albuterol for bronchospasms but the patient’s cough and night sweats worsened. In addition, the patient reported a 4.5 kg weight loss since the onset of his illness.
Given his worsening symptoms, 3 weeks later he underwent a chest x-ray (CXR), which revealed a left hilar mass with extension into the anterior segment of the upper lobe . A computer tomography (CT) scan revealed a 4.2 × 6.4 × 7.2 cm mass in the left upper lobe (LUL) with numerous satellite nodules concerning for primary lung malignancy. A positron emission tomography (PET)/CT revealed 18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the LUL mass with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 24.3 as well as FDG uptake in left hilar lymph nodes with a maximum SUV of 4.3. There was also FDG uptake within a subcutaneous nodule along the superior left gluteal cleft with a maximum SUV of 21.1. The patient reported that this area was initially cystic looking and had been developing for a few weeks to months but was first noticed to be draining purulent fluid around the time of his illness. He was placed on doxycycline by his PCP after the PET/CT result for suspected pilonidal cyst. Bacterial culture from this lesion yielded no growth.
Given the concern for primary lung cancer, the patient was referred to cardiothoracic surgery to obtain a tissue diagnosis. His radiographic findings were thought to be consistent with primary lung cancer at a T2N2M0 clinical stage. The patient was taken to the operating room (OR), about 5 weeks after his initial presentation, and underwent a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy with biopsies of the LUL mass as well as cervical mediastinoscopy with biopsy of regional lymph nodes. These biopsies revealed no evidence of malignancy and thus the decision was made to pursue video-assisted thoracoscopy surgery (VATS) with lobectomy to obtain a definitive diagnosis and for therapeutic purposes. The patient underwent this procedure the following week. During the procedure, the mass was found to be adherent to the mediastinal pleura in the region of the phrenic nerve and thus not amenable to wedge resection. An intraoperative frozen section of the mass revealed necrotizing granulomatous inflammation. Given this information, the plan for resection was aborted and flexible bronchoscopy with washings for cultures was performed to rule out infection.
The biopsy of the LUL mass again revealed no evidence of lung cancer on histopathology. However, yeast forms were seen on the biopsy concerning for Cryptococcus. Concurrently, the fungal cultures obtained from the patient’s bronchial washings had yeast on staining with growth of a mold on culture. These findings were consistent with a dimorphic fungus. This prompted mucicarmine and Fontana-Masson staining of the lung tissue which revealed 5 to 15 μm yeast forms with a double cell wall appearance consistent with Blastomyces . A DNA probe was performed on the positive cultures and this confirmed that the fungus was B. dermatitidis. A fungal culture on his gluteal lesion also grew a mold consistent with B. dermatitidis. In addition, the patient had a positive B. dermatitidis urine antigen. Rest of the patient’s laboratory workup remained negative including Cryptococcus and HIV serology were negative.
The patient was started on posaconazole for disseminated blastomycosis for a planned 6–12-month course. He started his course of posaconazole about 7 weeks after his initial visit to his PCP. A repeat CXR 1 month into posaconazole therapy revealed interval decrease in the size of the LUL mass . At his two-month follow-up appointment, the patient reported resolution of his cough and night sweats. He lost about 10 kg over the course of his illness but reported that his weight was stabilizing while on therapy. On examination, his left gluteal cleft lesion had completely healed .