A 53-year-old female patient who had been suffering for ten years from atypical facial pain combined with a partial facial spasm was referred to our outpatient clinic.
She presented with continuous distorsions of the mimic musculature in the region of the lower left lip, which had appeared following severe osteomyelitis of the left side of the mandible that had been treated surgically. For several weeks following the operation the patient experienced hypesthesia in the left mandibular region and skin. Thereafter, constant, disturbing spasms of the mimic musculature occurred combined with dyskinesia and deep spasmodic pain attacks located in her lower left lip region. In addition, a distinct cutaneous erythema appeared in the region of the dyskinesia .
The patient reported that pain attacks occurred daily immediately after awakening in the morning, continued during the day without any improvement and subsided only at bedtime.
There had been no satisfactory response to various neurological or dental therapy attempts nor to acupuncture. Only therapy with carbamazepine had brought a slight and transient relief of her symptoms.
The patient felt herself immensely restricted by her symptoms and was socially and professionally disabled. She had had to retire because of the intolerable pain attacks, and reported having suicidal thoughts from time to time.
During the following years she detected alleviation points in her left hand and behind the left ear with which she was able to stop the convulsions and the pain as long as pressure was applied to the points .
The patient had had no history of movement disorders such as hemifacial spasms nor of allergy, smoking or alcoholism. She had no history of medication except for carbamazepine.
On physical examination, no anatomic disorders, infections or tumors were found except for a discrete septum deviation. We observed continuous spasms in the region of her left lower lip, accompanied by an intense eczema in this region. She was able to stop the spasms and the pain by pressing the points on her hand or behind the ear.
After the patient had given informed consent, BTX-A-treatment was begun. She was treated over a period of 67 weeks with seven different injections of BTX-A at different time points.
The dose of BTX-A was increased from initially 5 units to 25 units at the seventh treatment. We also augmented the number of injection points from 2 points to 10 points in the affected area. Injections were made with 2.5 units per site (Botox®, Allergan Inc, Irvine, California; 0.1 ml = 2.5 units BTX-A). The time between the treatment sessions varied from 3 weeks to 24 weeks up to the last treatment. For details see table .
BTX-A was injected into the inferior depressor labii muscle in the left lower lip region. The seventh injection with 25 units injected into 10 points was the most effective with an effect lasting 24 weeks .
The patient was immediately pain-free after the injections and experienced other positive effects such as relief of spasms and eczema. The symptoms improved already after the first injection of botulinum toxin type A. At the check-up, three weeks after the first injection, the patient was free of symptoms and was very satisfied.
As agreed upon with the patient, she returned to our outpatient clinic for further treatment whenever any symptoms reappeared.
The BTX-A injection was repeated after 5 weeks with a total dose of 10 units at 4 injection points (4 injections à 2.5 units) because of mild spasms.
After the second injection, the patient again experienced a reduction in pain, spasms and eczema for a period of 7 weeks, at which time we injected 15 units into 6 injection points.
In the further course, the patient returned four more times after 3, 11, 17 and 24 weeks for further injections with 20 to 25 units BTX-A into 8 to 10 injection sites. Fourteen weeks after the last series, she reported in a telephone interview that the excellent positive effects were long lasting and that she was not suffering from pain, spasms or eczema.
The patient was able to reduce the dose of carbamazepine considerably.
In the course of the treatment period, the duration of the symptom-free period increased from a minimum of 3 weeks to 24 weeks. The longest positive effect was seen after the injection of 25 units BTX-A into 10 injection points in the lower left lip region.
The patient did not note any side effects except for a slight leakage at the corner of her mouth lasting a few days, which she did not find very irritating as the positive benefits were much more important for her. A total follow-up period of 62 weeks was observed in this patient.
In summary, the patient expressed great satisfaction and stated: "A completely new period in my life began" after the first injection.