A 26-year-old male presented with 1 week of fevers, chills, headache, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. Upon evaluation in the emergency department, he was febrile to 39.2 C, hypotensive to 75/35 mmHg, tachycardic at 126 beats per minute, with an oxygen saturation of 96% on 6 L nasal cannula. His labs were notable for leukocytosis (white blood cell count 17.1/nL), lymphopenia (absolute lymphocyte count 0.73/nL), acute kidney injury (creatinine 1.9 mg/dL), lactic acidosis (lactate 4.1 mmol/L), and elevated troponin levels (troponin T 0.218 µg/L, normal range < 0.09 µg/L). SARS-CoV-2 PCR was negative but SARS-CoV-2 IgG was positive. Point of care ultrasound showed severely reduced biventricular function. He was admitted to the cardiac care unit and given intravenous diuresis and inotropes for the management of cardiogenic shock (Additional file ).
Further admission laboratory assessment was notable for elevations in transaminases, procalcitonin, NT-proBNP, ferritin, D-dimer, ESR, and C-reactive protein . Chest x-ray showed opacification of the right lower lung field, a left lower lobe opacity, and borderline enlarged cardiac silhouette . Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with right axis deviation . An echocardiogram demonstrated a left ventricular ejection fraction of 20% with global hypokinesis, mildly dilated left ventricle, biatrial enlargement, hypokinetic and dilated right ventricle, moderate to severe mitral regurgitation due to leaflet tethering, severe tricuspid regurgitation, small pericardial effusion, and an estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 53 mmHg with a right atrial pressure of 15 mmHg (Additional files and : Video 1).) .
On the evening of admission, bedside pulmonary artery catheter was placed with the following hemodynamics: RA 17 mmHg, RV 36/15 mmHg, PA 35/24 mmHg with mean 28 mmHg, PCWP 24 mmHg, mixed venous O2 saturation 53%, cardiac output 3.5 L/min, cardiac index 1.9 L/min/m2, system vascular resistance of 1440 dynes/s/cm−5. Cardiac output was calculated based on Fick’s formula using an assumed oxygen consumption. Pulmonary Artery Pulsatility Index (PAPi) was 0.7 (normal PAPi > 1.0 ), consistent with right ventricular dysfunction and biventricular shock.
Milrinone was initiated after PA catheter measurements were consistent with biventricular shock and intravenous diuretics were continued. In light of his ongoing hypotension, norephinephrine was initiated to maintain a MAP ≥ 65 mmHg. Given the patient’s ongoing cardiogenic shock and rapid decline, the decision was made to treat empirically for fulminant giant cell myocarditis and MIS-A as his COVID-19 diagnosis was 5 weeks prior. As such, he was empirically treated with 1000 mg of solumedrol and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) therapy.
An endomyocardial biopsy was subsequently performed . Histologic assessment showed interstitial edema and inflammatory infiltrate consisting predominantly of interstitial macrophages with scant T lymphocytes. Rare subendocardial myocytes with ischemic injury as highlighted by immunostain for C4d were seen. No eosinophils, giant cells or vascular thrombi were present. Given the macrophage predominant histology in combination with the remainder of his findings, a diagnosis of MIS-A was made. Steroid dosing was de-escalated to 2 mg/kg daily and IVIg was continued for 2 days.
Despite antibiotic therapy and improving hemodynamics, the patient remained hypoxemic on 6 L nasal cannula with a rising D-Dimer (8147 ng/mL). A computed tomography scan was performed on hospital day 6 demonstrating multiple bilateral segmental and subsegmental pulmonary thromboemboli. The patient was transitioned from prophylactic to therapeutic heparin with rapid resolution of hypoxemia. Bilateral lower extremity venous duplexes showed no evidence of deep venous thrombosis.
By hospital day 7, the patient was tapered off milrinone. He was transitioned to apixaban, and guideline-directed medical therapy was initiated with metoprolol succinate, sacubitril-valsartan and spironolactone. Repeat echocardiogram prior to discharge showed an LVEF 75% with normal RV size and function, no more than trace valvular regurgitation and a small pericardial effusion (Additional files and : Video 2). His renal function returned to normal (0.9 mg/dL) without requiring renal replacement therapy and liver enzymes continued to downtrend.
The patient is doing well following discharge at 1 and 3 months with unlimited exercise tolerance and no evidence of arrhythmias or hemodynamic compromise. Repeat echocardiogram showed preserved biventricular function. He will have a cardiac MRI to further characterize the effect of myocardial injury and he is restricting vigorous exercise. He was referred to cardiac rehabilitation and remains on the same medications.