A 45-year-old African American male presented with right hip pain secondary to avascular necrosis of the femoral head, with collapse . The patient failed conservative treatment including physical therapy, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications, and a fluoroscopic-guided intra-articular corticosteroid injection, and elected to proceed with total hip arthroplasty (THA).
The index THA was performed through a standard posterolateral approach. A Stryker modular dual mobility (MDM) THA construct was selected. A Stryker Accolade 2, size #6, 132° neck angle femoral component was paired with a Biolox® delta ceramic 28 mm head, 0mm neck length. The stem is made of a titanium-based alloy which includes aluminum and vanadium and has a 5˚40’ taper with a smooth surface finish. The dual mobility polyethylene inserts measured 28 mm in inner diameter and 48 in outer diameter and articulated with the MDM cobalt-chromium liner. A 54 mm titanium acetabular shell was impacted into the bony acetabulum using press-fit technique and two 6.5 mm cancellous screws were used. At the conclusion of the case, all components were deemed well-fixed, and the patient demonstrated appropriate leg length and range of motion intraoperatively . Upon discharge, the patient maintained standard post-operative hip precautions and attended outpatient physical therapy. He was seen in clinic for routine post-operative care at the 3-week, 6-week, 3-month, and 9-month marks.
At 28 months, the patient returned to clinic with “mild right hip pain”. Infectious workup was negative and a bone scan failed to identify any evidence of component losing. The patient was subsequently lost to follow-up until 4.5 years post-operative, when he presented to the emergency department after tripping and falling onto his right hip. He reported severe pain in the right groin immediately after falling with an inability to bear weight. Radiographs revealed gross deformity of the right femoral head, with fine, radiopaque particles adjacent to the joint . CT scan confirmed fragmentation of the delta ceramic head without signs of other component failure or loosening . At the time, the patient refused urgent surgical management before agreeing to revision THA at his outpatient follow-up 2 days later.
The previous posterolateral incision was utilized for the revision. Examination of the ceramic femoral head revealed 4 large main fragments with multiple smaller pieces . After removal of the polyethylene and fragmented ceramic components, the metallic liner was evaluated and deemed to be securely fixed in place. The acetabular shell and femoral stem components were ingrown and well-fixed. The femoral component taper did not show any severe corrosion. Extensive synovectomy and irrigation were performed to ensure the removal of any remaining ceramic fragments. Trials of the original sized components demonstrated good stability. Thus, replacement 28 mm +0 Biolox® delta ceramic femoral head, Stryker Universal Titanium Taper Adapter, and Restoration MDM polyethylene liner (inside diameter 28 mm, outside diameter 48 mm) were implanted.
At the 2-week follow-up, the patient expressed his pain was well controlled. He was able to ambulate without an assistive device and felt well enough to return to his occupation in custodial services. He was still doing well based on follow-up telephone encounter 2 years post revision THA without any significant hip pain or functional limitations.