A 19-month-old Ethiopian baby boy from Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, presented with a left-sided body weakness of 4 days’ duration to Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital. The weakness of his left upper and lower extremities was noted by his mother upon awakening from sleep. He also had a low grade intermittent fever and weight loss (not quantified) for the preceding 1 month. His mother had symptoms of cough, sweating, and weight loss for the past 3 months for which she did not seek medical attention.
He was born at term to a primiparous woman, diagnosed as having HIV infection since her second month of pregnancy. Antiretroviral treatment (ART) was initiated along with diagnosis and she delivered via caesarean section. She opted for exclusive breast feeding. The newborn was given nevirapine prophylaxis immediately after delivery but both the mother’s and neonate’s ART were discontinued on the third day of life due to poor social support for the family. The child did not receive any further care for exposure to HIV infection. He had received all the vaccines of the national immunization schedule. His developmental milestones were optimal.
On physical examination, his vital signs were within normal limits. He was stunted with height measuring 71 cm (less than 5th centile for age). He had pale conjunctivae with 1.5 by 1 cm right and left axillary lymphadenopathies. He was fully conscious. A neurologic examination revealed left-sided hypertonia, hyper-reflexia, and weakness (left upper extremity 0/5 and left lower extremity 3/5).
A complete blood count showed white blood cell (WBC) of 5700/mm3 with 64% neutrophils and 23% lymphocytes. His hemoglobin was 7.6 gm/dl, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 66.1 fl, and platelets 261,000/mm3. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 107 mm/hour and HIV serology test was reactive. Baseline tests showed a CD4 count of 320/mm3, CD4 percentage of 14%, and a viral load of 690,000 copies/ml. Serum Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test was non-reactive. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis had no cells, with normal CSF glucose and protein. CSF VDRL was non-reactive. Organ function tests and lipid profiles were within normal limits. Coagulation profile tests showed a prothrombin time (PT) of 14.4 seconds, activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT) of 23.1 seconds, and international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.13. Testing for serum protein C and protein S levels was not possible in our hospital.
A chest X-ray revealed bilateral, mainly central, nodular opacities. Echocardiography was normal. Multiple hypoechoic splenic lesions and periportal lymphadenopathy were evident on an abdominal ultrasound. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his brain showed right temporoparietal M1 segment of middle cerebral artery territory acute ischemic infarct.
A CT angiography of his brain confirmed the above findings along with hemorrhagic transformation.
A diagnoses list of stunted, disseminated TB (lung, spleen, abdominal lymph nodes, and brain), iron deficiency anemia, left-sided hemiparesis due to ischemic stroke possibly due to tuberculous vasculitis, and a newly diagnosed HIV infection was made. Co-trimoxazole prophylaxis, anti-TB treatment (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) along with steroids and pyridoxine, aspirin, and iron supplementation were initiated as well as physiotherapy. Within 2 weeks of starting treatment, ART with abacavir, lamivudine and lopinavir/ritonavir was started.
He has currently completed his anti-TB treatment (2 months of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol and 10 months of isoniazid and rifampicin) as well as being on ART. His examination shows normal tone and reflexes with his left upper extremity having a power of 3/5 but his left lower extremity having a power of 5/5.