A 32-year-old Caucasian woman with atopy and relevant seasonal allergic rhinitis in the springtime was diagnosed EoE in 09/2018. Symptoms were somewhat atypical with postprandial coughing, especially after consumption of pasta and bread, regurgitation and intermittent dyspnea. After diagnosing EoE, treatment with fluticasone powder was initiated and continued for 16 months. Induction therapy was started at 2x1000μg/day for 2 weeks, then reduced to 2x500μg/day and 3x250μg/day, respectively. This therapy with fluticasone was in off-label prescription. When the orodispersible budesonide tablet became available in Switzerland, a change in therapy was planned. The switch to orodispersible budesonide 2x1mg/day is called day 1. Approximately 8 hours after the intake of the first effervescent tablet, a “strange pruritus” was felt in the throat. This sensation worsened with each subsequent intake. Three days later (day 4) approximately 1 h after the intake of the evening dose symptoms progressed and the patient complained of dysphagia and dysarthria. On day 5, she consulted an otolaryngologist office because of persisting tongue-numbness and a burning throat sensation. In the evening of day 5 tongue, lips, face and the oral mucosa became swollen. She was unable to lie down because of swallowing difficulties due to increased mucus production. She felt a burning pain behind the sternum and experienced a feeling of tightness. In the morning of day 6, she was referred to the emergency unit of the local hospital. The orodispersible budesonide was stopped. Clinical examination showed a generalized intraoral swelling and deep mucosal redness. In addition, small transparent vesicles grouped in the middle of the hard palate were noticed. A smear test of the vesicles on the palate was positive for H. simplex virus type 1. CRP was slightly elevated (10,9 mg/l), eosinophil count was normal (0.30G/l).
After treatment with clemastine (3 mg) and methylprednisolone 40 mg i.v. facial and mucosal swelling subsided within a few hours. A consecutive oral therapy with cetirizine 10 mg was prescribed. Swelling of the upper lips reoccurred the next day (day 7), but symptoms disappeared with oral prednisolone 50 mg/day over a period of 2 days. Dose was tapered to 20 mg and finally to 10 mg/day over a week. This dose was maintained for 2 weeks. Because allergy to budesonide was suspected, the patient was referred to an allergy workup.
The allergy workup was performed within 2 months after the reaction and included patch tests to Jorveza® and the corticosteroids tixocortol pivalate 1%, hydrocortisone 1%, prednisolone 1%, budesonide 0.1%, amicinonide 0.1%, triamcinolonacetonide 0.1%, dexamethasone 0.1%, hydrocortisone-17-butyrate 0.1%, betametasone-17-valerate 0.12% and clobetasol-17-propionate 0.25% and tixocortol-21-pivalate 3 μg/cm2, budesonide 1 μg/cm2, hydrocortizone-17-butyrate 20 μg/cm2 (allergEAZE® and T.R.U.E. TEST® SmartPractice, Hillerod, Denmark). Petrolatum was used as a negative control. Patch tests were removed 48 h after application and skin reactions were read after 48 and 72 h. Significantly positive reactions (++) with erythematous papules and isolated vesicules were observed to budesonide (tested twice) , (b)) and the incriminated medication Jorveza® ). Overnight after test application, a mild itchy flexural exanthema involving the insight of both elbows, neck, behind the ears and the décolleté area developed ).
Since the patient subsequently developed coughing and dysphagia again as before EoE treatment, the therapy was switched back to the formerly well tolerated fluticasone on day 45 with 500 μg/day for 5 days following which the dose was raised to 1000 μg/day. No side effects have been observed since.
Retrospectively, the patient was already treated with inhaled budesonide (Symbicort®, AstraZeneca AB, Sweden) 17 years ago for 6 months, but did not develop any symptoms at that time.