Case history
The patient was a 67-year-old male patient. His chief complaint was that six hours before arriving at the hospital, he suffered a car accident which caused his persistent neck pain with no effective measures of pain relief and his neck could not move. There were no such accompanying symptoms as nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and headache.

Physical examination
Physical examination showed that the patient's limbs had no obvious limitation of movement and no symptoms of nervous injury. However, the right side of the patient's neck was significantly swollen, and the trachea was shifted to the left, The patient had no history of chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, and coronary heart disease.

Image analysis
The Neck Disability Index (NDI), JOA score, operation time, intraoperative blood loss, and perioperative complications were recorded before and after the operation. The improvement of the height of the injured intervertebral space, the situation of the reattachment of the facet joint, and the improvement of the Cobb angle of the C2–7 cervical lordosis (the acute angle formed by the vertical line of the lower edge of the C2 vertebral body and the vertical line of the lower edge of the C7 vertebral body, see 1b) before and after surgery was compared by imaging. The situation of interbody fusion was evaluated by imaging according to the modified Brantigan criteria.

Operation
Skull traction was performed immediately after admission. The traction weight of the patient was 4–10 Kg, and the average traction weight was (6.0 ± 2.0) Kg. At the same time, the patient's neck arterial-venous CTA examination was immediately performed, the result showed that did not find obvious contrast agent leakage. Subsequently, we closely observed the patient's condition and gave the patient symptomatic treatment. After continuous skull traction, we reexamination the patient's neck CT again, it was confirmed that the locked facet joints of the patient had been reattached. With the patient's condition tended to be stable, an elective operation of ACDF was performed on the injured segment of the cervical spine, and intravenous inhalation combined with anesthesia was used during the operation. The patient was placed in a supine position, and a right anterior cervical transverse incision was made about 5 cm in length. The skin, subcutaneous tissue, and platysma were cut. The gap between the cervical vascular sheath and the visceral sheath was isolated, and the trachea esophagus and esophagus were pulled to expose the anterior fascia of the vertebra. The C-arm X-ray fluoroscopy was used to determine the intervertebral disc of the injured segment, and the target intervertebral disc was confirmed under direct vision. The outer annulus fibrosus was incised with a sharp knife to observe the deep intervertebral disc injury. A spatula and nucleus pulposus forceps were used to completely remove the injured intervertebral disc from the endplate. The bilateral uncinate joints were examined and bitten with a thin-mouth plier. Under the microscope, we carefully handled the posterior edge of the vertebral body to fully expose the posterior longitudinal ligament, then picked up the posterior longitudinal ligament with a thin hook and cut it with scissors to expose the cerebral dura mater, and fully decompress the head and tail. The cerebral dura mater and the nerve roots on both sides were explored and confirmed again without compression. The bone graft beds on both sides of the endplate were repaired and rinsed with normal saline, and the gelatin sponge was used to stop bleeding. The size of the intervertebral fusion cage was determined, and the Cage loaded with autologous bone particles was inserted into the intervertebral space. Through C-arm fluoroscopy, the Cage position was good. The appropriate length of the anterior cervical titanium plate was selected, and the titanium plate was locked by locking screws. The internal fixation position was determined to be satisfactory by fluoroscopy again. Finally, the incision was washed with physiological saline, and we put a drainage tube in the incision before closing the incision.

Postoperative management
After the operation, antibiotics, hormones, and dehydration drugs were routinely used for 4–5 days, and atomization inhalation was performed for 3 days. The drainage tube was removed 48–72 h after operation. X-ray and CT were reexamined after the operation to understand the reduction of vertebral body and internal fixation. The patient was suggested to wear neck circumference external fixation for 3 months, and the function training of the cervical spine was performed according to the patient's recovery.

Follow-up/imaging
The Neck Disability Index (NDI) score was 41 before the operation and 24 one year after the operation. The preoperative JOA score was 14, and the JOA score was 15 at 1 year after operation. The Cobb angle of C2–7 cervical lordosis was about 11° before the operation. The Cobb angle of C2–7 cervical lordosis was about 27° at 1 year after operation. The intervertebral height of the injured segment was about 2.6 mm before operation. The intervertebral height of the injured segment was about 4.4 mm at 1 year after operation. Compared with the preoperative image, the Cobb angle of C2–7 cervical lordosis, the intervertebral height of the injured segment, and the NDI score were significantly improved.