A 52-year-old Caucasian woman with a past medical history of severe hypertension and non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus presented with bilateral subacute visual loss which progressed over eight to 10 days to perceiving only light in the left eye and only hand movements in the right eye. The visual loss was preceded by dull ocular pain which persisted after the onset of visual loss. The patient experienced pain on eye movements but had no double vision. The patient did not have any temporal artery tenderness and temporal pulses were palpable bilaterally.
On fundoscopic examination, both optic discs were swollen and no retinopathic changes of diabetes or hypertension were evident. There was no evidence of venous engorgement. There was reduced color vision in both eyes and a left relative afferent papillary defect was present. Visual field mapping showed a left central scotoma and a normal right sided visual field. The patient's blood pressure was 152/80 on admission and lower on subsequent readings during her hospital stay. The remaining neurological examination was unremarkable. There was nothing in her history or physical examination suggestive of connective tissue disease or sarcoidosis. Initial blood tests showed a normal full blood count, normal urea and electrolytes (U&Es), normal liver function tests, a normal C-reactive protein (CRP; < 1) and plasma viscosity and a raised glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) of 7.3% (normal 4 to 6.1). Chest X-ray was normal. A lumbar puncture was performed which yielded cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with normal white and red blood cells, a normal angiotension converting enzyme (ACE) level, no oligoclonal bands and a marginally elevated protein level of 467.7 mg/L (normal 150 to 450 mg/L). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her brain and spinal cord was normal.
A provisional diagnosis of acute ischaemic optic neuropathy was made by the general medical team and the patient was started on aspirin with omeprazole cover. On review by the neurology team a day later the cause was thought to be inflammatory rather than ischemic. She received a three day course of intravenous methyl prednisolone. Vision improved to 6/6 in both eyes within two days with full restoration of color vision and visual field defects. Ten days later however, vision deteriorated again in the right eye to 6/36 with a temporal peripheral field loss. The relative afferent papillary defect had now switched to the right eye. The patient received 500 mg oral methyl prednisolone for five days. Her visual acuity and visual fields returned to normal within two days.
A subsequent auto-immunity screen including aquaporin-4 antibodies was negative. Visual evoked potentials performed twelve days after the onset of the second episode of visual loss were delayed bilaterally (left > right) indicating bilateral optic nerve dysfunction. Her pattern electroretinograms, brainstem evoked potentials, median nerve and posterior tibial somatosensory evoked potentials were normal bilaterally.
There was no evidence of Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy on genetic molecular analysis. The m.11778G > A, m.3460G > A, m.14484T > C mitochondrial mutations were tested for and not detected in our patient.
A chest computed tomography (CT) was normal and did not show any hilar adenopathy or any other features of sarcoidosis.
Serial MRIs over the next four months were normal without any inflammatory lesions and oligoclonal bands were negative which excluded multiple sclerosis.