An 8-year-old girl fell from a height of around 1.5 m and injured her left elbow. She was examined by a physician in her village and diagnosed as having an elbow sprain for which limb was immobilized in a plaster cast for 3 weeks. The child sustained another injury to the same elbow following fall on her outstretched hand 4 weeks after removal of the cast. Again the elbow was immobilized in a long arm cast for 3 weeks. After removal of the cast, the child complained of persistent pain and discomfort in the elbow. She was then referred to our hospital 3 months after the initial injury.
Examination revealed a stiff elbow with a painless range of motion from 45° to 90°, with only terminal limitation of pronation and supination. The ununited fragment was palpable separately from the rest of the distal humerus and freely mobile. Valgus instability was also noted. There were no signs of ulnar nerve irritability or deficit. An anteroposterior and lateral radiographs revealed a displaced fragment of the medial condyle involving the trochlea .
To address the limitation of movement, articular incongruity and elbow instability, open reduction, and fixation of the fracture was planned. After obtaining consent from the parents, the patient was administered general anesthesia and positioned supine on the operating table with arm abducted on arm board. Limb was exsanguinated and surgery was commenced under tourniquet. Incision was made directly over the medial condyle fragment. The ulnar nerve was identified and protected with plastic tube. The medial condyle fragment was found displaced proximally and anteriorly. The fragment was rotated with its cancellous surface lying anteriorly. This surface was freshened with a curette. Fracture surface on the humeral side was identified and freshened. Medial articular edge of distal humerus was identified for accurate reduction. Without any undue soft tissue stripping, the fractured fragment was reduced to the best possible position with approximation of articular surfaces. Fixation with three smooth Kirschner (K) wires was done followed by suturing of surgical wound. Long arm cast was applied with elbow at 90° and forearm in mid-prone position. There were no post-operative complications.
Considering that the fracture was already 3 months old at the time of surgery, we anticipated that a longer duration of immobilization would be required; hence, the cast and K-wires were removed at 6 weeks under local anesthesia. Active and active-assisted elbow range of motion exercises were started after K-wire removal. Radiographs taken at 3-month follow-up show union of the fracture, with an irregular medial condyle. The patient regained an active flexion arc of 25° to 95°, with complete pronation and supination . Passively 20° to 100° arc of motion had been restored. At 6-month follow-up range from 10° to 120° had been restored and there was no coronal plane deformity.