We report the case of a 64-year-old woman with regular cardiological follow-up for severe aortic valve regurgitation. She complained of fatigue and dyspnea with moderate exertion, dizziness and sporadic palpitations, with recent clinical (New York Heart Association functional class II-III) and echocardiographic deterioration. She had a previous history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, overweight, asthma and Sjögren syndrome, and was on diuretics, but with no previous hospitalizations for heart failure.
She was in sinus rhythm (∼80 bpm) with a diastolic murmur at the apex. The chest X-ray was normal with preserved cardiothoracic index. The preoperative echocardiogram revealed slightly enlarged left chambers (left atrium 46 mm; left ventricular systolic/diastolic diameters 41/59 mm; interventricular septal systolic/diastolic dimensions 11/15 mm, respectively) and preserved contractility (ejection fraction 63%). The aortic valve had four leaflets with preserved opening (no transvalvular gradient was present) but poor coaptation causing severe aortic regurgitation (vena contracta 8 mm). The ascending aorta measured 36 mm.

Cardiac catheterization revealed a slightly dilated ascending aorta (42 mm) and an incompetent aortic valve causing severe aortic regurgitation. No coronary or carotid disease was found.
The patient was operated electively. In the operating room, a concentrically hypertrophied left ventricle, dilated ascending aorta and fibrosed quadricuspid aortic valve (QAV) with leaflet retraction and a central orifice were observed. The supernumerary leaflet was the smallest and the others were of equal size. The left coronary ostium was tunneled under the commissure, which warranted special care in order to avoid damage during excision of the valve or obstruction by the prosthesis. Cardioplegia was delivered antegradely, directly in the coronary ostia. We also routinely use topical ice slush or cold saline solution as an adjuvant to myocardial protection. A 21-mm St. Jude mechanical prosthesis was implanted and the surgery ended uneventfully. The predischarge echocardiogram showed preserved ejection fraction (50%) and the mechanical aortic valve with normal opening and no paravalvular leak. Transvalvular gradients (maximum/mean) were 22/12 mmHg. No other valve lesions or significant pericardial effusion were found. The patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day.