A four-year-old girl presented to the emergency service with painful left hip and fever. There was no previous relevant medical history. There were no other local or systemic symptoms, except for a cervical adenopathy. On physical examination, she walked with a limp, and movements of the left hip were painful (mainly external rotation), but not restricted. Blood exam revealed anemia (Hb 8.7 gr/dL), normal WBC, ESB of 123 mm, and reactive C protein of 149.7 mg/L. An initial X-ray to the pelvis revealed no changes. An ultrasound of the left hip was performed revealing small infusion and synovitis. Guided puncture was then performed being macroscopically compatible with reactive arthritis, and general and bacteriological tests were demanded. Because of the unusual characteristics of the pain, a CT scan to the abdomen and pelvis was performed revealing a left adrenal mass and retroperitoneal adenopathies in the celiac trunk and superior mesenteric artery .
Despite the painful complaints of the patient, no bone or articular involvement was found in the CT scan. No further alterations were reported in the thoracic CT scan or in peripheral blood smears. Bacteriological examination of the hip effusion was negative. MRI was also performed. The direct myelogram was compatible with infiltration from neuroblastoma. Bone marrow biopsy and cervical adenopathy specimens were collected to perform histological diagnosis. Skeletal scintigraphy demonstrated numerous points of osteoblastic activity compatible with metastatic activity, and the 12 iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy concluded the following: “Abdominal mass with low expression of noradrenergic transporters. Diffuse bone metastasization with high expression of noradrenergic transporters. No other soft tissue involvement was detected.” In the histological report of the cervical adenopathy, the diagnosis of neuroblastoma NOS was performed. Immunohistochemistry revealed extensive expression for synaptophysin and CD56 (NCAM) and absence of expression of myogenin. .
Bone marrow biopsy revealed extensive metastatic involvement. The patient started chemotherapy two weeks after admission, with 8 cycles of rapid COJEC protocol. After six months of follow-up, the primary tumor was still without criteria for resection, despite a decrease in the metastatic involvement. Given the chemotherapy-related renal toxicity, it was decided to proceed with irinotecan in combination with temozolomide (TEMIRI). After thirteen months of follow-up, no significant regression of the primary tumor occurred, so surgery was contraindicated and the patient was proposed for stem cell treatment.