A 29-year-old man was hospitalized with progressive memory impairment for 10 days. He was reported to struggle remembering different locations, especially home-base. His medical history included an epileptic seizure 3 months prior to admission, without early diagnosis and treatment. The parents denied that he had promiscuous sexual behavior with any other persons. On examination, an ulcer was noted on the anterior perineum. The patient was disoriented in space, and he did not even know the result of 93 minus 7. His Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 22 out of 30. The remainder of his neurologic examination was normal. An electroencephalogram showed diffuse generalized slow spike-wave discharges. The blood work-up indicated a positive tolulized red unheated serum test (TRUST) with a titer of 1:32 and a positive fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorbed (FTA-ABS) test. Serum biochemistry, HIV and hepatitis serology, thyroid stimulating hormone, and glycated hemoglobin levels were unremarkable. Brain MRI showed high signal intensities on FLAIR images involving of bilateral medial and anterior temporal structures, insula, right pulvinar of the thalami, precuneus, frontal and temporo-occipital lobes, with focal meningeal enhancement , while MR-TOF angiography did not reveal any evidence of intracranial arterial stenosis. Lumbar puncture with CSF analysis was performed with an opening pressure of 15.5 cmH2O, which revealed pleocytosis (58 cells/µL), low glucose (2.18 mmol/L), and raised protein (1.39 g/L), his CSF TRUST also showed positive titres of 1:2. Furthermore, CSF sample was collected for mNGS to rule out co-infection. Interestingly, after 48 h, the results revealed 2288 sequence reads uniquely corresponding to the Treponema pallidum genome with 11.6483% coverage , confirming the diagnosis of neurosyphilis. Meanwhile, no other causative pathogen was identified. Following treatment with intravenous penicillin, 24 million units/day for two weeks, his memory and computation abilities improved greatly, and the MMSE score increased to 27 points. Repeat MRI of the brain performed on 16th day of admission showed shrinkage of FLAIR signal abnormalities within the right precuneus, frontal, temporo-occipital, and bilateral mesial temporal regions, without leptomeningeal enhancement . On the recent follow-up occasion, he was nearly a normal person and refused repeat testing, including lumbar puncture.