A 54-year-old Caucasian man with a 14-year history of Parkinson's disease (PD) was scheduled for DBS of the sub-thalamic nucleus (STN) bilaterally. His anti-parkinsonian medication consisted of 600 mg/day levodopa, 125 mg/day carbidopa, 1200 mg/day entacapone, and 0.54 mg/day pramipexole. This regimen was discontinued 18 hours prior to the DBS procedure, according to our standard protocol, to avoid medication-induced dyskinesias during surgery and to allow for the patient to be in an off-state, thus maximizing the clinical information gained by intra-operative stimulation . The procedure itself was uneventful, with implantation of the DBS electrodes in the STN bilaterally (Medtronic 3389 electrodes; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Three hours post-operatively the patient developed tremor, muscle rigidity, and high fever resistant to common anti-pyretic drugs (paracetamol 1 g). The tremor and rigidity were attributed to PD and 200 mg levodopa three times daily was administered through a nasogastric tube. Systemic and central nervous system infection were also considered in the differential diagnosis; however, cerebrospinal fluid analysis, a chest X-ray, and blood and urine cultures were all within normal limits. A subsequent brain magnetic resonance imaging scan depicted no intracranial pathology and confirmed optimal lead placement. Twelve hours postoperatively the patient's PD features worsened: He developed severe axial and appendicular rigidity, coarse resting tremor, and prolonged spasms of the extremities.
His temperature had risen to 40°C, and his blood pressure had increased to 165/94 mmHg. A new laboratory investigation showed leukocytosis (leukocyte count, 19.4 × 109/L with a shift to the left (neutrophil count, 167 × 109/l). His serum levels of creatine kinase (CK) were markedly elevated to 1500 U/l with a normal CK-MB fraction, and his cardiac troponin levels were normal, indicating that the CK elevation was not of cardiac origin. At that point, the diagnosis of NMS was established on the basis of the clinical examination and the laboratory findings. Malignant hyperthermia was excluded after a negative caffeine-halothane contracture test . The patient was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Treatment by intravenous administration of 3 mg/kg/day dantrolene, 600 mg/day levodopa, and 60 mg apomorphine was initiated. After copious ICU treatment, the patient was extubated on the ninth post-operative day. Fifteen days post-operatively he still appeared lethargic and confused. The DBS device was consequently activated on the 20th post-operative day, as it was considered that it could accelerate the patient's recovery. Indeed, after DBS activation, the patient showed a good recovery pace and was discharged from the hospital on the 32nd post-operative day. At his six-month follow-up examination, he demonstrated an overall improvement of 15% in the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale.