A 30-year-old male presented with grade 3 phimosis with no other relevant personal or family history. On physical examination, a mobile, painless, elastic, 20 mm diameter, solid, nodular mass was found in the right scrotum, with a one-year history. On ultrasound, a right paratesticular solid mass was found, 20 mm in diameter, predominantly hypoechoic, heterogeneous, with well-defined borders. Surgical resection was performed and the material was sent to the pathology department, fixed in 10% formalin. Macroscopically, a 2.5 x 1.5 x 0.7 cm skin fragment was received, which showed a 2 cm diameter nodule, poorly circumscribed, brown-grey, soft, gelatinous. Total processing of the sample was decided according to the routine protocol. Histological examination showed a dermo-hypodermic multilobulated proliferation, poorly circumscribed, partially subdivided by fibrous septa, consisting of a vascularised myxoid matrix with the presence of stromal cells of spindle-shaped fibroblasts and some stellate cells. The vascular structures had a thin wall and formed a tree-like network in some areas. A mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate and isolated polymorphonuclear neutrophils were detected at the intra-lesional level. In addition, there were elongated epithelial cords located in the periphery, but no mitosis or atypia was observed. Complementary histochemical (periodic acid-Schiff PAS; alcian blue and mucicarmine) and immunohistochemical techniques were used. The first highlighted the myxoid stromal matrix rich in mucin. The immunomarking profile was positive for vimentin and CD34 in some stromal cells and blood vessels, and negative for pan-keratin, S-100 protein, desmin, smooth muscle actin and estrogen and progesterone receptors. Clinical and morphological findings allowed the diagnosis of AS to be made. The section margins contacted the lesion. To rule out the Carney complex, extensive consultations and evaluations were performed. A detailed medical history and physical examination was performed, including a review of personal and family medical history. An echocardiogram ruled out the presence of cardiac myxoma. Possible skin lesions and laboratory blood tests were investigated. After these studies, no lesions or findings characteristic of the Carney complex were found, so this entity was ruled out. The patient signed the corresponding informed consent for the publication of the case.
