A 31-year-old woman presented with a 5-day history of double vision in all directions, holocephalic headaches, and nausea. Radiologic workup showed a hyperintense lesion extending from the fourth ventricle to the lamina quadrigemina and causing a hydrocephalus occlusus . An external ventricular drainage (EVD) was immediately inserted, and 1 day after, the resection of the ventricular mass was scheduled.
Surgical strategy and patient positioning were discussed based on routinely used 2D DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine) images and further analyzed using 3D MxR technology.
The novel MxR system utilized for holographic rendering and 3D visualization consisted of different components . The primary component was a CE-certified cloud environment (Lumi, Augmedit bv, Naarden, Netherlands) providing a direct MxR output using a validated expanding mesh algorithm (Disior, Helsinki, Finland) (, ). The Lumi cloud environment had associated applications for MxR glasses, which represented the second component of the system and the main tool for 3D visualization of the hologram (Hololens 2, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA).
2D DICOM images from an external institution were loaded in a completely anonymized form on the novel CE-certified cloud environment (Lumi by Augmedit bv, Utrecht, Netherlands) starting from the acquisition of an axial T1 MPRAGE with contrast medium (Siemens Skyra 3 T MRI, TR = 1,800 ms, 168 slices, slice thickness = 1.0 mm, acquisition matrix = 256 × 232, FOV: 90.62, pixel spacing: 0.48828125). The magnetic resonance study was automatically segmented on the platform to highlight the skin, skull, brain, ventricular system, and tumor. Following the automatic segmentation, the tumor was further refined by means of manual segmentation on 3D Slicer (3D Slicer image computing platform | 3D Slicer) .
Through the MxR glasses, the primary user could visualize the hologram in 3D and interact with it and project it onto the real anatomy of the patient, manually matching it using her head to review and plan surgical positioning and the approach .
To manage the increased intracranial pressure caused by an occluded hydrocephalus due to the mass effect, a right frontal EVD was inserted a day prior to the removal of the tumor.
Based on the combined analysis of 2D images and, most importantly, the 3D model, the patient underwent a parietal craniotomy with a subsequent interhemispheric transtentorial approach to the fourth ventricle. The MxR-3D visualization of the venous anatomy and the relationship of the tumor with the ventricular system was decisive in choosing a right parietal craniotomy to release maximally the right parietal vein frontally. This approach granted a straight trajectory posteriorly from the right parietal vein and right in the axis of the tumor. The 3D holographic visualization greatly helped in planning and rehearsing a surgical trajectory that could avoid the risk of injury of the basal cerebral veins. Furthermore, surgical planning with the 3D hologram endorsed the need to open the tentorium parallel to the straight sinus to achieve better intraoperative vision and control of the tumor . Patient positioning was designed according to the MxR planning, and the patient was positioned three-quarters prone with the head secured in a skull clamp slightly elevated and tilted toward the floor. A linear occipito–parietal incision along the midline was the approach chosen.
To confirm gross–total resection of the tumor, an intraoperative MRI was performed, revealing 98% removal of the lesion with a small remnant at the tectal level, which was too adherent to the great vein of Galen to be safely removed.