A 35-year-old female patient arrived at our department complaining of back pain, heart palpitations, and fatigue due to the large size of pericardial mass causing a pressure symptom. No symptoms of hypertension, fever, extrasystoles were found on physical examination, and no arrhythmia or rhythm disturbances were found on the electrocardiography. No previous medical and family history was declared by the patient. A chest X-ray showed that the patient’s cardiothoracic ratio was enlarged and that her cardiophrenic sinus was obscured on the right side (see Fig. ). A transthoracic echocardiography indicated pericardial effusion, tricuspid, and pulmonary insufficiencies and showed a large echogenic mass involving the pericardium beside the right heart. Pericardiocentesis was performed, and a cytologic examination of the bloody pericardial fluid obtained though fine needle aspiration (FNA) showed monotonous cells with oval-spindle vesicular nuclei with less amphophilic cytoplasm, evenly distributed chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli that formed groups in hypocellular samples (see Fig. ). Overlapping nuclei were observed locally. During pre-diagnosis, a spindle cell mesenchymal tumor with uncertain malignant potential was considered. Adequate sample cannot be obtained from aspiration for cell block preparation.
A contrasted CT scan of the chest showed a heterogeneously enhanced lesion measuring 12 cm x 11 cm x 6.5 cm located in the right mid-anterior of the pericardial area (see Fig. ). The mass had a heterogeneous internal structure, creating significant pressure on the right heart and superior vena cava. There was no radiological space between the mass and the right heart, and no significant vascular, cardiac, or thoracic wall invasions were observed. No lymph node involvement was observed in the mediastinal or hilar regions. The trachea, including both main bronchi and bronchial trees, was open. Neither an active infiltrative appearance nor any nodular lesions could not be seen in the lung parenchyma (see Fig. ). All radiological findings were indicative of either a pericardial fibroma or a pericardial sarcoma, both of which were noted in the differential diagnosis. On positron emission tomography (PET)-CT imaging, only the pericardial mass showed increased F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake with a maximum standard uptake of 5.3. No lymph node metastasis was detected radiologically.
After the radiological examinations, the pericardial mass was decided to be resected. During thoracotomy, the pericardial mass was found to invade the ventricular wall and main vascular structures, therefore, the mass was resected incompletely. Due to the location, extent and nature of the tumor, debulking surgery was performed and R0 surgery could not be performed. Macroscopically, any palpable lymph node was not detected during the surgery.
Histopathologically, a spindle cell mesenchymal tumor with infiltrative limited hypercellular fascicular structure containing a small amount of loose myxoid stroma hyalinized, and necrotic areas showing mild to moderate pleomorphism were observed in fragmented mass samples (see Fig. a). A nuclear palisade was noted in the neoplastic cells, and the mitotic rate was 18 mitotic cells per 10 high power fields (see Fig. b). Mesothelioma, fibrosarcoma, a solitary fibrous tumor, leiomyosarcoma, and synovial sarcoma were all included as possibilities in the differential diagnosis. Immunohistochemical staining showed a positive reaction with vimentin, Bcl-2, TLE-1 (see Fig. c), and a negative reaction with pan-cytokeratin, HBME-1, calretinin, CD99, actin, desmin, CD34, STAT6, and S100. The Ki67 proliferation index was increased in the tumor (see Fig. d). A sample was sent to an external center where molecular studies could be performed for genetic analysis, and a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test detected SYT-SSX1 fusion. With these findings, the patient was given a definitive diagnosed of monophasic synovial sarcoma.
Postoperative radiotherapy and chemotherapy were advised but refused by the patient at first place. On postoperative 4th month, the patient decided to undergo the oncological therapies, however, a six-week pregnancy was detected, therefore, only radiotherapy was applied due to the enlargement of pericardial mass. The chemotherapy was postponed for one year. After the term delivery, the patient suffered from the respiratory distress due to enlargement of the mass in the pericardial region to 14 cm in diameter, therefore, six cycles of doxorubicin and ifosfamide combination were administered. An emboli in the left main pulmonary artery, a pleural effusion in the right hemithorax, and a metastatic mass in the liver were detected. The patient whose respiratory parameters deteriorated was followed up in the intensive care unit. During this follow-up, the patient, who had myocardial infarction 21 months after the operation, died.