A 68-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for weakness for more than 3 d.
Three days before admission, she first experienced weakness of the limb weakness with posterior neck pain, numbness in the distal extremities, and a feeling of electric shock when touched. On the day of admission, these symptoms were aggravated, and she could not stably hold things in either hand. She also had cold-related pain in the upper extremities, weakness in the lower extremities, an inability to ambulate, urinary and fecal retention, and increased posterior neck pain. A cranial computed tomography (CT) showed no obvious signs of hemorrhage. The patient did not experience chills or fever, cough or sputum production, headache, visual hallucination, choking and coughing when eating, dysarthria, chest pain, palpitations, abdominal distension, or diarrhea.
She had a history of hypertension for more than one year and was taking daily amlodipine tablets. She denied any history of upper respiratory tract infection, diarrhea, or abdominal pain before the onset of symptoms and reported no recent vaccinations. She had no history of diabetes mellitus or allergy to foods or drugs.
She had no history of diabetes mellitus or allergy to foods or drugs. Denial of family history.
Physical examination: At admission, her body temperature was 36.8 ℃, her pulse rate was 76 beats/min and rhythmical, and there were no pathological murmurs in the auscultation area of each heart valve. Her respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, her blood pressure was 145/78 mmHg, and there was no neck stiffness or breathing resistance. There were clear breath sounds in both lungs and no dry rales. Her abdomen was soft, and she had no varices in the veins of the abdominal wall. No pressure tenderness or rebound pain was observed at McBurney's point. There was no shifting dullness to percussion, but slightly reduced bowel sounds (2–3/min) were observed. Her lower limbs had no edema.
Neurological examination: The patient had clear consciousness and no dysarthria. Her pupils were round, had the same diameter (3.0 mm), and were light-sensitive. She had adequate eye movement in all directions, no nystagmus, and symmetrical bilateral frontal lines. The muscle strength of both upper limbs was grade 4; the muscle strength of both lower limbs was grade 3; the muscle tone of the limbs was low; and the tendon reflexes had bilateral weakness. The Babinski sign was positive on both sides. Her sensations of bilateral distal pain and temperature were slightly reduced; the two-handed finger-nose test was stable and accurate; the bilateral heel-knee-shin test was unstable and inaccurate; and she had normal bilateral vibration sensation and joint position sensation. The meningeal stimulation sign was negative, and she exhibited no involuntary movements.
The complete blood count, liver and renal function tests, coagulation indicators, and tumor indicators indicated no significant abnormalities and cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also did not show significant abnormalities. A lumbar puncture indicated an elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure of 116 mmH20 and the presence of cytoalbuminologic dissociation. A peripheral neuropathy immunoblotting test (ganglioside antibody profile) was positive for anti-sulfatide antibody IgG. The markers of central nervous system demyelinating diseases, including oligoclonal bands, aquaporin 4, and anti-MOG antibodies, were all negative
Electromyography revealed some motor nerves with conduction block but normal sensory nerve conduction velocity and wave amplitude, suggesting damage to multiple peripheral nerves. A cervical MRI revealed a high signal in the cervical spinal cord, suggesting inflammatory changes.However, a thoracic MRI revealed degeneration of certain thoracic discs, and a lumbar MRI revealed bulges of the L3/4, L4/5, and L5/S1 discs. A chest CT revealed two foci of lung fibrosis, but a whole abdominal CT did not reveal significant abnormalities