A 46-year-old male with an incomplete tetraplegia (AIS B, neurological level C7), 5 years post injury consented to participate. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa. Conventional rehabilitation, including weekly physical therapy for 1–2 h, occupational therapy for 1 h, and pool therapy for 1–2 h, was maintained during the PAS and was the same as before the intervention. His muscle strength had remained stable prior to PAS (Supplementary Table ). Mean ± SD spontaneous changes of manual muscle test (MMT) score in the 17 months preceding PAS were 0.67 ± 0.52 (right hand) and 0.17 ± 1.17 (left hand). Pinch strength values were 0.57 ± 0.32 kg (right hand) and 0.27 ± 0.63 kg (left hand) in the 12 months preceding PAS (Supplementary Table ). Medication is presented in Supplementary Table .
Navigated TMS (nTMS) of the motor cortex was delivered by a NBS 4.3 stimulator (Nexstim Ltd., Helsinki, Finland) with a figure-of-eight coil (outer diameter 70 mm, biphasic pulse). Structural T1-weighted MRI for nTMS was obtained with a 3T Siemens Verio scanner (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany). The nTMS system enables accurate, reproducible stimulation of selected cortical sites, the “hotspots” , where MEPs are most readily elicited from the selected muscles . The hotspots were defined for abductor pollicis brevis (APB), abductor digiti minimi (ADM), and brachioradialis (BR) muscles in both hands as in our previous studies .
PNS was delivered using a Dantec Keypoint electroneuromyography device (Natus Medical Inc., Pleasanton, CA, USA) and surface electrodes . The nerves were stimulated as in our previous studies . Initially, PNS stimuli were 50-Hz trains (1-ms square pulses, 6 pulses per train, train duration 100 ms). From week 30 onwards, 100-Hz trains (train duration 50 ms) were used as they were experimentally proven to be more efficient for MEP potentiation in healthy subjects .
For PAS , nTMS (single-pulse, 0.2 Hz, 100% MSO) of the selected hotspots was synchronized with the first pulse of the PNS train given to the corresponding contralateral nerve . The interstimulus interval for each pair was calculated using individual parameters . The subject was seated comfortably during PAS. One session consisted of PAS of 3–6 hotspot-nerve pairs given in pseudo-random order of 1.5–3 h duration in total (20 min per nerve plus time for preparations, Fig. ).
The hand motor training (MT) combined with the PAS (PAS-MT) was aimed at increasing muscle strength in those muscles where MMT scores remained 2 or less after 24 weeks of the intervention. Three weak muscles in the right hand were trained with motor tasks (thumb palmar abduction for APB; spreading fingers for dorsal interossei; and thumb radial abduction for abductor pollicis longus) simultaneously with the corresponding PAS. AR manually assisted the subject in finger movements.
The intervention of 56 weeks included 47 weeks of PAS and 1–2-week breaks without stimulations . PAS to a hotspot-nerve pair was stopped when strength and range of motion of all muscles innervated by this nerve reached an MMT score of 4–5. All left-hand muscles reached this level at week 28; only the right hand was stimulated thereafter. At subject’s request, PAS of the left median nerve and the associated motor task were reinitiated at week 40 to enable more fluent grasp movements. The follow-up period started when the MMT scores of all evaluated muscles of both hands reached level 4 or 5 and was continued for 32 weeks. All tests were performed immediately prior to the study, during the intervention, and follow up.
Outcome measures in both hands included MMT (total scores for all evaluated muscles and partial scores of the muscles innervated by each of the stimulated nerves) and the modified Ashworth scale (MAS, spasticity in wrist and elbow) evaluated by a physiotherapist specialized in SCI and blinded to the intervention changes and results of previous evaluations. In addition, we collected sensory scores of the American Spinal Injury Association impairment scale (AIS); grip strength assessed with the adjustable-handle Jamar dynamometer (Asimov Engineering Co., MA, USA); tip, key, and palmar pinch assessed with the pinch gauge (B&L Engineering, CA, USA); the spinal cord independence measure (SCIM); the box and block (BB) test; the nine hole peg test (NHPT); and MEPs and F-responses recorded from APB, ADM, and BR . For the MMT, only muscles that scored <5 in the first assessment were selected for further evaluation (Supplementary Table 2 parts 1, 2). The subject reported subjective functional changes.
The total and partial MMT scores were improved in both hands . In total, the left hand regained 19 points and the right hand 48 points during the intervention. The scores reached the maximum level in the left hand after 47 weeks and remained stable in follow up. MMT scores of level 4 or 5 in the right-hand muscles were obtained in follow up. MMT scores were improved further during the PAS-MT, particularly in the right hand (Supplementary Table 2 part 1). AIS sensory scores did not differ (Supplementary Table ). Spasticity assessed with MAS remained 0 at all times. Increased grip and pinch strengths were observed in both hands already after 8–20 weeks of PAS. Remarkably, all tested pinch strength types were increased (Supplementary Table ). In the right hand, grip and pinch strength increased during the first 8–20 PAS weeks and stabilized thereafter. In the left hand, the increase in pinch strength stabilized after 25 weeks of PAS. Grip strength increased in the right hand by 4.5 kg and in the left hand by 3.3 kg . Pinch strength increased in the right hand by 3.0 kg and in the left hand by 2.6 kg, (Supplementary Table ). PAS-MT further increased pinch strength. Pinch strength decreased towards the level observed before PAS-MT administration in follow up. Results of the BB test increased from 45/68 (right hand/left hand) blocks to 52/75 blocks. By the end of the intervention, the NHPT time decreased by 31 s in the left and by 32 s in the right hand (Supplementary Table ) and remained stable during follow up in the left hand (see Supplementary Video ). The subject’s self-care and indoor and outdoor mobility increased during the PAS and improved further during follow up. His SCIM self-care score increased from 3 to 13 and SCIM indoor mobility from 6 to 10 . Respiration and sphincter management did not change. Before PAS, the subject needed total or partial assistance in eating, bathing, dressing, and grooming. During follow up, he could perform these tasks independently and without adaptive devices. In total, the subject’s SCIM score increased from 40 to 56 (Supplementary Table ). He enhanced his coherent motor control after 8 weeks of PAS (see Supplementary Videos and ), and reported numerous improvements in both hands during follow up . He regained the ability to perform various complex fine motor tasks without external help. Before intervention, the subject had pain and uncomfortable tingling that decreased or completely disappeared during the intervention and follow-up (Supplementary Table ).
The PAS potentiated MEPs in five out of six targeted muscles . The overall effect differed slightly between the right and left hands. In all six muscles, the MEP amplitudes in both hands increased on average by 324% after 16 weeks of follow up when compared with the corresponding values obtained prior to PAS. Before treatment it was not possible to elicit MEPs from the right ADM even with muscle preactivation. MEPs were detected after 42 weeks of stimulation and remained stable during follow up. In the left ADM, small MEPs were elicited before PAS. Their amplitudes increased during PAS and follow up. Although the changes were variable, the total amplitude increase was systematic when the first and last MEP recordings were compared . The minimum F-response latencies (F min) in the right hand decreased after PAS from 32 to 25 ms (23%) for the ulnar nerve and from 31 to 28 ms (9%) for the median nerve. No response was found with the left median nerve before intervention but was obtained during follow up (F min = 33 ms). F-min latency in the left ulnar nerve (31 ms) did not change. F-responses to the radial nerve stimulation in both hands were inconsistent. No amplitude changes were observed.
Around week 12, during PAS of the right radial nerve the subject reported a sensation in both legs resembling electrical stimulation, leg spasticity, and spasticity-related leg pain. A simultaneous urinary tract infection unrelated to stimulation was detected and treated. Psychological stress unrelated to stimulation occurred simultaneously. The PAS was interrupted for 2 weeks and the subject increased pain medication. After that he reported a decrease in spasticity and pain. The subject’s position in the chair was adjusted to increase comfort, and PNS intensity was slightly decreased . During weeks 16–19 these symptoms gradually disappeared. No other adverse effects were reported.