A 68-year-old Hispanic male with no significant past medical history was brought to the ED by emergency medical services (EMS) for confusion and altered mental status. EMS reported that they were called by the patient’s wife when she discovered him breathing erratically and could not rouse him. Upon arrival to the ED, the patient was obtunded and began to experience cardiac arrest with ventricular fibrillation. He was subsequently intubated and given Advanced Cardiac Life Support where cardiopulmonary resuscitation was administered and the patient was defibrillated. He went on to experience return of spontaneous circulation. An ECG obtained in the ED during this event demonstrated ST-segment elevations in V1–V3 and specific repolarization abnormalities in V1 and V2 .
Additional ECG findings included the following: first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block, PR interval of 220 milliseconds (120–200 milliseconds), and QRS duration of 0.11 seconds (0.08–0.12 seconds).
The patient was placed on an amiodarone infusion and transferred to a medical facility with a cardiac catheterization laboratory. Emergent cardiac catheterization was performed due to concerns for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), but no acute findings were discovered. Laboratory values from the initial blood draw in the ED demonstrated the following: sodium 132 milliequivalent per liter (meq/L) (normal 136–145 meq/L); potassium 3.3meq/L (normal 3.5–5.0 meq/L); magnesium 3.3 milligram per deciliter (mg/dL) (normal 1.5–2.4 mg/dL); glucose 197mg/dL; troponin <0.02 nanograms per milliliter; brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 65; prothrombin time (PT) 13.6 seconds (normal 11–13 seconds); international normalized ratio (INR) 1.3 seconds; and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) 59.4 milliunits per liter (mU/L) (normal 0.5–5.0 mU/L).
Following cardiac catheterization, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit where all vital signs remained stable and within normal limits. With members of the patient’s immediate family at bedside, information pertaining to his personal history was elicited for the first time. They reported that the patient had been in good health prior to the onset of his confusion and at no point did he complain of any discomfort or associated symptoms. Furthermore, they denied any significant past medical or surgical events in the patient’s history, including any personal or family history of heart disease or sudden cardiac death. They stated that the patient had no allergies, did not take any medications, never used tobacco or illicit drugs, and consumed alcohol occasionally during social events.
The following day, the patient was extubated with excellent response and was found to have no focal deficits on physical exam. Thyroid replacement therapy was initiated for severe hypothyroidism discovered incidentally during the aforementioned care. Although no additional adverse cardiac events would occur for the duration of his hospital stay, the patient agreed to placement of an implantable-cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) as recommended for secondary prevention of Brugada syndrome.
Further work-up of the patient during his hospital course included the following: magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, which demonstrated multiple small areas of infarct in the bilateral cerebral hemispheres and no other significant findings. Computed tomography angiography of the head and neck were found to be normal. After demonstrating an ability to ambulate 300 feet with front-wheel walker, the patient was discharged home on aspirin and statin medication.
Left heart catheterization was performed 18 days later as recommended by the patient’s electrophysiologist. The right coronary artery was found without stenosis or blockage; the left anterior descending artery was patent; and overall coronary circulation and left ventricular function were normal. These findings, coupled with the patient’s presenting symptoms and findings found on ECG in the ED, ultimately corroborated a diagnosis of Brugada syndrome with a type 1 pattern.