A 29-year-old African American male individual presented to the emergency department (ED) for right upper quadrant abdominal pain and early satiety. Physical examination was unrevealing except for abdominal tenderness. His past medical history included 5 years of daily alcohol use and occasional marijuana use. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed hepatomegaly with a large mass centered in the left lobe measuring 14 cm. Laboratory values showed mildly elevated transaminases, with an alanine transaminase (ALT) of 51, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 74, and an alkaline phosphatase of 93 units/L. The patient was then discharged with a planned outpatient hepatology follow-up.

A total of 1 month later, the patient presented again to the ED with the same symptoms; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 19 cm enhancing left hepatic mass. Laboratory tests demonstrated a mild elevation in transaminases, a negative hepatitis viral panel, and unremarkable tumor marker levels, including alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19.9). After appropriate pain control, the patient was discharged again with plans for outpatient follow-up.

The patient was lost to follow-up owing to insurance concerns, until he presented to a different ED the following month for abdominal pain, vomiting, early satiety, and unintentional 10 lb weight loss. Abdominal CT angiography with contrast showed a 21 cm hepatic mass centered in the left hepatic lobe, and given the concern for hepatocellular carcinoma, the patient was admitted for biopsy and staging imaging. Laboratory tests revealed alkaline phosphatase elevation (451 IU/L) and mildly elevated transaminases, with an AST level of 93 units/L and an ALT of 45 units/L. His tumor marker laboratory results were within normal ranges (CA 19.9 < 14.0; AFP: 1.97; and CEA: 5.28). A chest CT revealed innumerable bilateral pulmonary nodules measuring up to 8 mm, favoring metastases. Initial histopathological examination of the liver biopsy specimens revealed a well-differentiated carcinoma characterized by a distinctive myxoid stroma with tubular and cribriform structures, consistent with metastatic adenoid cystic carcinoma. The patient underwent transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) and was discharged with a hematology–oncology follow-up.

He was readmitted 2 weeks later for a planned repeat TACE procedure, as well as a repeat liver biopsy for further testing. Initial laboratory values on admission were an AST of 44 units/L, ALT of 24 units/L, and alkaline phosphatase of 282 units/L. During this admission, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck soft tissue with contrast revealed a complex bilobed mass in the right parotid gland measuring approximately 6.5 cm. Its progression into the parapharyngeal space caused notable deformity of the oropharynx, raising further concerns about potential malignancy. A biopsy was taken with immunohistochemistry findings suggestive of ACC; however, BCAC could not be completely excluded without examination of a completely removed salivary gland tumor. Therefore, a presumptive diagnosis of stage IV adenoid cystic carcinoma with metastases to the liver and lung was made. Given the tremendous tumor burden and poor prognosis, the treatment goals were palliative, and the patient was started on a chemotherapeutic regimen with cisplatin and vinorelbine.

A total of 5 months later, the patient presented to the emergency department with neurological symptoms, including lightheadedness and left-sided weakness. A CT scan revealed new right frontal hyperdensities, consistent with brain metastasis. During this admission, he received one dose of radiotherapy with a plan to finish five doses. He was then discharged with a planned outpatient follow-up.