A 74-year-old Asian woman with no family history of significant medical problems presented with erythema on her face, back, and the back of her hands which had developed 3 weeks earlier . At the same time, she noticed a right breast mass and redness of the skin of the breast . Breast ultrasonography revealed a hyperechoic view of the entire skin of the right breast and a 36-mm irregular mass at the 9 o’clock position . A T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination showed a high-signal mass at the same area, and enlargement of the right axillary lymph nodes .
A vacuum aspiration biopsy was performed. It showed that atypical cells with enlarged chromatin nuclei and eosinophilic endoplasmic reticulum form vesicular nests on hematoxylin–eosin stain. We made a diagnosis of invasive ductal carcinoma that was suspected to be inflammatory breast cancer . The tumor was positive for both estrogen (about 100%) and progesterone (over 90%) receptors, HER2 was negative, and the Ki-67 index was 40%. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no metastases, and the stage was IIIC (cT4dN3aM0) in TNM classification.
The patient was also referred to a dermatologist. The shawl sign was seen on her upper back . Multiple hyperkeratotic and erythematous papules were observed over the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of both hands (Gottron papule, Fig. c). The patient did not have muscle weakness. Blood tests showed that her creatine kinase, aspartate aminotransferase, and aldolase were normal, the anti-transcriptional intermediary factor 1-γ antibody (specific to amyopathic dermatomyositis) was positive, and the test for anti-aminoacyl tRNA synthetase antibody was negative.
Based on these findings, she was diagnosed with amyopathic dermatomyositis, and prednisolone was started at 20 mg/day. She also received 4 cycles of epirubicin–cyclophosphamide therapy. The total dose of epirubicin was 425 mg and cyclophosphamide was 2970 mg. Subsequent ultrasonography and MRI revealed that the tumor had shrunk remarkably, the swollen right axillary lymph node had disappeared as had the rash on the right breast. Therefore, a total mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy were performed. No tumor cells were found in the sentinel lymph nodes and axillary lymph node dissection was not performed.
Breast pathology showed only non-invasive carcinoma in the duct. The sentinel lymph nodes in the permanent specimen showed fibrosis. Chemotherapeutic effect was Grade 2b in the General Rules for Clinical and Pathological Recording of Breast Cancer (18th edition) . Therefore, postoperative stage was ypTisN0M0.
The dermatomyositis began to improve during chemotherapy. The prednisolone was reduced to 5 mg/day after surgery, without any worsening of her symptoms. No postoperative chemotherapy was performed, and she has been taking letrozole (an aromatase inhibitor) for a year and has not seen a recurrence.