A 79 year old man was admitted at our emergency department due to exertion dyspnoea and swelling of the upper limbs, head and neck. Five years ago the patient had undergone elective replacement of the aortic valve with a prosthetic one (Carbomedics 23 mm) and a concomitant ascending aorta aneurysm replacement with a 28 mm synthetic graft. On admission the patient was dyspnoic with malaise. His blood pressure was normal (128/82 mmHg) and the oxygen saturation without oxygen supply was 92%. Pulses were irregular and increased in rate. ECG showed atrial fibrillation with fast ventricular response (135 to 145 beats/min). The physical examination documented cyanotic and swollen head and neck and distended jugular veins. Superior vena cava syndrome (SVCS) was clinically diagnosed. Laboratory data included a prolonged INR of 7 and Ht: 35.6%. Other elements of blood count and coagulation time were within physiologic values. Cardiac enzymes were negative. LDH was 620 IU/L. The rest of his biochemical profile was normal. Arterial blood gases showed mild respiratory acidosis (PH: 7.33) due to elevated PCO2: 48mmHg.
Chest x-rays was further confirmatory of the clinical diagnosis showing a widened mediastinum. However the contrast CT angiography of the chest was remarkable, revealing a large pseudoaneurysm of the ascending aorta with a maximum diameter of 13cm compressing the superior vena cava and an extensive collateral circulation .
Transfusions with 2 units of fresh frozen plasma were enough to lower the INR to 1.8 and the patient was then transferred to the operating room. Femoro-femoral cannulation was undertaken in order to establish cardiopulmonary bypass and decrease the patient's temperature to down to 16°C to safely commence circulatory arrest. After the completion of cooling with collection of the patient's blood within the reservoir of the extracorporeal device, repeat sternotomy was performed through safe surgical means. Retrograde cardioplegia was installed. The pseudoaneurysm was incised and the thrombotic material was carefully removed. Two sites of major leakage originating from the anterior and posterior segment of the distal anastomosis were revealed. Suturing with 3/0 prolene, reinforced by teflon patches, was performed. Eventually extracorporeal circulation was recommenced, gradual rewarming was carried out and successful weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass was achieved.
The patient was extubated 6 hours later and he remained in the intensive care unit for 18 hours. His postoperative course was uneventful. Ten days following his admission the patient was discharged in good condition, presenting however atrial fibrillation with good rate control under Amiodarone treatment. Three months following his discharge he remains free of symptoms.