A 34-year-old Caucasian man presented for evaluation of a five-month history of worsening exertional dyspnea, productive cough, and lower extremity swelling. He reported associated fatigue, unintentional 50 pounds weight loss, and early satiety. His past medical history was notable only for hypertension, which was controlled with hydrochlorothiazide and carvedilol. He recently started taking furosemide for lower extremity swelling.
He is a never smoker. He has no history of recent travel or any relevant exposures. His vital signs were significant for an oxygen saturation of 92% on 2 L per minute of supplemental oxygen and mild tachycardia. Physical examination was notable for diaphoresis, pallor, diminished heart sounds, markedly decreased breath sounds over the right thorax, and 2+ pitting lower extremity edema.
Pulmonary function tests demonstrated an intrinsic restrictive ventilatory defect with a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 4.03 L (59% of predicted) and diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 23.3 mL/min/mmHg (55% of predicted). The partial pressure of oxygen on arterial blood gas was 60 mmHg. High resolution chest computed tomography showed diffuse pulmonary nodules with upper lobe predominance and in a perilymphatic distribution; diffuse partially calcified mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy; moderate to large right pleural effusion; and moderate to large pericardial effusion with pericardial thickening. He subsequently underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram which demonstrated preserved left ventricular systolic function and a large circumferential pericardial effusion with evidence of mitral inflow/tricuspid inflow respiratory variation and paradoxical septal shift, concerning for early tamponade physiology. He was admitted to hospital and underwent an urgent pericardiocentesis with removal of 500 mL of serosanguinous fluid. Pericardiocentesis resulted in immediate clinical improvement. The fluid was monocyte-predominant, with negative cultures. The pericardial drain was removed after several days of minimal drainage.

Thoracentesis and fiberoptic bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), transbronchial biopsy, and endobronchial ultrasound guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) of the mediastinal lymph nodes were also performed. Pleural fluid analysis showed monocytic predominant transudate (53% monocytes, 38% lymphocytes) with negative cultures, cytology, and flow cytometry. Adenosine deaminase level was normal. BAL of the right middle lobe was also predominantly monocytic, with negative cultures (including acid-fast bacilli) and cytology. Transbronchial biopsies yielded two non-necrotizing granulomas, and otherwise were negative for malignancy or infection. Mediastinal lymph node fine needle aspiration from the EBUS-TBNA was non-diagnostic.
Given the inconclusive nature of the results, the patient subsequently underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery wedge biopsies of the right lung as well as pleural and pericardial biopsy. A pericardial window was attempted during the procedure but was not successful. A right chest tube was left in place with subsequent daily output of one liter or greater of transudative fluid. The pathology demonstrated lung tissue with florid non-necrotizing granulomas extending into the visceral pleura. No fungi or acid-fast bacilli were identified on culture or tissue staining. The biopsy of the pericardium showed focal fibrosis but no granulomas were seen. He was diagnosed with sarcoidosis involving the lungs, pleura, and presumably the pericardium and was started on prednisone 30 mg daily.

Soon after, the patient's hospital course was complicated by re-accumulation of the pericardial effusion, and this time with cardiogenic shock, secondary to cardiac tamponade. He underwent an emergent pericardial window and mediastinal drain placement with resolution of shock but continued to have more than one liter of transudative drainage daily from both the chest and mediastinal tubes.
Further evaluation with cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging demonstrated a significant reduction in pericardial slippage between the parietal and visceral layers of the heart as well as prominent ventricular septal bounce consistent with enhanced inter-ventricular dependence; collectively suggestive of constrictive pericarditis. Of note, there was no evidence of late gadolinium enhancement to support myocardial involvement with sarcoidosis. Confirmation of effusive-constrictive pericarditis was noted on right heart catheterization, which showed equalization of diastolic right ventricular (RV) and left ventricular (LV) pressures with evidence of a “square root sign”, and RV/LV discordance. He then underwent pericardiectomy, which on histopathologic evaluation demonstrated non-necrotizing granulomas, thus confirming pericardial involvement of sarcoidosis.

The patient steadily improved clinically following his surgery and had complete resolution of the pleural effusion and lower extremity edema with diuretics. He was discharged in stable condition on 20 mg of prednisone. At one month follow-up he denied dyspnea and the echocardiogram demonstrated normal cardiac chamber size. Pulmonary function tests showed improvement with a FVC of 5.52 L (79% of predicted) and DLCO of 24.92 mL/min/mmHg (57% of predicted). Methotrexate was started as a steroid-sparing agent and prednisone was tapered off.