A 52-year-old male weighing 70 kg who was a teetotaler and a biology researcher was admitted to hospital 3 h after intentional ingestion of 150 ml of 99.9% methanol. This is an analytical reference material stored in graduated glass laboratory apparatus, which was used for self-harm purposes by this patient. He was brought in by his wife, who had found him early in the morning vomiting, soon after the exposure. He was alert, cooperative, presenting nausea and vertigo, and reporting six episodes of vomiting, without other complaints. He said he had not co-ingested any ethanol. He had been taking bupropion, clonazepam and oxycarbazepine under irregular psychiatric treatment for depression, for the preceding four months.
Physical examination showed no remarkable features. A blood sample for methanol and ethanol determination (gas chromatography) was obtained 4 h after ingestion, and the result came out 6 h later (10 h after ingestion), showing 70 mg/dl of methanol and no detectable ethanol. With this result, it was decided to institute a loading dose of 10% ethanol solution (7 ml/kg intravenously), followed by a maintenance dose of 0.9-1.0 ml/kg/h intravenously, for 42 h, and hemodialysis was also indicated. An eight-hour course of hemodialysis was then started 19 h after ingestion, during which 2.1 ml/kg/h of 10% ethanol was administered. Eight intravenous doses of folinic acid (50 mg in 5% dextrose, for 30-60 minutes every 6 h) were also given over a 48-hour period, starting 4 h after ingestion.
summarizes the main laboratory results and treatment measures according to the time after ingestion. Blood glucose, complete blood counts, electrolytes, amylase, liver function tests, lactate dehydrogenase, creatinine, urea nitrogen and electrocardiographic analyses were within reference values.
The patient was discharged on day 4, after undergoing ophthalmological evaluation and a cerebral computed tomography scan, which did not show any abnormalities. Follow-up did not show any sequelae, and the patient is currently under regular psychiatric treatment, with good compliance so far.