A 37-year-old male with past medical history significant for asthma, anxiety, and former tobacco use, presented to our emergency department after experiencing two episodes of syncope while at work. He was employed outdoors in a heavy manual labor industry. He and his co-workers have been frequently bitten by ticks at work in the past. Initial vital signs on admission were significant for bradycardia, with a heart rate of 57 bpm, and the ECG showed sinus bradycardia with first degree AV block, with a PR interval of 480 ms (NL 120–200 ms) . Physical exam was unremarkable, except for hypopigmentation of fingers. Serum ALT level was elevated 115 (NL 12–78). Other labs on admission were all within normal including serum troponin. Further workup included a normal CT scan of head, a vascular study of the carotid vessels that showed minor right sided carotid stenosis of < 50%, and an echocardiogram that was unremarkable,except for mildly increased LV wall thickness with an EF of 60%. An exercise stress test done by the cardiologist, was terminated early. The patient developed dyspnea, and his ECG demonstrated progression of first-degree AV block to high degree AV block . Once back at rest, the patient’s high degree AV block reverted to first degree AV block. He had a similar episode while walking in the hallway wearing a Holter monitor, on day 5, also reversible with rest. He was transferred to the critical care unit for close monitoring and treated with ceftriaxone 2G iv once daily and doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily. The first-degree AV block improved with a gradual decrease in the PR interval . His Lyme serology (Western Blot) was strongly positive .
The heart block significantly improved to 270 ms by day 7 of treatment. He was discharged and continued outpatient IV Ceftriaxone for 3 weeks. After completing treatment, the patient had a normal ECG with PR interval of 178 on day 16 and an uneventful exercise stress test. He returned towork without limitations, doing manual labor. He has been symptom free for 2 years. Now he uses tick-repellents at work.