A 19-yr-old Caucasian male was scheduled for a septorhinoplasty operation. He had no history of laryngeal disorders and there was no apparent diabetes mellitus, chronic renal failure, chronic corticosteroid use, laryngeal malacia, acromegaly or other factors that might weaken the cricoarytenoid joint. His past medical history, physical examination and laboratory examination were unremarkable (preoperative physical status clasification of patients according to the American Society of Anesthesiologists; ASA I). Physical examination revealed a class 2 airway. Mallampati Intubation Score and other airway measurements were normal. After securing intravenous access and beginning standard monitoring, anesthesia was induced with thiopental (8 mg.kg-1), rocuronium (0.6 mg.kg-1), and remifentanyl (0.5 mcg.kg-1) intravenously. Complete muscle relaxation was provided before insertion of the tube. At the visualisation of larynx with direct laringoscopy (Macintosh 4 laryngoscope blade) the epiglottis was short but the glottis was Grade II (Cormack-Lahene). On the first attempt, a 8.0-mm endotracheal tube was smoothly inserted into the trachea without difficulty and fixed at the middle. The patient did not cough during the intubation. During the four hour operative procedure, anesthesia was maintained with nitrous oxide, oxygen, isoflurane, remifentanyl (0.25 mcg.kg-1.min-1) and rocuronium. The surgery was uneventful. After the operation, the endotracheal tube cuff was deflated and removed without any difficulty, severe coughing and vomiting did not occur at this period. On the first day, the patient complained of moderate hoarseness. He was discharged on the second day and still complained of persistant hoarseness on the 6th day. He had no symptoms other than hoarseness. On the 6th day after the operation, fiberoptic laryngoscopy was performed by an otorhinolaryngologist and revealed anteromedial dislocation of the left arytenoid cartilage . Surgical reduction, under the general anesthesia, was scheduled on the 9th post-operative day. The dislocation of the arytenoid cartilage was visualised under rigid broncoscopy and posterolateral reposition by spatula and steroid injection were performed. The hoarseness was relieved gradually in 6 weeks. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.