The patient was an 89-year-old woman who visited a neighborhood hospital 4 h after developing abdominal pain and vomiting of sudden onset. She was referred to our hospital 2 h later with the diagnosis of intestinal obstruction. She had a history of undergoing cesarean sections. On arrival at our hospital, her vital signs were stable; examination revealed that she was 145 cm tall and weighed 36.9 kg (calculated body mass index [BMI], 17.5). She had severe tenderness in the lower abdomen, but no signs of peritoneal irritation. Blood tests showed an elevated white blood cell count, although the serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was normal. Blood gas analysis showed mild acidosis, with a pH of 7.383, and a base excess (BE) of − 3.7. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a small bowel forming a closed loop, with poor contrast effect, and dilatation of the oral side of the small bowel . Ascites was also identified . The patient was diagnosed as having strangulated bowel obstruction, and emergency surgery was performed.
At laparotomy, bloody ascites was observed. Two segments of the ileum were tied together forming a knot, and both segments were necrotic due to impaired blood flow . There was a band formation between a nearby segment of the small bowel and the abdominal wall, probably attributable in part to the previous cesarean sections, but there was no evidence of intestinal obstruction. Although it was necessary to release the strangulated small bowel, we did not immediately release the knot, but first proceeded with ligation of the mesenteric vessels draining the strangulated small bowel, to prevent dissemination of toxic substances from the necrotic bowel to the systemic circulation. Ligation of the mesenteric vessels was followed by resection of a 100-cm segment of the knotted necrotic ileum, 10 cm from the ileal end. Hand-sewn anastomosis was performed with the Albert-Lembert suture. The volume of blood loss was 282 ml, and the operation time was 1 h 41 min.
The resected specimen showed the two intestinal segments wrapped together forming a knot, as indicated by the intraoperative diagnosis, and the strangulation was released by untying the knot . There were no abnormalities on the mucosal surface other than signs of necrosis. Histopathological examination of the resected ileum showed that the resected small bowel was remarkably devoid of crypt epithelium, and there was severe congestion and hemorrhage extending from the intrinsic mucosal layer to the submucosa, which was considered to represent an ischemic change.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 13th postoperative day.