The case report was approved by the Ethics Committee of the General Hospital of Veroia (decision No. 11, 10/12/2017). The patient’s family provided verbal informed consent. A 64-year-old man with a medical history of bipolar disorder and arterial hypertension was hospitalized for a delayed presentation ST-elevation myocardial infarction. He was admitted to our hospital 24 hours after symptom onset. Diagnostic coronary angiography revealed 95% stenosis at the distal third of the right coronary artery, and he underwent a primary percutaneous coronary intervention to the culprit lesion. Loading doses of aspirin and ticagrelor were given. During his hospitalization, he reported palpitations and shortness of breath. Clinical examination revealed normal heart sounds and a grade III systolic murmur at the cardiac apex. The patient’s blood pressure was 100/65 mmHg, pulse rate was 95 bpm, and respiratory rate was 14 breaths/minute. He had functional class II heart failure according to the New York Heart Association. Electrocardiography showed a sinus rhythm with Q-wave formation in the inferior wall leads (II, III, aVF), T-wave inversion in the same leads, and borderline QT prolongation (QTc of 490 ms). No ST elevation suggestive of left ventricular aneurysm formation was noticed. The P2Y12 inhibitor was switched from ticagrelor to prasugrel, and 24-hour ambulatory electrocardiography revealed frequent premature atrial and ventricular complexes. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a hypokinetic posteroinferior wall with a mildly reduced ejection fraction of 45% (Simpson’s method), moderate mitral regurgitation (vena contracta, 0.6 cm; proximal isovelocity surface area, 0.7 cm; effective regurgitant orifice area, 34 mm2), and mild pericardial effusion.

Furosemide was added to lisinopril and metoprolol, but only mild to moderate improvement of the patient’s symptoms was noticed before he deteriorated. Furthermore, up-titration of these medications was difficult because of the borderline arterial pressure. The addition of ivabradine and the switch from ticagrelor to prasugrel did not change his clinical status. Ticagrelor may cause transient dyspnea in some patients, which reverses with discontinuation.3

Forty days after the myocardial infarction, the patient was readmitted because of exertional dyspnea and worsening shortness of breath. New transthoracic echocardiography showed a dyskinetic cavity that was connected to the posteroinferior wall and communicated with the left ventricle, causing damage to the posterior mitral valve leaflet (P1 scallop) and resulting in severe mitral regurgitation. A color Doppler study confirmed passage of blood from the left ventricle into the cavity through an opening in the left ventricular wall. No thrombus formation was detected. The diagnosis of left ventricular pseudoaneurysm was made.

Unfortunately, the patient died while waiting to transfer for surgical treatment.