A 75-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a gastroesophageal lesion. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a raised lesion with ulceration on the posterior wall of the greater curvature of the cardia. The endoscopy also indicated tenderness in the lower esophagus and tumor invasion was suspected . Immunostaining of the tumor biopsy showed positive staining for Melan-A, human melanoma black-45 (HMB45), and S-100 protein (+), indicating malignant melanoma of the esophagogastric junction. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a mildly stained lesion protruding into the cardiac part of stomach and enlarged perigastric lymph nodes (the right paracardial lymph node and lesser curvature lymph node were lumped together) . No obvious distant metastasis was observed. Serum analysis indicated that squamous cell carcinoma antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 were within normal limits. A positron emission tomography (PET)– CT scan showed a high degree of fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation (maximum standardized uptake value: early = 13.2, delayed = 19.2) in the upper stomach and enlarged lymph nodes. Based on these findings, we performed proximal gastrectomy, lower esophagus resection, and double-tract reconstruction. We also performed resection of the enlarged lymph node in the lesser curvature of stomach and no obvious distant metastasis in the abdominal cavity was found. Histological examination of the resected tissue indicated an elastic, soft tumor that was located in the esophagogastric junction (6 × 5 cm, Fig. a). Analysis of the tumor cell morphology demonstrated large, round tumor cells with nuclear atypia and high mitotic activity . Immunostaining was positive for Melan-A, HMB45, S-100 protein and SRY-box transcription factor 10 , and the patient was diagnosed with malignant melanoma of the esophagogastric junction with regional lymph node metastases. Postoperative recovery was good, and the patient was discharged on 22 days post-operation. Three months after the surgery, a follow-up CT showed subpleural masses in the lower lobe of the left lung, with bilateral pleural effusion . As previous analyses of the primary tumor had revealed BRAF-wild-type, the patient was prescribed with nivolumab, human immunoglobulin G4 monoclonal antibody, and inhibitor of programmed death-1 (PD-1) in accordance with melanoma treatment guidelines. Following three courses of nivolumab treatment, the patient presented with grade 3 renal dysfunction (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0) . The patient was prescribed steroid therapy for the immune-related adverse events that developed in response to the nivolumab treatment. Despite improved renal function, chemotherapy was discontinued at the patient's request. Five months after the presentation of renal dysfunction, a CT scan demonstrated an unstained nodule in the pancreas with dilation of the caudal pancreatic duct , although the size of the pleural metastasis was unchanged. Intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) was initiated for pancreatic metastasis treatment at 66 Gy. Six months after IMRT treatment, a CT scan revealed pancreatic nodule and pleural metastasis was shrunk. Eight months after the IMRT (13 months after nivolumab treatment completion), the pleural mass and pleural effusion had disappeared . PET–CT showed no obvious abnormal accumulation . We hypothesized that the abscopal effect was caused by the radiation therapy, and further enhanced by the nivolumab treatment, which had finished 5 months earlier; the timeline of these events is shown in Fig. . Twelve months after the onset of the abscopal effect, no additional lesions were observed and the patient had discontinued all treatment.