We present a case of a 74-year-old man smoker patient with NSCLC with bone metastases (T2NXM1) and HCC (BCLC stage C). The patient had a related liver cirrhosis metabolic syndrome, good liver function (Child Pugh A5), and reported a diabetes mellitus type II in his past medical history. In July 2014 for chest and abdominal pain he performed a CT scan with evidence of lung and liver lesions, and bone metastasis. Lung biopsy performed on primary lung lesion showed pulmonary adenocarcinoma (TTF1 positive and p40 negative) and liver biopsy showed HCC (grade 2 Edmondson) . As the patient was not in good clinical conditions due to grade 2 asthenia, we decided to start with gemcitabine in monochemotherapy in August 2014. After 2 months of chemotherapy a further CT scan showed a disease progression in both the lung and the liver. We decided to initiate treatment with sorafenib with standard schedule (400 mg bid continuously).
CT scan before therapy showed that the primary liver lesion measured 97 mm × 98.3 mm . The primary lung lesion measured 40.9 mm × 29.3 mm and the metastasis in the contralateral lung measured 27 mm × 25 mm . After 20 days we decided to reduce the dose of sorafenib to 400 mg per day for adverse events (hypertension grade 2 and mucositis grade 3). This dose was maintained until progression, without adverse events. CT scan after 2 months showed partial response in both lung lesions and stable disease in the liver and bone lesions. CT scan after 6 months of therapy showed partial response of the primary lung lesion and complete response of the lung metastasis . HCC was stable . After 13 months of therapy CT scan showed a disease progression in both the lung and the liver . Due to poor performance status of the patient we decided to treat patient with only best supportive care.
The pulmonary lesion underwent routine diagnostic molecular characterization for EGFR, KRAS, NRAS, PIK3CA, BRAF, ERBB2, ALK, DDR2, MAP2K1, RET mutations using Myriapod Lung Status (MassARRAY Sequenom). Results revealed an exon 11 point mutation on BRAF gene (G469V).
The same analysis was performed on the liver lesion, with no mutations in the different genes. Genomic DNA extraction from both lesions was performed starting from tumor sections composed of about 70 % of tumor cells.
Taking into consideration our previous results obtained in HCC patients, in which we have demonstrated that specific polymorphisms of eNOS, VEGFA, VEGFC and HIF-1alpha seem to correlate with response to sorafenib [–], we performed the analysis of such polymorphisms on our patient. Results showed an homozygous status for eNOS VNTR (4bb) and HIF-1alpha rs12434438 GG. Both of these polymorphisms were associated with a worse prognosis in our previous studies [–].
The molecular determinations performed on the liver lesion (not part of routine molecular diagnostics) and the polymorphism analyses, both part of an ongoing research protocol on liver cancer approved by our Local Ethics Committee, were carried out after obtaining written consent from the patient.