A 75-year-old Japanese man was found to have a pancreatic cyst in 2006 while undergoing postoperative evaluation for colorectal cancer. The pancreatic cyst increased in size, and surgery was recommended, but the patient declined . In 2015, the cyst ruptured, and he was treated conservatively . In 2017, he began dialysis for chronic renal failure. The same year, he fell down on a road with a fever of 40 °C and was transported emergently to a nearby hospital. Laboratory tests showed elevated levels of C-reactive protein. Serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were 5.8 ng/ml and 131.3 U/ml, respectively .
The patient was treated with new quinolone-based antibiotics for 3 weeks as a conservative treatment after hospitalization. Bacteria were not detected by blood culture examination at admission. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a cystic lesion in the body of the pancreas measuring 119 mm × 100 mm and an adjacent left renal cyst measuring 63 mm in diameter. The wall of the pancreatic cyst was thickened. The pancreatic ducts were not dilated . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a liquid surface in the pancreatic cyst . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) did not show pancreatic duct dilation . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a liquid surface in the pancreatic cyst and did not show nodules in the cyst . Gastroscopy showed an elevated mass in the posterior wall of the body of the stomach with intact mucosa . In addition, colonoscopy performed 5 months before admission showed an elevated mass in the descending colon with intact mucosa .
Pancreatic cyst infection was diagnosed as the source of infection. However, identification of the organism was difficult. Furthermore, due to the increase in the size and wall thickness of the cyst, it was unclear whether the cystic mass was neoplastic with malignant potential. For these reasons, the patient underwent distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy, with deroofing of the left renal cyst. Intraoperatively, the pancreatic cyst strongly adhered to the descending colon, so partial resection of the colon was added.
Pathologic analysis of the resected cyst demonstrated a simple cyst lined by mucinous epithelium . There was no underlying stromal condensation or epithelial dysplasia, and communication with the native pancreatic ducts was not observed. Pathological analysis of the resected colon adhesive pancreatic wall revealed a fistula-like depression on the mucosal side of the colon . Bacteroides fragilis and Streptococcus sanguinis were detected as a result of culture examination of the pancreatic cyst contents. On the basis of the operative and histological findings, a final diagnosis of MNNC with colon communication was made . The small colonic fistula was presumed to be the source of infection.
Postoperatively, the patient was treated for a grade B pancreatic fistula. On postoperative day 12, emergency surgery was performed for thrombotic descending colon perforation. On postoperative day 94, the patient was discharged on foot.