A 91-year-old Thai woman with bilateral pseudophakia presented with acute left eye pain and redness. The best-corrected visual acuity was 6/9. On slit-lamp examination of the left eye, diffuse conjunctiva injection and the dendritic ulcer with terminal bulbs, highlighted by fluorescein staining, were observed on the superotemporal side of the cornea . There were no cells in the anterior chamber. She was diagnosed with herpes simplex keratitis (HSK) on the left eye. Noticeably, there was also a localized encapsulated bleb on the superonasal conjunctiva with a negative Seidel test . No peripheral iridectomy was seen and the IOP was 12 mmHg. Fundus examination revealed a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.5 with an intact neural rim.
The patient had no underlying systemic/ocular diseases, or any significant trauma to this eye, and denied use of any topical anti-glaucoma medications. According to the medical record, she had only had two surgeries; the first operation was a nasal pterygium excision with bare sclera technique and adjunctive MMC performed 26 years ago. Unfortunately, the operative note of the previous pterygium excision, including the concentration and duration of MMC, was unavailable. The second operation was an uneventful ECCE with intraocular lens implantation 8 months after the pterygium excision. She was seen for 3 years at our hospital without any complications and then was lost to follow-up. The first notice of the bleb was approximately a year ago, which was 25 years after the surgeries.
Gonioscopic examination revealed 5° of a localized area of peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) at the superonasal quadrant anterior chamber angle without any fistula or fish-mouthing appearance of wound gape. Anterior segment ocular coherence tomography (ASOCT) illustrated a thick-wall cystic space . Noticeably, at the 158° cut, a straight, sharp-edged fistula, parallel to the iris plane and connected between the bleb and anterior chamber at the scleral spur, was also revealed . These characteristics corresponded with the site of the ECCE scleral wound. The location of the fistula from ASOCT coincided with the PAS in the gonioscopic view. According to the area of pterygium scar, it is highly suggestive that the site of this fistula was within the area of previous MMC application. An inadvertent bleb formation, the late complication of MMC, was diagnosed.
She was treated successfully with a 1 week course of hospital-made topical 2% ganciclovir, five times daily for herpes simplex keratitis. The bleb was observed without further management as it was inactive and had no ocular hypotony. The patient had been informed about the warning symptoms/signs of bleb-related infection.