Our patient is a 32-year-old G4P1021 (Gravida 4 Para 1,021–1 term delivery, 0 preterm deliveries, 2 abortions, 1 living offspring) with a body mass index of 37 who initially presented at 8 weeks of gestation for her dating ultrasound, which depicted a fetus in the right uterine horn and an empty left uterine horn. The patient had a known history of a didelphys uterus with two uteri and two cervices diagnosed several years prior on pelvic ultrasound. No additional imaging was obtained to evaluate for renal anomalies, which limited a complete antepartum evaluation, as renal tract malformations are highly associated with Müllarian anomalies. Her obstetrical history was significant for a prior low-transverse cesarean section at full term for arrest of dilation at 1.0 cm, a dilation and evacuation for a fetus with polycystic kidney disease and secondary anhydramnios, and a medical termination of pregnancy. All four of her pregnancies were located in the right uterine horn. Throughout her antepartum course, fetal growth was within normal limits with consistent cephalic presentation.

At 39 weeks 3 days of gestation she presented in early labor at 1.0 cm dilated, 80 % effaced, at −2 station. She denied incisional pain. Her VBAC score was calculated as 35 %. She requested a TOLAC, was counseled appropriately regarding the risks and benefits, and was admitted for labor augmentation. The fetal heart rate tracing on admission was Category I with approximately three contractions in ten minutes on tocometer. She received an epidural and vaginal exam was repeated. A rudimentary cervix was palpated on the patient’s left with a slightly dilated cervix identified on the patient’s right, through which the cervical ripening balloon was placed. Both the uterine and vaginal balloons were inflated with 80 cc of normal saline. Pitocin was also started at that time.

The balloon was in place for 11 h, at which time she was 4.0 cm dilated, 50 % effaced, at −2 station with the cervix still notably on the patient’s right. Her membranes were artificially ruptured at that time for clear fluid. She became fully dilated after 22 h on pitocin. She pushed for 90 min with a Category II tracing secondary to variable decelerations. Right mediolateral episiotomy was cut to expedite delivery of a viable female infant from LOA position with 1-and 5-min APGAR scores of 6 and 9, respectively. Birthweight was 3225 g (25.5th percentile). Retained placenta was manually extracted with a total estimated blood loss of 400 cc. The episiotomy was repaired with 2–0 vicryl in the standard fashion. The patient’s postpartum course was uncomplicated and she was discharged home on postpartum day 2.