A 51-year-old male with intellectual disability presented to our hospital due to fever. He denied any pain or other symptoms, and his vital signs were normal. Laboratory values were as follows: 11,500/mm3 white blood cells, 12.3 g/dL hemoglobin, 5 mg/L C-reactive protein, 12 U/L aspartate aminotransferase, and 9 U/L alanine aminotransferase. Initially, he was diagnosed with aspiration pneumonia based on chest X-ray and blood examination. However, an abdominal X-ray examination suggested a foreign body , and a computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a toothbrush in the duodenum . No abnormal ascites fluid, free air, and abdominal abscess were observed, and it looked as if the toothbrush was stuck in the liver. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed immediately following the CT studies. It was observed in the second part of duodenum, and there was a granuloma around the handle part of the toothbrush at the duodenal bulb . Endoscopic removal was attempted using a polypectomy snare and biopsy forceps. However, the toothbrush was deeply embedded into the duodenal mucosa, so it could not be safely removed. This case was diagnosed as duodenal incarceration of the toothbrush, and it was removed by laparoscopic surgery, which is less invasive than open surgery. The surgical procedure was as follows . First, we found that the hepatic hilum and duodenal bulb were adhered tightly and could not be detached by peeling. Therefore, the toothbrush was difficult to remove by making an incision in the duodenal bulb. For that, the transverse and ascending colons were detached from the retroperitoneum to expose the C-loop of the duodenum in which the toothbrush was incarcerated. After that, an incision was made on the caudal side of the second part of the duodenum, and the toothbrush was removed through the incision . The extraction hole was closed using a barbed suture, and the procedure was completed. The operation time and estimated blood loss were 201 min and a little, respectively. The extracted toothbrush was 15 cm in length . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful without complications and a postoperative CT showed no changes in the liver . During the postoperative course, no abnormal values of liver function were observed; these results were consistent with those of the preoperative blood examination.