The patient is a 24-year-old right-hand dominant Hispanic female that initially presented to an urgent care office in October 2021 with a right small finger mass on the ulnar aspect of the proximal interphalangeal joint that had been present for several months prior to presentation. She had no pertinent medical or surgical history and a family history positive for renal cell carcinoma and diabetes on her maternal side of the family. She reported the mass would grow and reduce in size, especially during her pregnancy, when at times, she states it would grow to the size of an olive. Her pain worsened after pregnancy, with her newborn child grasping the finger frequently. The urgent care provider attempted aspiration of the mass, which was unsuccessful, and it was diagnosed as a likely ganglion cyst. The patient saw another local hand surgeon sometime after her urgent care visit, with apparent plans to remove the mass that was never executed. In March 2022, the patient presented to the treating hand surgeon with complaints of increasing pain and an open wound with bleeding from the original site of the mass starting one month prior. Plain radiographs demonstrated a soft tissue mass on the ulnar aspect of the small finger near the PIP joint, with some possible small punctate calcifications seen within. The patient underwent a surgical excisional biopsy of the mass on 3/15/22. The surgical pathology was reviewed by two independent pathologists, which was consistent with low-grade leiomyosarcoma of the finger. The immunohistochemical staining and histological slides are seen in . The patient underwent a PET/CT scan in early April 2022 , demonstrating a suspicious lymph node in the right axilla. However, the treating oncologist thought it was benign and likely reactive. This is a clinical and pathologic assessment consistent with AJCC stage 1 A disease. The right small finger mass was also appreciated on the PET/CT scan. A general surgeon was also consulted for a second opinion and felt the lymph node to be benign and reactive.
Given the above clinical and imaging findings, in early May 2022, the patient was discussed at the tumor board of the treating hospital, and it was agreed that she would likely get the most benefit from a ray amputation. Routine laboratory studies around this time were unremarkable for any infectious or inflammatory workup. The same day, the patient presented to the treating surgeon's office with a new complaint of another mass, which was more distal on the small finger than the original mass. The exam and radiographs seemed consistent with what was likely another focus of leiomyosarcoma. On 6/15/22, the patient underwent successful right-hand minor finger ray amputation for her primary leiomyosarcoma. The small finger ray was amputated to the level of the mid-metacarpal shaft. The small finger digital nerves also underwent targeted muscle reinnervation. The wound was closed with primary wound closure . The surgical margins assessed by a pathologist were clear for any tumor, with the biopsy results again consistent with low-grade leiomyosarcoma. The patient was followed by her medical oncologist and the hand surgery team as an outpatient over the next several months. Her disease was stable, with the right axillary node showing no sign of change on repeat chest CT scans. The patient's right hand showed no evidence of recurrence or residual tumor clinically or on an MRI of the right hand obtained on 10/11/22. The patient continues progressing well postoperatively and initiated hand therapy approximately three weeks postoperatively. Most recent occupational therapy clinic notes indicated the full function of the right-hand digits 1–4, flexion 0.5 cm from the distal palmar crease, and comparable grip strength to the contralateral hand. She has no pain or other masses. Postoperatively she commented on a prominent and ropy scar, for which she also underwent aggressive therapy and massage . Continued oncologic surveillance and repeat MRI of the right hand showed no local or systemic disease recurrence at nine months postoperatively .