An agitated 20-year-old boy without known past medical history, who had hallucinations referred to emergency toxicology department. He was reported to have abused 30 subcutaneous injections of somatropin, each containing 10 mg/1.5 mL all at once with the aim of enhancing performance for coming competition. He also had been using somatropin for the past 2 years for anabolic purposes. The initial vital signs were; BP = 145/96 mmHg, PR = 111/min, RR = 21/min, T = 37.10C and SPO2 with mask = 100%. He had been sedated in ED with midazolam. Laboratory tests revealed hypernatremia (157 mEq/L), hyperkalemia (5.3 mEq/L), high Lactate Dehydrogenases (LDH; 1448 U/L) and Creatine Phosphokinase (CPK; 2620 U/L) level which were all robustly signifying that a state of rhabdomyolysis had happened. Urine toxicology analysis was negative for all substances. The supine chest X-Ray had veiling opacities related to pleural effusion. In Electrocardiogram (ECG), left atrium (LA) abnormality was seen according to Romhilt-Estes criterion . The O2 saturation level dropped within hours and he had to be intubated. Brain CT scan demonstrated no pathologic changes. Consolidations in dependent sites of lungs were observed in his chest CT scan that were indicative of aspiration pneumonia . He experienced several episodes of hypertensive crisis during his admission and was then infused on trinitroglycerin drip. On the fourth day he had a temperature of 40 0C. The patient was evaluated for sepsis and samples of endotracheal tube were collected for culture which consisted of gram-positive staphylococcus aureus. Urine culture was also positive for klebsiella. Therefore, antibiotics including; ceftriaxone and clindamycin, were prescribed. As the consciousness level had not been improving up until then, and SPO2 levels had begun to decline, the decision was made to change the endotracheal tube and re-intubate him with suspicion of upper airway obstruction. In spite of no ischemic changes in electrocardiography, on the sixth day of admission; elevated troponin level (0.99 ng/ml) was detected. The case was consulted with cardiologists and considering his high d-dimer, they advised chest CT angiography with a high suspicion for pulmonary embolism, however, in view of his unstable condition CT angiography could not have been carried out. As a result, an alternative regimen of anticoagulant therapy with heparin was initiated. The next day he deteriorated with cardiopulmonary arrest, cardio pulmonary resuscitation was instituted but the cardiac rhythm remained unviable and he was declared dead after 40 min.