We report the case of a 42-year-old Tunisian man, born out of a consanguineous marriage, who had no cardiovascular risk factors and was followed-up for hypofibrinogenemia diagnosed three years previously due to bleeding after dental care. He had no known family history of fibrinogen deficiency. He was admitted for an acute typical anginal pain which occurred at rest and continued for several hours.
On physical examination he had no fever, his blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg, his heart rate was 65 beats per minute and cardiopulmonary auscultation was normal. An electrocardiogram (ECG) on admission, seven hours after the onset of pain showed an elevation of the ST segment in inferior leads and an ST-segment depression in DI, aVL. His troponin I and creatine phosphokinase levels were elevated to 17 ng/L and 820IU/L respectively. There was no sign of inflammation; his C-reactive protein level was 5 mg/L and white blood cell count, 7000 cells/mL. Bleeding-related tests were carried out. His fibrinogen level was 0.3 g/L using the Von Clauss method, and < 0.16 g/L using the immunological method. His activated partial thromboplastin time was > 120 seconds (control: 32 seconds), prothombin activity < 10% and thrombin time > 120 seconds (control: 13 seconds). His platelet count (242,000/mm3) and bleeding time (140 seconds) were normal. A transthoracic echocardiography estimated his left ventricular ejection fraction at 61% without evidence of segmental motion abnormalities. A coronary angiography was not performed in view of the major risk of bleeding. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on day 5 showed the presence of almost complete transmural enhancement of the apicolateral segment. It is noteworthy that an etiological investigation for acute myocardial infarction in a young adult was otherwise negative; our patient did not have any protein C or protein S or an antithrombin deficiency; there was neither a Factor V Leiden nor prothrombin G20210 mutation, no anti-phospholipid antibodies (lupus type v inhibitor, anticardiolipin or anti-2-glycoprotein-1 antibodies) were detected and his plasma homocysteine level was normal. His fasting glucose (0.9 g/L) and hemoglobin A1C (4.7%) levels, lipid profile (cholesterol: 1.8 g/L; high density cholesterol: 0.47 g/L; triglycerides: 1.6 g/L; low density cholesterol (Friedewald formula): 1.0 g/L) and liver function tests were also normal. Transesophageal echocardiography ruled out an emboligenic disease. Our patient was managed with aspirin, atenolol, captopril and atorvastatin but did not receive any anticoagulant treatment. He did not experience any angina recurrence.
A submaximal exercise test on the sixth day was negative. An electrocardiogram on the seventh day showed a Q wave in inferior leads with apicolateral subepicardial ischemia. We did not detect any recurrence of the myocardial ischemia. A cardiac MRI performed one month after the acute episode identified a zone of myocardial necrosis and wall thinning, confirming the initial diagnosis .