The case involves Mr. N., a 36-year-old man with no previous medical history, who had returned from a long stay in Ivory Coast for professional activities (about 0–6 months). Since his return to Tunisia, he presented a symptomatology associating fever, headache, asthenia, and diarrhea. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for Covid-19 had previously been performed (before traveling), which was negative. Mr. N. did not seek medical advice and resorted to self-medication including antipyretic and analgesics. On the 5th day, Mr. N.’s condition worsened as he presented a generalized tonic-clonic convulsive seizure, after which he did not regain consciousness. His family members called for medical assistance, but Mr. N. died before the arrival of the emergency units. As a result of an unclear cause of death, a medicolegal autopsy was ordered by the prosecutor, and the body was thus transferred to our department for autopsy. Malaria infection was already suspected at this point upon investigating the death circumstances with his relatives. A postmortem blood sample, on ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) preserved blood sample, was hence referred to the Parasitology Laboratory in order to confirm our assumptions before autopsy. Malaria rapid diagnostic test (RDT) (i.e., rapid diagnostic test for malaria which detects malaria antigens in a person’s blood) was positive. In both thick and thin Giemsa-stained blood smears , numerous Plasmodium falciparum (trophozoites) were found, showing high parasitemia. The percentage of parasitemia was though difficult to assess due to the hemolysis state of the postmortem samples. External examination revealed cyanosis with frank mucocutaneous icterus. Autopsy findings revealed massive congestion and edema of the brain, weighing 1550 g , lungs (weighing 745 g on the right and 640 g on the left), and inner organs. Hepatomegaly was noted (liver weighing 2905 g) with heterogeneous parenchyma on section. The spleen (weighing 385 g) was enlarged with a tense, smooth capsule, and congested parenchyma of brown-black color. Histology showed cerebral gray and white matter with congested capillaries containing numerous parasitized erythrocytes (trophozoites) in each examined brain section. Each cell contained dots of hemozoin pigment (malaria pigment). The same findings were also observed in the histology of the remaining thoracic and abdominal organs . Toxicological analyses did not reveal the presence of any toxic substance that might have been involved in the death.
Based on histology, autopsy findings, as well as parasitology expertise, the case was considered to have died of fulminant cerebral malaria with multiple organ failure.