A 59-year-old male with a past medical history of hypertension presented to the ED for evaluation of a right-sided headache with an episode of palpitations and near syncope that developed while receiving an IANB for a tooth extraction at a dentist’s office. While his dentist was performing a dental block with lidocaine and epinephrine, he developed acute onset of severe right-sided headache accompanied by palpitations and near syncope with “trouble keeping his eyes open.” The dental extraction procedure was aborted and he was brought to the ED. By the time the patient had arrived to the ED, his palpitations and near syncopal episode had subsided, but his right-sided headache was persistent. The patient denied any other symptoms.
Vital signs at initial presentation included blood pressure of 190/80 millimeters of mercury; heart rate of 73 beats per minute; respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute; pulse oximetry 96% on room air; and temperature of 98.4° Fahrenheit. Physical exam revealed a middle-aged man in moderate discomfort from pain. His head was normocephalic and atraumatic; no ecchymosis, erythema, or crepitus was noted on his jaw or neck. His pupils were 5 millimeters, equal, round, and reactive to light bilaterally, and without objective ptosis. Cranial nerves II-XII were intact and symmetrical bilaterally. He had 5/5 muscle strength in both the upper and lower extremities bilaterally and 2+ bilateral patella and Achilles deep tendon reflexes. The patient had no ataxia or pronator drift and had a normal finger to nose.
Initial laboratory studies included a basic metabolic panel, complete blood count, coagulation panel, thyroid stimulating hormone level, and troponin. None of these labs demonstrated any significant abnormalities. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram was noted to be normal sinus rhythm with a rate of 63 beats per minute with left axis deviation with high lateral T wave inversion, nonspecific ST changes in anterior leads with no change from previous. A chest radiograph was obtained and was without infiltrates or evidence of cardiomegaly.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head without intravenous (IV) contrast revealed multiple small foci of air predominantly in the expected region of the intracranial venous drainage system ( and ). Multiple small foci of air were also noted in the right temporalis muscle. Given the patient’s history of dental procedure the possibility of intravascular introduction of air and local anesthetic was raised . There was no evidence of hemorrhage or acute territorial infarction or mass.
Given the findings on the CT head, a dedicated CT neck with IV contrast was performed and showed residual punctate foci of gas in the left transverse sinus and posterior right cavernous sinus. Most of the previously seen bilateral cavernous sinus gas noted on CT of the head was not present on CT neck with IV contrast. The CT neck with IV contrast also reported that the patient was noted to have tortuosity of the extracranial internal carotid arteries with a short segment of the retropharyngeal course at the level of the hypopharynx.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for continued neurologic and cardiovascular monitoring after discovering the findings of intracranial venous air embolism and air near the carotid sheath on CT from suspected intravascular injection of local anesthetic. While hospitalized, the patient’s headache completely resolved. The patient had a repeat CT of his head and neck 24 hours later with near-total resolution of the previously noted gas in the cavernous sinus region and no acute intracranial infarct or hemorrhage. Neurology evaluated the patient and recommended no additional imaging as repeat CT demonstrated resolution of previously noted venous gas foci, and recommended symptomatic treatment of headache if symptoms recurred. The patient was discharged that next day with completely resolved symptoms.