An 18-year-old male, healthy collegiate sprinter, presented with a chronic tear of his right rectus femoris tendon. A year prior, he was running high school track when he felt a pop in his right thigh and developed an obvious deformity. Physical therapy was attempted with incomplete recovery and continued thigh and groin pain, resulting in an occasional antalgic gait. He also felt subjective limitation in his athletic ability. Due to his continued symptoms, he sought a second opinion with the primary investigator.
Physical examination of the thigh demonstrated an obvious subcutaneous deformity, similar to a “Popeye” type sign seen in the proximal biceps, with a palpable defect in the quadriceps tendon. Knee range of motion was 0–120° and he was tender to palpation along the distal tendon stump. Hip range of motion was 110° of flexion, 15° of extension, 35° of internal rotation, and 45° of external rotation. Internal impingement sign was positive reproducing the patient’s pain in his groin.
MRI of the right lower extremity and MR arthrogram of the right hip demonstrated a complete tear of the rectus femoris tendon without atrophic changes, a CAM lesion with an alpha angle of 70°, and anterior-superior labrum tearing.
A trial of conservative management was attempted with activity modification, physical therapy, and an intra-articular hip injection for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. With the injection, we attempted to isolate the patient’s symptoms as coming from intra-articular hip pathology or from the rectus femoris rupture. The injection relieved his groin pain for approximately 1 week with continued irritation in the thigh, especially isolated around the tendon stump. An attempt was made with the patient to elucidate the true nature of the symptoms. He sincerely felt that the groin pain, which was temporarily relieved from the injection, was significant and independent pain from the pain, he experienced at the region of the tendon stump. The pain at the tendon stump continued to bother him during the week of relief from the groin pain. Furthermore, after the initial response to the injection, the patient felt that both areas of pain were significant to his overall limitations and symptoms. At this point, the patient had failed conservative therapy with both the intra-articular pathology and rectus femoris rupture deemed significant sources of his persistent symptoms. Surgery was recommended for both hip and tendon pathologies.
The primary surgeon and patient jointly decided to address the rectus femoris rupture with reconstruction and the intra-articular hip pathologies through hip arthroscopy. For the rectus femoris, the patient was positioned supine on a traction table. A midline incision, in line with the quadriceps tendon, was made at the site of tendon rupture from the tendon stump to the proximal patella. The distal stump of the rectus femoris was isolated circumferentially. There was approximately 4 mm of relatively thin rectus femoris tendon stump remaining. The tendon stump was sutured with multiple loops of Fiberwire (Arthrex, Naples, FL). The Achilles allograft was then obtained and sutured medially and laterally in a running Krackow fashion. The Achilles graft was fanned out and tacked to the rectus femoris muscle belly utilizing approximately 15 simple interrupted #2 Ethibond (Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH) sutures. Fiberwire (Arthrex, Naples FL) was utilized to connect the tendon graft to the remaining rectus femoris tendon stump in a Krakow fashion medially and laterally. Attempting to balance anatomic location versus graft/tendon tension, the rectus femoris complex was pulled over the distal intact quadriceps tendon. While maintaining tension, #2 Fiberwire (Arthrex, Naples, FL) was passed in a running Krakow fashion medially and laterally through the graft and quadriceps tendon from musculotendinous margin to the proximal patella and back. Once completed, the graft and rectus femoris had excellent stability throughout knee range of motion.
For the hip arthroscopic procedure, the hip was placed under traction. Three portals were utilized: Anterolateral, mid-anterior, and distal anterolateral accessory. Diagnostic arthroscopy demonstrated a labral tear from the 12:30 to 3:00 position. The acetabular rim was decorticated. For the 1:00 position and 2:30 position, knotless Cinchlock anchors (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) were utilized to affix the labrum. Traction was then released and restoration of the suction seal nature of the labrum was confirmed. Attention was then turned to the arthroscopic femoroplasty. The convex protuberance of bone consistent with a CAM lesion was noted at the 1–3 o’clock position. A burr was used to recontour the femoral head-and-neck junction to a concave structure. This was confirmed by direct visualization and intraoperative radiographs.
Following the arthroscopic procedure, the rectus femoris reconstruction was rechecked and intact. All skin incisions were then closed and dressed.
Postoperatively, the patient was placed in a locked knee immobilizer and recommend toe-touch weightbearing for 3 weeks. Physical therapy was initiated after 2 weeks with a gradual progression of weightbearing after 3 weeks. Knee flexion was initiated at 2 weeks with 15 degrees per week until full motion. No quadriceps resistance was allowed until 3 months. Six months following the operation, the patient was cleared to return to sports. There were no complications encountered.