A 64-year-old woman was admitted to the hematology department of our hospital in August 2019 with pancytopenia complicated by headache.
The patient had recurrent pancytopenia for half a year. The symptom of headache had lasted for 4 d.
The patient presented with a 3-mo history of lumbar pain and was finally diagnosed with solitary bone plasmacytoma a year ago. She had received only radiotherapy, at a dose of 45 Gy, 22 times. She was first admitted to the hospital in February 2019 due to persistent pancytopenia. The initial complete blood count (CBC) showed a hemoglobin (HB) level of 96 g/L, white blood cell count (WBC) of 2.5 × 109/L, and platelet (PLT) count of 38 × 109/L. Immunofixation electrophoresis showed that the M component was an IgG-kappa light chain. On bone marrow (BM) aspiration, 0.13% of monoclonal plasma cells were observed by flow cytometry (FCM). Biopsy revealed hypoplastic marrow without megakaryocytes. No bone lesion other than primary local lumbar injury was observed in a series of X-ray scans. The patient was diagnosed with SBP with minimal marrow involvement, according to the diagnostic criteria for plasma cell dyscrasia, with concomitant myelosuppression. She underwent treatment with thalidomide, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), and thrombopoietin (TPO), blood transfusion, and other supportive treatments. Peripheral blood was significantly improved after 3 mo of treatment and almost restored to normal.
On admission, the patient was lucid and slurred in speech. The skin mucous membrane of the whole body had scattered haemorrhage spots. Limb activity was normal, and nervous system examination showed no abnormality.
The CBC revealed pancytopenia (HB 70 g/L, WBC 3.0 × 109/L, and PLT 38 × 109/L). A peripheral blood smear showed 16% of abnormal promyelocytes with dendritic protrusions . Thrombin function test showed that prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were prolonged, fibrinogen was decreased, and the D-dimers were elevated to 4.5 μg/mL. BM examination was conducted, followed by cytogenetic and molecular analyses using BM specimens. The BM aspirate showed 90% of abnormal promyelocytes with densely packed large granules , which on flow cytometric immunophenotyping expressed CD13, CD33, CD117, CD56, CD81, and myeloperoxidase; partially expressed CD38 and CD34; and slightly expressed CD15, CD11b, and CD16 HLA-DR . Chromosome analysis using a BM sample revealed a karyotype of 46,XX,t(15;17)(q22;q21) in 20 metaphase cells examined . Reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) analyses confirmed the presence of S-form PML/RARα gene rearrangement. The FLT3-ITD gene mutation was detected by Sanger sequencing . Plasma cells were not detected. A monoclonal peak was continuously observed on serum IFE, showing IgG and kappa-type monoclonal gammopathy.
The patient was married and had two daughters and one son. No additional family history was obtained.