A 48-year-old Caucasian male with traumatic epidural hematoma and subarachnoid bleeding was transferred, after rapid neurological deterioration necessitating intubation, from another hospital to a tertiary university hospital for neurosurgical intervention. The patient had a history of preexisting fever and nonproductive cough over a period of 3–4 days prior to admission and had direct contact with a person who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. A SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test performed upon admission was positive. The patient had no preexisting comorbidities, medications, or interventions.
Due to the positive SARS-CoV-2 swab, further management was performed according to the then valid institutional guidelines. Directly after the admission to our hospital, an uncomplicated emergency craniotomy for evacuation of the epidural hematoma and insertion of an intraparenchymal intracranial pressure (ICP) probe was performed, after which the patient was transferred to the ICU. Seventy-two hours after the admission to the ICU, a decompressive craniectomy was necessary due to edema of the left hemisphere with a midline shift of 6 mm. Further ICP management was uncomplicated. On the day of the second intervention, the patient developed a maculopapular erythematous exanthema, which progressed to a papulovesicular rash within 24–48 hours. Simultaneous to the progression of cutaneous eruptions, the patient developed respiratory failure and signs of septic shock.
Upon admission to the ICU, the patient presented with mild hypotension (95/60 mmHg) and a normal heart rate of 63 beats per minute. The patient was fully sedated with propofol and fentanyl [Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score of 3 points], intubated, and volume-controlled ventilated with a fractional concentration of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 0.55, positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 7 mbar, and respiratory rate of 17 breaths per minute. His body temperature was 39 °C. About 72 hours after the admission, a maculopapular erythematous exanthema predominantly on the trunk and upper and lower extremities was noted. Mucosae, palmar surfaces of hands, and plantar surfaces of feet were spared . The exanthema was initially interpreted as a possible cutaneous manifestation of the SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, over the following days the exanthema progressed to a papulovesicular rash. The patient developed severe septic shock requiring volume substitution and high-dose vasoactive agents, as well as progressive respiratory failure with rapidly rising oxygen demand.
Routine laboratory tests upon admission were unremarkable except for slightly increased inflammatory markers and lymphopenia. Blood gas analysis was normal with an oxygenation index of 490 (FiO2 0.55, partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood 272 mmHg), and an initial thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no pulmonary infiltrates. Along with clinical signs of septic shock, inflammatory markers increased, and oxygenation index decreased .
A second CT scan performed on the fifth day after the admission revealed patchy ground-glass opacifications and progressive consolidations typical for COVID-19 present in 23% of the lung tissue volume. Small bilateral pleural effusions were also described . The severe hemodynamic and respiratory deterioration (oxygenation index at this point was 97) was suggestive of a bacterial coinfection. However, because of the cutaneous manifestations, varicella zoster virus (VZV) was also considered. A PCR from a swab taken from a cutaneous vesicular lesion was positive for VZV and negative for herpes simplex virus types 1–2 and SARS-CoV-2. Serological testing confirmed primary VZV infection . A bedside bronchoscopy was performed. Microbiological testing of the tracheal secretion revealed a polymicrobial bacterial flora with Staphylococcus aureus, Enterobacter cloacae, and Serratia marcescens. In addition, a specific PCR test was positive for VZV (4700 GEq/ml). Acute encephalitis, a possible complication of the surgeries, was also taken into account. Bacterial culture of the cerebrospinal fluid and multiplex PCR panel including VZV were negative.
In addition to the COVID-19 pneumonia, a primary VZV coinfection with possible pulmonary involvement and ventilator-associated multibacterial tracheobronchitis with Staphylococcus aureus, E. cloacae, and Serratia marcescens were diagnosed. Due to rapid, progressive hemodynamic and respiratory deterioration, COVID-19 treatment with remdesivir (5 days) and dexamethasone (10 days) according to the then valid institutional protocol for COVID-19 management was started. Simultaneously, a broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage with meropenem (for 7 days) was initiated, and the primary VZV infection with possible pulmonary involvement was treated with high-dose acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 hours for 14 days).
We observed a fast pulmonary and hemodynamic stabilization. Continuously decreasing values of C-reactive protein and procalcitonin along with a good neurological and pulmonary recovery allowed for extubation 11 days after admission to the ICU and transfer to the normal ward after 20 days. After 46 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged and transferred to a rehabilitation clinic.