A 25 year old lady presented in a state of shock with massive haematuria. Patient gave a previous history of lower segment caesarean section 2 month ago following which she was doing well for one month. On 30th post-operative day of caesarean, she started passing blood and blood clots (long cylinder) in urine. There was no history of bleeding from per vaginum and other site. There was no history of dysuria or trauma and also no significant history of drugs or allergy found. She was evaluated outside and a CT was done which suggested a uterine/internal iliac artery pseudoaneurysm along with bladder clots. A cystoscopy was done outside 4 days before presentation which showed a defect of size 2.2 cm on dome of bladder. Intrabladder blood clot was evacuated. She was then referred to our center. On arrival she was haemodynamically unstable and her pulse rate, blood pressure, haemoglobin, blood urea, and serum creatinine were 154/min, 62/40 mm Hg, 4.8 g/dl, 10.8 mg/dl, and 0.44 mg/dl respectively. She was aggressively resuscitated with crystalloids and later 4 PRBC and 4 FFP was transfused. She was started on inotropic support and shifted to ICU for stabilisation. She responded to fluid resuscitation and her BP and pulse normalised. She developed blockage of the Foley catheter with clot retention in bladder. Foley catheter was removed and a tri-way Foley catheter with bladder irrigation was started. Later urine got cleared after irrigation. After 20 h when the patient stabilised, a CT angiography was done to localise the source of bleeding. CT angiogram was suggestive of left uterine pseudoaneurysm. She was taken to DSA after stabilisation which showed a pseudoaneurysm in the pelvis on the left side between the bladder and the lower uterus, possibly from the anterior uterine wall, with surrounding haematoma. There was clot and air within the urinary bladder; however no direct vesico-vaginal or vesico-uterine fistula was evident (A and B).The patient was urgently taken up for digital subtraction angiography and subsequent embolization. It revealed a hypertrophied and tortuous left uterine artery with a large pseudoaneurysm distally. Then after super selective microcatheterisation using 2.7 F microcatheter of left uterine artery, successful glue embolization was performed using 20% n-butyl cyanoacrylate and lipiodol mixture (C). Post procedure control angiogram showed complete devascularisation of pseudoaneurysm (D). This intervention was done by an additional professor with 12 years of experience in Level-1 trauma center. She was remaining haemodynamically stable throughout the procedure. In the post angio period she was kept in the ICU for 2 days where her condition remains stable. Haematuria persisted for 2 days and then it gradually cleared. She was later shifted to general wards from where she was discharged. She was doing well at 6 months of follow up.