A 24-year-old man from Gondar town, North-West Ethiopia, presented to our medical out-patient clinic, University of Gondar Hospital in first week of June 2017. He presented with the chief complaint of recurrent episodes of nasal congestion with itching and paranasal discomfort, and productive cough for more than a decade. He had repeated clinic visits since then, and had been treated as having chronic sinusitis and recurrent pneumonia. He noticed frequent exacerbation of cough with copious purulent sputum in the last 3 years. He was treated for pulmonary tuberculosis 7 years back as smear-negative pulmonary tuberculosis, but there was no significant clinical improvement after completion of 6 months’ anti-tuberculosis therapy. He was seen by an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) specialist 3 months back and was told he had chronic sinusitis and nasal polyp, and was treated with antibiotics and intranasal steroid. He was a casual alcohol consumer, but never smoked cigarettes. There was no similar illness in his family.
On physical examination, he was nourished, conscious, and oriented. His blood pressure (BP) was 100/70 mmHg, pulse rate (PR) 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate (RR) 20 breaths per minute, and temperature (T°) 37.5 °C. His arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) was 93% with room air. He had hyperemic conjunctivae. He had a deviated left nasal septum with 1 × 2 cm-sized nasal polyp, and hypertrophied inferior turbinate. There was no lymphadenopathy in accessible sites. A respiratory system examination revealed coarse crackles and scattered rhonchi on both basal lung fields. On cardiovascular examination, apex beat was felt on right fifth intercostal space along midclavicular line. Heart sounds were best audible on the right side of his chest. An abdominal examination revealed tympanitic note on percussion and no sign of fluid collection. He had grade 2 clubbing of fingers of both hands. A nervous system examination showed no abnormality.
A laboratory examination revealed hemoglobin 18 gm/dl (normal, 12–18 gm/dl), total leukocyte count 12,500/μl (normal, 4000–11,000/μl; granulocyte 74%, lymphocyte 15%), and platelet count 350,000/μl (normal, 150,000–450,000/μl). Sputum for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) staining (three times) was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Serum chemistries were normal. A chest X-ray revealed cardiac apex and aortic arch on right side, and fibrotic bands and bronchiectasis on lower field of left lung . A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed bronchiectatic changes prominent on both lower lung fields . Ultrasound examination of his abdomen showed liver and inferior vena cava on left side, and spleen on right side, suggestive of situs inversus . Then, a diagnosis of KS was made on the basis of clinical presentation and imaging features . He was treated with orally administered antibiotics, mucolytic, and chest physiotherapy. He was symptomatically better with the above therapy, and started on long-term low-dose prophylactic antibiotic. He was then referred to the medical chest clinic of our hospital for follow-up.