A 62-year-old woman complaining of dizziness was admitted to our college hospital. The patient had a past medical history of thyroid dysfunction. She was neurologically intact, and had no abnormalities in her blood tests. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an extended intrasellar tumor, which measured 25-mm in its greatest diameter and did not attach to the optic chiasm. The lesion infiltrated the right cavernous sinus, and extended to the pharynx . Initially, the tumor was considered to be a nonfunctional pituitary adenoma.
The patient consented to TSS, and TSS was performed without incident . Seven days after TSS, the patient presented with associated hyponatremia . Approximately, 10 days after TSS, the patient complained of blurred near vision.
In the ophthalmological examination before TSS, her vision was almost completely intact without visual field loss. The corrected visual acuity of both eyes was 20/20, the spherical equivalent of the right eye was −2.125 diopters, and that of the left eye was −2.0 diopters before TSS. However, 11 days after TSS, the spherical equivalent of the right eye had changed to −0.75 diopters, and that of the left eye had changed to −1.125 diopters. Figure shows the time course of serum electrolyte and glucose levels, corneal radius, spherical equivalent, axial length, anterior chamber depth, and lens thickness of both eyes. Axial length, anterior chamber depth and lens thickness were calculated by A-mode ultrasonography. Lens power was calculated with Bennett’s formula at the onset of blurred vision (11 days after surgery) and follow up (264 days), but could not be calculated before onset (i.e. before surgery and upto 10 days after) because we did not calculate axial length, anterior chamber depth and lens thickness over this time frame. There were no changes in axial length during follow up; however, both spherical equivalent and lens thickness were decreased, while in contrast the anterior chamber depth was increased. In addition, the size of both the decrease in lens thickness and the increase in anterior chamber depth was the same. The lens power (right eye: 17.52 diopters, left eye: 18.30 diopters) at onset increased to 20.27 diopters (right eye) and 20.11 diopters (left eye) at follow up . Although her hyponatremia rapidly improved over a period of one week, the refractive change persisted for 6 weeks (43 days) after TSS and 4 weeks after onset. During her 7 months of follow-up, the level of serum glucose was not changed from a normal and the patient had no apparent recurrence. And also, the corrected visual acuity was not changed during the follow-up.