A 39-year-old female with SSc was admitted at our hospital with a complaint of shortness of breath on exertion [World Health Organization-functional class (WHO-FC) was III]. The patient was diagnosed with SSc with positive anti-centromere protein antibodies when she was 28 years old. She developed pseudo intestinal obstruction for which a central venous (CV) catheter was employed for feeding at the age of 33. She was taking 5 mg of prednisolone and 240 µg of beraprost for Raynaud’s symptoms and intestinal disturbance due to SSc. Since the past 4 months, she became aware of shortness of breath while riding a bicycle and walking. She was referred to our department due to worsening shortness of breath and cardiac enlargement on chest X-ray. The outpatient doctor decided to admit her for a thorough examination.
On admission, her blood pressure was 94/60 mmHg, pulse rate was 75 beat per minute, and oxygen saturation was 97% in room air. Physical examination revealed juglar veins dilation, systolic murmur (Levine III/VI), and Raynaud’s phenomenon. Laboratory testing revealed brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels of 754.8 pg/mL (<20 pg/mL) and D-dimer levels of 2800 ng/mL (<1000 ng/mL). In terms of coagulation factors, protein C, protein S, and lupus anticoagulant were normal. Electrocardiogram revealed findings of right ventricular loading . Chest X-ray revealed enlargement of the heart and a CV catheter inserted from the right subclavian vein . Echocardiogram revealed normal left ventricular ejection fraction and severe tricuspid valve regurgitation . Peak velocity of tricuspid regurgitation was 3.6 m/s, the diameter of the inferior vena cava was 14/11 mm, and the right ventricular systolic pressure was 61.8 mmHg. Right heart catheterization revealed severe PH evidenced by mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) of 38 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 18.7 wood unit (WU), normal range of mean pulmonary artery wedge pressure (9 mmHg), and low cardiac output (1.5 L/min). We performed enhanced thoracic computed tomography (CT) and lung perfusion scans for CTEPH screening while investigating the cause of PH. Computed tomography detected multiple thromboemboli in the peripheral pulmonary arteries, mosaic pattern of the lung field, and dilation of the right heart . No thrombus was observed around the CV catheter that was inserted from the right subclavian vein. The spirogram of the pulmonary functional tests revealed a normal range. Perfusion scintigraphy of the lung revealed heterogeneous blood flow distribution in both the lungs and multiple segmental defects . There was no deep vein thrombosis (DVT) on lower limb echography. We performed pulmonary angiography, which revealed multiple webs and narrowing of the pulmonary arteries . Considering these results, we diagnosed the patient with CTEPH complicated by SSc. She did not have a history of DVT or pulmonary embolism (PE). Moreover, she did not have any risk factors for DVT/PE, including the use of birth control, travel, cancer, etc.
shows the patient’s clinical course of medication for severe PH; 10 mg of macitentan (endothelin receptor antagonist), 20 mg of tadalafil (phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor), and an anticoagulant were administered. Since she was suffered from gastrointestinal symptoms owing to pseudo intestinal obstruction, we did not use riociguat (stimulator of soluble guanylate cyclase).
Oxygen therapy was also initiated. Two months following the start of these medications, mean PAP was still high at 34 mmHg (PVR was 15 WU); hence, we decided to perform BPA for CTEPH. We decided that the treatment with BPA rather than PEA was more feasible considering the absence of an obvious thrombus in the central pulmonary artery. We judged that the comorbidities, such as pseudo intestinal obstruction associated with SSc, rendered PEA a high-risk procedure. We mainly performed BPA to the regions at both sides of the peripheral pulmonary arteries, which gradually decreased her PVR. Perfusion scintigraphy of the lung following the 1st BPA session (targeted vessels: multiple peripheral right pulmonary arteries) revealed a reduced blood flow deficit in the right lung . We performed four sessions of BPA guided with the deficit image on perfusion scintigraphy of the lung in ∼1 year with the goal of improving the haemodynamics. Complications, such as haemoptysis and pulmonary oedema were not observed throughout the BPA sessions. Compared with the time of diagnosis, at ∼1 year after initiating treatment, PVR decreased from 18.7 WU to 8.7 WU, and BNP decreased from 754.8 to 131.7 pg/mL. Her 6-min walking distance increased from 250 to 450 m, and her WHO-FC improved from class III to class II. Since her PVR is currently high, we plan to repeat BPA to treat the residual CTEPH at the next follow-up (in 3 months) .