A 37-year-old man presented with a 2-year history of painless swelling of the right arm with a gradual increase in size. A physical examination was normal except for a well circumscribed non-tender mass in the upper two-thirds of the right arm and multiple lymph nodes in the right axilla. Imaging revealed a 53 × 40 mm diameter soft tissue mass that was hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI in the posterior compartment of the right arm, with no bone or vascular invasion . Surgical biopsy of the mass and axillary lymph node excision were performed; the laboratory received two fragments with soft consistency, measuring 2 × 1 × 0.3 cm and 2.5 × 1 × 0.5 cm. Histopathological examination showed a desembryoplastic multitissular tumor, containing a sarcomatous component constituted by spindle cells and organized in bundles with rhabdomyoblastic differentiation. There was also an immature and malignant neuroglial component, and this tumor additionally showed epithelial structures with squamous or glandular differentiation; some cells were compatible with embryonal carcinoma. These various tissular structures were very confluent, without transition. Atypical immature cartilage and bone components were observed associated with necrosis. The axillary lymph node excised was metastatic. There was no need for immunohistochemical staining to confirm the diagnosis of malignant mixed GCT (teratocarcinoma variety) . Testicular palpation and ultrasonography results were normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed no abnormalities. Serum α-fetoprotein (AFP), β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG), and serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were all within normal ranges. The patient received four courses of chemotherapy (bleomycin 30 units intravenous injection, days 1, 8, and 15; etoposide 100 mg/m2 intravenously, days 1 through 5; cisplatin 20 mg/m2 intravenously, days 1 through 5). A clinical evaluation of response at the end of chemotherapy showed a stable disease. Then, 1 month later, a wide excision with axillary dissection was performed; the excised tumor was partially well circumscribed and measured 57 × 42 × 38 mm and had a uniform, yellowish, solid, and partially nodular appearance on the cut surface. Final pathology revealed the same histological aspect as observed in the biopsy but did not revealed tumoral necrotic patterns. All surgical margins were free, and one of six lymph nodes identified was involved without extracapsular spread . Two further cycles of chemotherapy using the same protocol were added. At 18 months of close follow-up, no locoregional recurrence or distant metastases have been detected.