A 33-year-old man complained of multisite pain for 6 h following waist trauma and was admitted to the hospital. He suffered multiple injuries from severe impact on the right rear of his waist after driving an out of control forklift truck. The patient presented with excruciating pain in the back, chest, and abdomen, and the muscle strength of both lower limbs was decreased (3/5 strength in the left lower limb and 2/5 strength in the right lower limb); both lower limb extremity paresthesias and urinary retention was observed. Immediately after the injury, the patient was sent to our hospital by ambulance for treatment and underwent x-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan ; the imaging examinations revealed the left 10th and 11th rib, bilateral transverse processes (L2–L5 levels), sacrum, and coccyx and right ilium fractures, and L5 vertebra and S1 vertebra dislocation and separation. A lumbosacral vertebra magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a complete rupture of the L5–S1 intervertebral disc; tear in anterior longitudinal ligament, posterior longitudinal ligament, ligamentum flavum, interspinous ligament, supraspinous ligament, and dural sac; and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) seepage into the tissue space behind the lumbar spine . The patient was healthy previously and had no other diseases or syndromes. Traumatic lumbosacral spondyloptosis diagnosis was established. On admission, the patient was conscious, the blood pressure (BP) was 85/60 mmHg, and heart rate was 78 beats/min; intravenous rehydration therapy was immediately started because of a low BP and then the BP gradually returned to the normal level. The severity of the spinal injury was graded according to the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) grading scale, and the patient was classified as grade C. The visual analog scale (VAS) score was 9.
The patient was sent to the operating room for surgical treatment 10 days after admission. During the operation, we found that the subcutaneous soft tissue and muscle behind the lumbar spine were seriously injured, the L5 vertebra were severely dislocated to the front-left side, the L5–S1 facet joint was fractured and dislocated, the bilateral inferior articular processes of L5 were locked and located anterior to the S1 vertebra , severe dural sac tear had occurred at the L5–S1 level, and only part of cauda equina and filum terminale are continuous; the L5–S1 intervertebral disc had ruptured and prolapsed into the spinal canal. Specific procedures were performed as follows. After successful anesthesia, the patient was placed in the prone position. In the surgical area, routine disinfection was carried out and laid with sterile sheets. A 20–25 cm incision was made at the midline of the back using the L4 spinous process as the center. The skin was cut parallel to the spine, then the lumbodorsal fascia was stripped and the paravertebral muscle was bluntly stripped to completely expose the spinous process and bilateral vertebral plate of L3–S2 vertebrae, and the spinous process of L5–S1 vertebrae was removed. Pilot holes for pedicle screws placement from L3 through S1 and also for the S2 alar-iliac (S2AI) screws entry site were marked; bilateral L3, L4, L5, and S1 pedicle screws of appropriate length were then inserted, and dual S2AI screws placement bilaterally were performed. A pre-bent short titanium rod was temporarily installed to distract L5–S1 intervertebral space. We found that the bilateral inferior articular processes of L5 was still dislocated in front of the S1 vertebra after C-arm fluoroscopy, and it is particularly difficult to perform the reduction with a screw distractor; so we decided to resect bilateral inferior articular processes of L5 with the assistance of the ultrasonic bone scalpel . Reduction was attempted again, and the spinal column getting back into normal alignment was observed after C-arm fluoroscopy . Then, bilateral laminectomies, facetectomies, decompression of the cauda equina, and discectomy of L5–S1 were performed. Interbody bone graft fusion was performed by implanting an interbody fusion cage filled with bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and local bone at the L5/S1 level. Finally, the dura with artificial dura mater were repaired. Bilateral lumbar drainage tubes were placed at the end of procedures. The operative procedure was about 3 h and intraoperative blood loss was about 800 ml.
After the surgical operation was completed, the patient was transferred to the postanesthesia care unit and then to the orthopedics wards. We found the patient had CSF leakage on the first postoperative day and presented with mild headaches and light-headedness. The patient's low back pain and numbness of both lower limbs were effectively improved; however, the muscle strength of both lower limbs did not significantly improve. The VAS back pain decreased from 9 preoperatively to 4 postoperatively. The ASIA grade remained in grade C after surgery. The right lumbar drainage tube and the Foley catheter were removed on the third postoperative day, and then the left lumbar drainage tube was removed and the skin was closed using 2–0 nylon sutures on postoperative day 7. The patient was then transferred to the rehabilitation hospital for hyperbaric oxygen and rehabilitation treatment on postoperative day 10. At 1-month follow-up, the patient's muscle strength of bilateral hip flexors and knee extensors improved gradually, but the muscle strength of right foot dorsiflexion and plantar flexion did not show significant improvement. The lumbar x-ray, CT scan, and MRI showed that the internal fixation and lumbar interbody cages were in good position, and there was a small amount of fluid behind the lumbar spine . At the 6-month postoperative follow-up, the patient had no numbness of both lower limbs, and the symptom of urinary retention was significantly improved. The patient exhibited 4/5 strength in the left lower limb, 2/5 strength in right foot dorsiflexion and plantar flexion, and 4/5 strength in right hip flexor and knee extensor. The ASIA grade improved from grade C preoperatively to grade D postoperatively.