An 83-year-old male patient who underwent laparoscopic extended right hepatectomy for HCC 3 months previously presented with lung metastasis and suspicion of carcinomatous peritonitis in contrast-enhanced CT. The patient was treated with atezolizumab plus bevacizumab as first-line salvage therapy for metastatic HCC. Although the patient achieved a partial response, the lung metastasis showed progression, and bilateral hilar lymph nodes were newly detected after five cycles of the IO/TKI therapy. Thus, lenvatinib was selected as second-line salvage therapy for metastatic HCC. During the first line of IO/TKI therapy, the patient also developed gross hematuria, and contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed a 15 × 15 mm soft tissue mass protruding from the posterior wall of the bladder . Urine cytology yielded negative results. Cystoscopy revealed the presence of a solitary submucosal mass on the posterior wall . Based on these findings, primary bladder cancer was first suspected and surgical resection of the bladder tumor was performed.
Under spinal anesthesia, the patient underwent TUR-BT. The total surgical time was 26 min, and the patient was discharged from the hospital 4 days after TUR-BT without experiencing any complications. Pathological examination of the TURBT specimens showed solid and sheet-like growth of atypical epithelial cells with enlarged nuclei and prominent nucleoli in the subepithelial connective tissue and muscularis propria, similar to the histological features of HCC . Immunohistochemical staining for GATA-binding protein 3, which is typically positive in urothelial carcinoma, was negative, whereas staining for hepatocyte paraffin 1, an HCC marker, was positive . These pathological findings were consistent with a diagnosis of primary HCC with bladder metastasis . Surgical margin was negative. Four weeks after the surgery, lenvatinib was resumed. During the 2-month follow-up after the surgery, no clinical progression of lung metastasis and bilateral hilar lymph nodes was observed.