A 2 years old Javanese boy came with complaints of recurrent fever and urinary tract symptoms such as dysuria and straining. The patient was born via cesarean section at 34 weeks of gestation, with birth weight of 2250 g and considered as low birth weight. In his growth and development, this patient experienced numerous clinical problems in the form of abnormalities in his organs, such as atresia ani and unilateral undescended testicles. During the first year of his life, this patient underwent several definitive surgeries such as colostomy, anoplasty and orchidopexy. Right now this patient came with complaints of recurrent fever and urinary tract symptoms such as dysuria and straining. From a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen, the results showed there was an abnormality in the urinary tract . Cystourethrography examination was done and showed grade 5 voiding and grade 1 vesicoureteral reflux on both the left and right side Fig. .
Retrograde pyelography is a necessary examination to confirm the diagnosis of unilateral renal agenesis. From this examination, it was found that there was a duplication in the left ureter and the absence of a collecting system on the left side. This patient also underwent a lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination to confirm whether this patient suffered from spina bifida or not . A laparoscopic left ureterectomy examination was carried to see how the patient's urinary tract functions Fig. .
In the end, laparoscopic left transperitoneal ureterectomy was done because of the presence of recurrent infections and visible vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) grade 5. The procedure began with the insertion of three 3 mm ports in the left abdominal hemi. Followed by opening the white line to access the ureter. Blunt dissection and hemodynamic control were performed afterward. The left ureter was cut at a height to reach the vesicoureteral junction and macroscopically no kidney image remained at all in the resected tissue . After that, the specimens were taken to the pathology laboratory for histopathological investigation Fig. .
The results of the pathological examination concluded several things. Most of the primitive kidney tissue with parenchyma had been replaced with fibrotic tissue. In several places such as atrophic dilated kidney tubules and a small part of the glomerulus, colloid-like material (thyroidization) can be seen. This pathological examination does not identify the cortex and medulla of the kidney because it is quite difficult to process. However, foci of ureteral tissue with monomorphic urothelial cells were identified. Apart from that, the fibrous stroma is edematous and fibrotic with chronic inflammatory cells, mostly lymphocytes. The blastema component also cannot be seen, but metaplastic cartilage islands could be seen in our case Fig. .
Further examination immunostaining using CD10, CK7 and p63 which aims to check the presence of renal glomeruli and tubules, urothelial cells and urothelial basal cells. The examination results of each immunostaining test included, the CD10 test gave positive staining results in the glomerulus and remaining renal tubular cells, as well as very positive CK7 staining in urothelial cells and positive p63 expression in urothelial basal cells. The conclusion that can be drawn is that after the initial examination was carried out and the diagnosis was established in the form of unilateral renal agenesis, the diagnosis changed because the results of histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations were more likely to lead to a diagnosis of severe dysplasia or aplastic kidney Fig. .
After the surgical management was carried out, the condition of the patient showed positive results because there was a complete resolution of the condition of fever and dysuria which had been the main complaint so far. Video urodynamic studies were performed two months after surgery. The results show that the patient's bladder capacity is 120 cc. From the examination, it was concluded that this patient was already experiencing a normal condition because there were no abnormalities found when the filling phase had reached 120 cc, grade I right ureteral reflux, detrussor overactivity, normal bladder compliance and bladder capacity. When it was time to urinate, the patient was able to void 75 cc of urine and 75 cc of post-voiding volume. For now, the condition of spina bifida experienced by patients is still the responsibility of the neurosurgeon for follow-up and management.