A 7-year-old female patient, residing in an urban area and with no prior medical history, was brought to the emergency department by her parents. The patient had a history of consuming pork daily. Clinical symptoms had begun the day before admission, characterized by abdominal pain in the lower quadrants of a colic-like nature, accompanied by abdominal distension. Additionally, the patient exhibited fever, multiple vomiting episodes, and diarrhea. She had been self-medicated with an antidiarrheal (Loperamide) in an unspecified dose by her parents.
Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis (13,160 × 103/μl) without neutrophilia and thrombocytosis (554,000 × μl). Urinalysis showed no pathological findings. Imaging evaluation included an abdominal radiography, which reported the presence of multiple air-fluid levels and absence of gas in the distal segment, suggesting an intestinal obstruction. Given these findings, management with Ampicillin/Sulbactam was initiated, and she was transferred to a higher complexity center on the third day of the onset of symptoms.
Upon admission to the institution, the patient exhibited signs of dehydration, tachypnea, a restrictive respiratory pattern, a distended and tympanic abdomen with pain upon palpation in the lower abdomen. Additionally, she presented with fever, multiple vomiting episodes of food content, and diarrheal stools without the presence of mucus or blood. Resuscitation management was initiated, and she was assessed by the pediatric surgery department, which found no signs of peritoneal irritation on physical examination. A rectal examination revealed the presence of abundant fecal matter in the rectal ampulla, leading to the placement of a nasogastric tube and administration of an enema with 175 ml of isotonic saline solution and 75 ml of soapy solution, resulting in minimal fecal return. Post-enema abdominal radiography showed coprostasis and distension of the small bowel without evidence of air-fluid levels . Admission laboratory tests showed leukocytosis (16,630 × 103/μl) with an increase in neutrophils (12,940 × 103/μl), thrombocytosis (478,000 × μl), and elevated levels of C-reactive protein (35.06 mg/dl, with a reference range of 0–5 mg/dl). Arterial gases revealed compensated respiratory alkalosis and hypokalemia (3.2 mEq/l). Given the inadequate response to medical treatment for intestinal obstruction, treatment was escalated to Piperacillin/Tazobactam, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.
Given the lack of response to medical treatment, a decision was made to perform an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan on the first day of admission to the institution. The images revealed notable dilatation of the small bowel, with a maximum diameter of 4.3 cm, without evident transition zones, and an appendix measuring 9 mm with increased enhancement of its walls, presence of gas within, surrounding peritoneal thickening, free abdominal fluid, and pneumoperitoneum . These findings led to the diagnosis of acute appendicitis with secondary ileus. The patient was prepared for surgical intervention. The procedure, initially planned as a laparoscopic appendectomy, had to be converted to an open surgery via a midline infraumbilical laparotomy due to the development of respiratory distress caused by the insufflation of pneumoperitoneum and limited visibility due to intestinal distension. During the surgical procedure, an appendiceal phlegmon formed by loops of the small intestine was mechanically released without requiring intestinal resection. The appendix was found in a subcecal position, necrotic, and perforated at its tip. Given the extensive fecal contamination, a peritoneal irrigation was performed until clear fluid return was achieved.
In the postoperative period, the patient was taken to the ICU, where she continued antibiotic management with Piperacillin/Tazobactam. The use of vasopressors or ventilatory support was not necessary. She remained with ileus for six days, necessitating the use of parenteral nutritional support. Control laboratory tests performed on the fourth postoperative day showed improvement in inflammatory markers, with a reduction in the levels of leukocytes (12,980 × 103/μl), neutrophils (7,300 × 103/μl), and C-reactive protein (7.94 mg/dl). The patient was then transferred to general ward care. Resolution of the ileus and tolerance to oral intake were achieved by the sixth postoperative day.
Pathologic analysis revealed an inflammatory infiltrate and perforation of the appendix with liquefactive necrosis, along with the presence of Balantidium coli trophozoites, leading to the definitive diagnosis of acute appendicitis caused by Balantidium coli . Following this finding, Metronidazole was added to the medical management, administered at a dose of 500 mg every 8 h. The postoperative recovery proceeded without complications. She completed treatment with 10 total days of Piperacillin/Tazobactam and 7 days of Metronidazole. Ten days after the surgical intervention, she was discharged. At the two-week outpatient follow-up no signs of infection in the surgical wound were seen, adequate wound healing was observed, and no abdominal pain was present .