This is a 50-year-old woman with an established diagnosis of MS manifested by transverse myelitis. She had been treated with intravenous (IV) steroids and glatiramer acetate with excellent results in the past for episodes of left-sided weakness after MR imaging of the brain done 1 year before this presentation revealed a deep white matter lesion with an incomplete ring-enhancing pattern without midline shift or edema .
On the current admission, she presented with nausea, vomiting, and lethargy. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the head demonstrated subfalcine herniation secondary to extensive vasogenic edema, which explained her obtundation. She was admitted to the intensive care unit and placed on 1000 mg of IV methylprednisone on a daily basis. Considerable improvement in her mentation was noted over the next day.
On the third day of her stay in the intensive care unit, she developed a nonreactive dilated right pupil and was found to be somnolent. A repeat CT scan revealed worsening edema, causing transtentorial herniation . She was taken immediately to the operating room for a right decompressive hemicraniectomy.
Intraoperatively, after removal of the bone flap, the right cerebral hemisphere herniated through the bony defect. Underlying the dura, there was a significant amount of abnormal brain tissue that was grayish in color. A biopsy of the tissue was performed, and the skin edges were closed. The patient was continued on the high-dose steroid therapy and remained under close observation in the intensive care unit. Over the next 3 days, she became more alert and her right pupil returned to normal size and reactivity. She regained her previous baseline neurologic status with a left hemiparesis and was able to communicate easily.
The results of the pathologic examination were consistent with demyelinating disease. Due to the enhancing nature of the lesion as well as the extensive edema, there was a concern for an underlying pathology that was not obvious. It was decided to continue treatment with immunosuppressive therapies and repeat neuroimaging in a few weeks after interval resolution of the edema. After 5 weeks, the patient's skin flap had become sunken; however, given her ongoing immunotherapy, a cranioplasty was not performed. She was transferred to a rehabilitation facility.