A 94-year-old male with a past ocular history of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in both eyes presented to the ophthalmology clinic for a routine dilated fundus exam (DFE). On exam his Snellen visual acuity was 20/100 OD and count fingers (CF) OS. Exam findings were significant for end-stage AMD in the left eye and subretinal hemorrhage in the right eye. He was referred for ocular ultrasound and found to have subretinal hemorrhage secondary to progression of his exudative macular degeneration. Anti-VEGF treatment was initiated and continued for several months. The patient was then found to have a choroidal lesion that measured 14.5 × 14.6 mm in basal dimension with a thickness of 6.4 mm. There was low to medium reflectivity, moderate irregularity and trace spontaneous vascularity. These findings were consistent with a clinical diagnosis of choroidal melanoma.
The patient was referred for a liver ultrasound, which showed questionable focal lesions within the liver, and further evaluation with CT abdomen and pelvis was recommended. Given the liver ultrasound findings the patient was re-evaluated with ocular ultrasound, which did not show evidence of extrascleral extension . The patient underwent staging CT chest, abdomen and pelvis that were negative for metastatic disease. An MRI of the orbits with contrast showed a subcentimeter region of abnormal contrast enhancement extending into the immediately adjacent retro-bulbar fat, suspicious for scleral invasion and small extrascleral lesional extension .
The patient presented to the ophthalmology walk-in clinic several days after the MRI with complaints of right eye pain that he described as “monotonous friction” like pain. Exam findings were significant for visual acuity no light perception (NLP) OD, an intraocular pressure of 28 OD, diffuse hemorrhage in the anterior chamber and no view into the posterior pole secondary to vitreous hemorrhage. B-scan ocular ultrasound performed during that visit was consistent with hemorrhagic choroidal detachments with diffuse vitreous hemorrhage. Given the presence of a choroidal melanoma, questionable extrascleral extension and a painful eye, patient and providers decided to pursue enucleation. The patient underwent enucleation OD and the specimen was sent for analysis. Final pathology revealed malignant melanoma of the choroid (spindle B-type) with intact sclera and no obvious extrascleral extension posteriorly .