A 71-year-old Japanese man came to our hospital with a chief complaint of hematuria. Diagnosis of muscle invasive bladder cancer without distant metastases was confirmed after imaging tests and transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT). He underwent radical cystectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection; an ileal conduit was also constructed. Microscopically, the tumor exhibited solid growth of spindle-shaped cells with atypia. Immunohistochemically, the cells were positive for CD56, a neural cell adhesion molecule expressed on the cell membrane of neurons, and synaptophysin, a synaptic vesicle glycoprotein that is present in neuroendocrine cells . In contrast, they were negative for CK20, which is a marker of urothelial carcinoma. The cells showed strong intranuclear positivity to ki-67 antibodies (> 70%) . Invasion beyond the bladder wall and metastasis of one of the thirteen regional lymph nodes that were excised were observed. Diagnosis of SCBC (pT3bN1M0) was confirmed. No component of urothelial carcinoma was found. Additionally, pathological re-examination of TURBT specimen exhibited similar features to the cystectomy specimen, which was pure SCBC. The patient received four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2, administered intravenously) and cisplatin (70 mg/m2, administered intravenously); 6 months after cystectomy, he complained of right arm edema and hoarseness. Left tracheal deviation was observed on a chest radiograph ; Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed superior vena cava syndrome due to a 70 mm right-sided infraclavicular lymph node metastasis . Additionally, a 28 mm abdominal wall tumor and a 68 mm pelvic tumor were found. At that time, the serum neuron-specific enolase (NSE) level was 227 ng/ml. The 21-day cycle regimen (including carboplatin, etoposide, and atezolizumab) was administered intravenously, according to the clinical practice guidelines for extensive-disease SCLC . We administered carboplatin (area under the curve, 5 mg min/mL) on the first day, etoposide (100 mg/m2) from the first through the third day, and atezolizumab (1200 mg) on the first day. Considering the risk of nausea and loss of appetite, we intravenously administered palonosetron (0.75 mg) on the first day and dexamethasone (6.6 mg) from the first through the third day and orally administered aprepitant (125 mg) once daily on the first day, aprepitant (80 mg) once daily on the second and third day, and metoclopramide (5 mg) three times daily from the third through the seventh day. On the third day of the first cycle, right arm edema and hoarseness had improved. Additionally, tracheal deviation disappeared from the radiograph . While the patient experienced grade II neutropenia from days 8–10 of each cycle, it abated spontaneously without administration of the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. He did not develop anemia or thrombocytopenia. Moreover, owing to the preventive therapy, he did not experience nausea or loss of appetite. After four cycles, all recurrent tumors completely disappeared from the CT scan. The serum NSE level decreased to 8.0 ng/ml. The patient continued to receive maintenance atezolizumab therapy (1200 mg, administered intravenously) every 21 days, without any evidence of recurrence over the 12 month follow up. Retrospectively, programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) staining was performed using a cystectomy specimen. The immune cells infiltrating the tumor were positive for PD-L1, whereas the tumor cells were negative for PD-L1 . The proportion of tumor-infiltrating immune cells expressing PD-L1 in the tumor area was more than 1% and less than 5%. Additionally, the proportion of tumor cells expressing PD-L1 in all tumor cells was less than 1%.