A 59 year old male was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology of our hospital on June 16, 2020 due to jaundice of the skin and sclera for more than 15 days and progressive weight loss about 5 kg. He had a history of brain stem infarction with left lower limb weakness and occasionally chokes on drinking water. He denied a history of hepatitis, tuberculosis or other infectious diseases. Physical examination showed that he had chronic disease appearance with jaundice of the skin and sclera, but no obvious enlargement of superficial lymph nodes and no obvious positive signs in the abdomen. Laboratory data on the day of admission were as follows: hemoglobin 101 g/L, glutamic-pyruvic transaminase 158 U/L, glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 150 U/L, total bilirubin 217.3 umo/L, direct bilirubin 152.4 umo/L, indirect bilirubin 64.9 umol/L, hypersensitive C-reactive protein 5.8 mg/L, procalcitonin 0.11 ng/ml, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 6.19 μg/L, carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) 117.1 kU/L. On June 17 abdominal ultrasonography showed gallbladder enlargement, cholecystitis, cholestasis, and dilatation of intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. On June 18 magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) and abdominal magnetic resonance (MRI) considered neoplastic lesions of the duodenal papilla, severe dilatation of intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts, bile stasis in common bile duct, large gallbladder. On June 19 ultrasound gastroscopy revealed that a neoplasms of approximately 2.5 × 2.5 cm in size could be seen at the duodenal papilla, with ulceration on the surface, covered with yellow and white slough, and contact bleeding. Three biopsies were taken. The patient was transferred to our department from the Department of Gastroenterology on June 20. The results of abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) on June 23 were similar to MRI. On the same day cholangiograms of percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) was performed for jaundice reduction. On June 29 we prepped the patient for pancreaticoduodenectomy after discussion and obtaining informed consent from the patient and his family. However, histopathological examination on June 30 showed severe chronic active inflammation with ulcers, infiltrated by large number of atypical lymphocytes. Mitotic figures were visible, and the cytoplasm of tumor cells was empty and bright. Immunohistochemical results were as follows: LCA ( +), CD34 (vascular +), Ki67 (Li80%), CD20 ( +), LCA ( +), CD34 (vascular +). Aggressive Non-Hodgkin’s B-cell lymphoma was diagnosed on the basis of this results. The surgical plan was cancelled after a consultation with a haematology, chemotherapy was indicated.