A 44-year-old Guatemalan woman presented to our outpatient clinic with a chief complaint of left knee pain for the last 6 months. One month prior our patient had consulted with an outside physician, who prescribed her with 300 mg of carbamazepine, 5 mg of prednisone every 24 hours, and ibuprofen every 8 hours as needed. The symptoms did not resolve and our patient increased the dose to 600 mg of carbamazepine and 20 mg of prednisone 7 days before consulting. She suddenly interrupted prednisone 3 days before consulting, because she felt this was making her pain worse. At the consultation, our patient complained of left knee pain, fatigue, and bilateral lower limb cramps. No pertinent medical, surgical, allergic, family, and psychosocial history was recorded and her vital signs were within normal limits (blood pressure of 118/64 mmHg; heart rate of 75/minute; respiratory rate of 14 beats/minute; temperature at 98.9 °Fahrenheit). Our patient was on day 12 of her menstrual cycle. A physical examination revealed mild facial edema, multiple port-wine stains on her upper and lower extremities associated with mild hypertrophy of the calves , more prominent on the right side with mild edema, the rest of the physical examination was non-contributory. Imaging and routine blood studies were requested. Our patient was seen the next day at the office with the laboratory results .
Our patient presented with only a complaint of fatigue at this visit, however, no neurologic or physical disabilities were recorded, and her vital signs were within normal limits.
Our patient was sent to the emergency department (ED) for electrolyte imbalance correction and for other diagnostic studies. In the ED, a 12-lead electrocardiogram did not show any electric abnormalities, her urinary Na+ (UNa+) was 164 mmol/L (normal 40–220 mmol/L), and osmolality 328 mmol/kg (50–1200 mmol/kg). No carbamazepine serum levels were recorded due to lack of reactive in the hospital. Our patient was diagnosed with syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) secondary to carbamazepine use, hypokalemia secondary to corticosteroid therapy, and Klippel-Trénaunay-Weber (KTW) syndrome. Patient orders were to discontinue carbamazepine, fluid restriction to 1.5 L/day and intravenous potassium (K+) slow correction. She was discharged 3 days later with Na+ 128 mmol/L, K+ 4.6 mmol/L, and serum osmolality 265 mmol/kg. Our patient was seen in the office 1 week after discharge: she no longer felt fatigued, her cramps were not present and her left knee pain had mildly improved with acetaminophen use and local nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) cream. Her left knee pain was attributed to the KTW syndrome. She was not taking carbamazepine and prednisone at the time of the follow-up. Electrolyte studies revealed Na+ 138 mmol/L, K 4.6 mmol/L, and serum osmolality at 276 mmol/kg.