Patient 1 The proband , a 6.6-year-old girl, was admitted to our hospital because of short stature. As the first child of nonconsanguineous parents, she was born at 41 weeks of gestation via vaginal delivery, whose birth weight and length were 1800 g (<P3rd) and 47 cm (<P3rd), respectively. She showed significant growth retardation since the newborn stage, and now her height, weight and body mass index (BMI) were 90.5 m (− 6.3 SD), 11 kg (− 4.9 SD) and 13.4 kg/m2 (P10-25th), respectively. Her ratios of arm span/height and sitting height/height were 0.92 (− 2 SD) and 0.58 (+ 3 SD) according to the standard reference values . Her psychomotor development was mildly delayed.
Physical examination: She showed the following typical features of Noonan syndrome : hypertelorism; downslanting palpebral fissures; epicanthal folds; low-set, oval-shaped, posteriorly rotated ears with a thick helix; a short broad nose with a depressed root and full tip; a deeply grooved and long philtrum; high and wide peaks of the vermilion; a highly arched palate; micrognathia; a short neck; cubitus valgus; scoliosis; café au lait spots; and mild hypertrichosis. She also presented with squinting, refractive errors and nystagmus.
Auxiliary examination: The IGF-1 level was 61 μg/L (− 1.9 SD) and growth hormone (GH) stimulation test (insulin and levodopa stimulation test) showed that GH peak was 5.54 ng/mL (cut-off value: < 7 ng/mL). The electrocardiogram test showed frequent premature ventricular beats (the second and third rhythms), X-rays and MRI of the spine showed hemivertebral deformity of the third thoracic vertebra and scoliosis (Cobb’s angle = 28°), and her bone age was 5.5 years old. In addition, hormone levels of the adrenal gland, thyroid gland and gonad were normal; the tumor markers (includes AFP, HCG and CEA) were also negative. No abnormalities were found during the ultrasound examination of the heart, liver, kidneys, uterus or ovaries, so did the MRI of the craniocerebrum. Besides, her karyotype was 46, XX.
According to the clinical manifestation and laboratory tests, she was diagnosed as Noonan syndrome with GH deficiency clinically . Due to her serious scoliosis and hemivertebral deformity, recombined human GH treatment was not recommended.