A 58-year-old Japanese man was presented to our out-patient unit complaining of posterior cervical pain. The pain firstly appeared 3 months before the first contact to us without any particular triggers such as trauma. He was relieved from the pain when lying flat; however, he kept working as a plumber and the pain got worse over the time period. A brain computed tomography (CT) was performed 1.5 months after the onset in another clinic and it revealed bilateral subdural effusion , still, no treatment was given at this point. Later on, when he was presented to our hospital, numbness and weakness of extremities also appeared in addition to the progressive posterior cervical pain as well as headache. He had a medical history of hemorrhoid and no particular familial history.
The patient admitted to our department soon after the initial contact. A hand-held dynamometer revealed his weakened grip strength of both of his hands by 30–40 kg. He was also presented with bilateral muscle weakness in his lower extremities which was 4 of 5 in the Manual Muscle Test (MMT) score , as well as sensory disturbances in his forearms, hands and the posterior surface of thighs on both sides. His Japanese Orthopedic Association (JOA) score was 13.5.
A fat suppression T2-weighted MRI without gadolinium enhancement of the cervical spine illustrated a fluid collection in the soft tissue spaces of the retrospinal region at C1-C2 level . Additionally, it demonstrated spinal canal stenosis at C3/4 level. Subsequently, a cisternoscintigram and a CT myelogram were performed with intradural injection of 111In-DTPA (Nihon Mediphysics, Tokyo, Japan) and Omnipaque 240® (Daiichi-Sankyo, Tokyo, Japan), an iodine contrast agent, through a lumber puncture. The 111In-DTPA cisternoscintigram clearly revealed CSF leakage into the retrospinal region at C1-C2 level, as well as blockage of the 111In-DTPA at lower level of the cervical spinal canal . Furthermore, the CT myelogram also suggested blockage at lower level of the cervical spinal canal; though it did not demonstrated the sign of CSF at C1-C2 level or any other sites .
72 h of conservative therapy, including bed rest, intravenous fluid hydration, muscle relaxants and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, was ineffective at improving his symptoms, and the re-examination of brain CT showed progression of the bilateral subdural effusions to bilateral subdural hematomas .
After reviewing of his imaging data and confirmation that no other cause presented in development of subdural hematoma along with careful discussions, we gave a diagnosis of intracranial hypotension due to the CSF leakage from C1-C2 level, which might be caused by spinal canal stenosis at C3/4 level. We, therefore, performed burr-hole drainage of the subdural hematoma, blood-patch therapy at C1/2 level and laminoplasty at C3–4, at the same time. In the laminoplasty, CSF flew out from the epidural space subsequently to the opening of lamina, and after sufficient decompression, the CSF flow was reduced in the operation field, without detection and restoration of dural tear (Video). In the blood-patch therapy, an epidural catheter was inserted from the surgical field at C3–4 level to C1-C2 level under x-ray fluoroscopy observation. Approximately 5 ml of autologous blood sampled from patient’s peripheral vein was injected to the epidural site at C1-C2 level and the blood-patch therapy was achieved.
Postoperative response was significantly favorable. His symptoms completely improved and the imaging features that suggested CSF leak and intracranial hypotension disappeared . He discharged on postoperative day 10 with satisfaction, and no signs of recurrence were observed for 5 months postoperatively up to this point. The patient returned to his daily life as well as his occupation.