A 69-year-old man was hospitalized with transient loss of consciousness due to severe anemia and melena. He had previously suffered from thromboangitis obliterans and had undergone revascularization of his lower extremities. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed two lesions. One 15 mm-sized depressed lesion was present in the lesser curvature of the cardia . Biopsy diagnosed poor differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. As evaluated by endoscopic ultrasound, the tumor had invaded the submucosa and surgery was necessary. The other lesion was present on the posterior wall of the body in the stomach, and a biopsy of this ulcer scar was diagnosed as suspected gastric cancer . Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a circumferential type 2 tumor in the sigmoid colon . The tumor was 38 cm from the anal verge. Biopsy revealed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. The lumen was narrowed by this tumor, but the scope managed to pass. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) showed no swollen lymph nodes around the gastric lesions. The sigmoid colon had thickened walls and increased concentration of surrounding adipose tissue, but no swollen lymph nodes around the sigmoid colon lesion in preoperative CT . There was no distant metastasis to the gastric cancer or sigmoid colon cancer. Preoperative diagnosis was T1N0M0 Stage I (UICC 8th Edition) for two gastric cancers and T4aN0M0 Stage II B(UICC 8th Edition) for sigmoid colon cancer. The lesion in the body of the stomach was an intramucosal lesion and was singled out for endoscopic treatment, but preoperative treatment was not performed because of a lack of time. The symptoms of sigmoid colon lesions began to appear. We have had a policy of total gastrectomy for removing two gastric cancers.
Preoperative CT and blood vessel construction using 3D image analysis software SYNAPSE VINCENT® (Fujifilm, Tokyo) showed artificial blood vessels under the skin . There was a bypass vessel from the left axillary artery to the left femoral artery under the skin on the left side of thoracoabdominal region. Furthermore, there were three bypass vessels from the left external iliac artery to the right femoral artery under the skin of the lower abdomen. Two of the three bypasses were occluded. In the blood flow to the intestinal tract, the inferior mesenteric artery was already occluded. Peripheral blood flow in the common iliac artery depended on blood flow from the artificial blood vessel, and blood flow from the internal iliac artery to the rectum was poor. Blood flow in the anal intestinal tract after excision seemed to be poor, and anastomosis was judged to be at a high risk of leakage. We have a policy of using laparoscopic Hartmann’s surgery. Port and stoma sites were decided by heeding the position of the artificial blood vessels. The port sites on the left were located more inside than usual. First, the stomach was resected, and the stump was evaluated pathologically. There was no tumor residue on the stump. Next, the sigmoid colon was resected before reconstruction . And then stomach reconstruction was performed by Roux-en-Y reconstruction. The jejunum was lifted anterior transverse colon pathway. Finally, the stoma was made in the lower left abdomen. The operation time was 11 h and 24 min. The blood loss volume was 74 ml. Postoperatively, fever was observed at 9 days after the operation, and CT showed pancreatic fistula (grade B). The patient improved with antibiotics. He was discharged at 21 days after the operation. The pathological diagnosis showed that there was another lesion in the stomach. It was unknown before the operation. In the end, there were three lesions. One was a submucosal invasion, and the others were intramucosal cancers. All were Stage I. Sigmoid colon cancer was T3N0M0 Stage II A. Two years have passed since the operation and there has been no recurrence.