A 63-year-old man presented with hematuria and urinary obstruction symptoms. He came to the hospital four times each with presence of gross hematuria. Moreover, the patient suffered from frequency and nocturia at least for six months. Physical examination revealed enlargement of prostate, but there was no palpable nodule on the digital rectal examination. PSA was normal and there was also no evidence of hepatomegaly or splenomegaly.
The first transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) and biopsy was done for him, but pathologic results showed the evidence of BPH. After 28 days, the patient was admitted again due to gross hematuria. Rectal examination was normal. Pelvic CT-scan revealed a big clot in bladder without any lymphadenopathy. There was a significant heterogeneity in prostate. In second TURP, clot evacuation and biopsy were performed on more than 15 different areas of prostate. During the next 2 weeks, the patient underwent 3 other trans-urethral coagulation and clot evacuations due to hematuria.
However, laboratory tests such as prothrombin time (PT) , partial thromboplastin time (PTT), clotting time (CT), bleeding time (BT) and platelet count were normal. After 15 days hematuria was stopped and was not repeated. Sections from prostate show foci of hemorrhage, and ).
The first transfusion was 2 units of PC during the second surgery. The second transfusion was 2 units of PC and 2 FFP, two days later. The consecutive third and fourth transfusions were done two days later during which the patient received 3 units of FFP, and 3 units of whole blood.
Immunohistochemistry studies demonstrate CD20-positive in 90% of lymphoid cells and in the lymphoepithelial lesions , CD5-positive in background lymphocytes, CD43-positive in 90% of lymphoid cells, CD3-positive in background lymphocytes, CK and PSA markers are negative in neoplastic cells. Further evaluation and examination such as bone marrow biopsy, abdominal and pelvic CT-scan did not show other involvement.
In the last fallow up, around eight months after discharging, the patient was alive and asymptomatic. Moreover, there is no evidence of other organ involvement.