An 83-year-old male patient had no family history of hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or malignancy. He smoked for 40 years and had a smoking index of 20 pack-years. He was admitted to the hospital for a physical examination, during which a chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a left hilar occupancy measuring approximately 5.9x3.6 cm, obstructive atelectasis in the left lung field, and a small pleural effusion. Further fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed that the left main bronchus was blocked by new organisms, the surfaces of which oozed blood. This location was the site of the biopsy, which revealed lung squamous cell carcinoma . P40 (+), CK56 (-), ki-67 > 25%, TTF-1 (-) in immunohistochemistry. The patient ceased chemotherapy because he could not endure the adverse effects of nausea and vomiting after one cycle of perfusion chemotherapy (40 mg nedaplatin via bronchial artery infusion administration) and paclitaxel systemic intravenous treatment. After 7 months, the patient developed hemoptysis with a daily volume of about 10-20 mL, and chest CT scan revealed a left deviation of the mediastinum, left lung consolidation and atelectasis, a soft tissue mass in the left hilum with a size of about 8.1x4.6 cm, left main bronchial obstruction, and enlarged lymph nodes in the left cervical root and mediastinum. No obvious metastatic lesions had been found after head MRI, whole-body bone imaging, whole-abdomen enhancement CT. We took the disease’s progression into consideration (Clinical Stage, cT4N3M1a, stage IVA). Subsequently, the BRCA2 EXON15 G25085 mutation was detected by blood next-generation sequencing, and the tumor mutation load TMB was 5.98 mutations/Mb. Based on the sequencing test results, we immediately started aggressive treatment and decided to use the PARP inhibitor Olaparib (300mg twice a day) with the PD-1 inhibitor Cindilimab. After one week, the patient’s hemoptysis stopped. A repeat chest CT revealed that the left hilar mass was substantially smaller than before, with a long diameter of around 4.5 cm, and that the left lung was recruiting and the pleural effusion was absorbed after receiving Olaparib for two months and PD-1 inhibitor for two immunotherapy sessions. At this time, the patient appeared new symptoms, puffy eyelids, decreased urine volume, and generalized weakness. In further testing of common serological indicators, we found that blood creatinine increased from normal value at the beginning of the disease to 163.90μmol/L. Meanwhile, urine precipitation microscopy showed urine protein (+) without a tubular pattern. Routine blood, liver function, inflammation indicators, tumor indicators were normal, and autoantibodies were negative. Following the multidisciplinary team’s discussion, we took into account the kidney damage caused by immune checkpoint inhibitors, which was graded as 2, and stopped using the PD-1 inhibitor in accordance with the Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology (CSCO) 2022 recommendation. One month after quitting the PD-1 inhibitor, the serum creatinine level was back to normal. Six months after starting Olaparib monotherapy, the patient was more advanced. The therapy options, disease response, and PFS for each treatment line are summarized in .