A 43-year-old woman accidentally found a right breast lump on March 2014, with a diameter of 2 × 2 cm and stabbing pain. The mass was not related to the menstrual cycle. There was no redness, swelling, or rupture of the skin near the lump. No erosion, stabbing pain, pruritus, or discharge of the nipple was observed. In 2016, the tumor became progressively enlarged, and a mass of 3 × 2 cm was found under the right axilla. In March 2017, there was pain in the right axilla with obvious tenderness. Physical examination determined with touch indicated a tough mass of 5 × 3 cm in the right breast (between 7 and 9 o'clock), and the lump was characterized by unpolished surface, obscure boundary, and poor activity. A soft mass of 4 × 2 cm was touched in the right axilla, and no obvious abnormality was found during the rest of the physical examination. Ultrasound examination suggested multiple solid masses in the right breast. The dimensions of the tumor determined between 6 and 11 o'clock were 5.3 × 3.4 cm, which was classified as BI-RADS 4C-5; the dimensions of the mass identified at 10 o'clock were 1.2 × 0.5 cm, which was classified as BI-RADS 4a. The dimensions of enlarged lymph nodes in the right axilla were 1.2 × 0.6 cm. Ultrasound-guided needle biopsy showed an invasive carcinoma of the right breast with fibroadenoma. Surgical treatment was performed on 9 March 2017. Intraoperative sentinel lymph node biopsy found metastatic cancer, and simplified radical mastectomy was performed for right breast cancer. Postoperative pathology showed non-specific invasive carcinoma of the right breast (invasive ductal carcinoma SBR II-III) and mucinous carcinoma of high to medium grade (intraductal carcinoma) of the dimension 3.5 × 1.5 × 3.0 cm, as seen in . The other three lesions were non-special invasive carcinoma (invasive ductal carcinoma SBR II), with the dimensions of 0.7 × 0.7 × 0.5 cm, 1.0 × 0.6 × 0.5 cm, and 1.0 × 0.8 × 0.5 cm. No metastasis was found in the right axillary lymph node (0/15). Positive immunohistochemical staining for ER, PR, HER-2, AR, P53, and Ki 67 was performed. The postoperative stage was pT2N2M0 IIIA, Lumina I B. The chemotherapy regimen was EC-TH chemotherapy, with 8 sessions of chemotherapy completed from April 7, 2017 to September 25, 2017.
During the follow-up, corresponding examinations were made according to the patient's condition. Between the baseline and eighth chemotherapy sessions, ECG, cardiac ultrasonography and breast ultrasound, chest CT and upper abdomen CT, and ECT were performed in the following order: Chest CT, upper abdomen CT, and cardiac ultrasound were performed at baseline; ECG examination was performed after the first chemotherapy and the third chemotherapy. On the fifth chemotherapy session, none of the above examinations were performed. Chest CT, upper abdomen CT, cardiac ultrasonography, and breast ultrasound were performed during the eight chemotherapy session. Breast ultrasound results showed (1) a right breast surgery, (2) multiple cystic nodules in the left breast, and (3) no enlarged lymph nodes under both axilla and supraclavicular, and the rest of the examination results were normal. Degree II myelosuppression occurred during chemotherapy, and hematology returned to normal after treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).
In this case, CMR examinations were performed at the beginning of the first chemotherapy (baseline) and after the third, fifth, and eighth chemotherapy sessions, using a 3.0 T magnetic resonance imager (platform HDxt; General Electric Medical Systems, Waukesha, WI) equipped with an 8-channel phased-array cardiac coil. Standard 2-, 3-, and 4-chamber and left ventricle (LV) short-axis cine images from apical to basal were acquired with fast imaging employing a steady-state acquisition sequence. IVIM imaging was performed with the echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence. LV structural and functional parameters were measured by the Qmass package (Medis® Suite MR), as seen in . IVIM parameters were obtained by using GE Functool 9.4.05a software, as seen in . Cine images of 4-chamber, 2-chamber, left ventricle (LV) short-axis and IVIM images of baseline are shown in . IVIM images of the third, fifth, and eighth chemotherapy sessions are shown in .