A 53-year-old male was admitted to the outpatient department of the Second Hospital of Jilin University in February 2020, with swelling and pain on his left hip and proximal thigh, which he stated as having been developing over 5 days and aggravated with fever for 1 day. There was no history of trauma, and the patient was febrile (37.8 ℃). On physical examination, extensive redness and swelling spreading from the patient’s left buttocks to the thigh root could be seen at the lithotomy position, with high skin temperature and obvious tenderness; perianal connective tissue was detected protruding from the anus, and extensive soft tissue bulges were palpable on digital rectal examination, with obvious tenderness and a sense of fluctuation at the 6 o’clock position.
Ultrasound of the left buttocks showed the echo of abnormal soft tissue with a thickened subcutaneous layer and multiple low to anechoic stripe and flaky zones, where the most extensive area was 1.9 cm × 1.1 cm . A CT scan was obtained to further define the extent and nature of the lesion, confirming multiple patchy liquid and gas density shadows in the bilateral rectal sphincter space, bilateral ischiorectal space, left hip and left thigh root muscle space, with gas–liquid planes detected in the left hip, and the rectum wall was discontinuous at 6 o'clock . Blood examination revealed that the white blood cell count reached 16.4 × 10^9/L, with 15.7 × 10^9/L and 92.2% for neutrophils.
The patient was then diagnosed as gas-producing perianal abscess and admitted to the surgical ward with preparation for open surgery. The patient’s blood was collected for blood culture examination (5 ml cultivated for 5 days in BacT/ALERT FA culture bottles and BacT/ALERT FN culture bottles for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria detection, respectively, using BacT/ALERT 3D Microbial Detection Systems (BioMerieux Ltd., France)), and then the patient was managed with intravenous fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics (ceftizoxime (2.0 g i.v. q12h), ornidazole (0.5 g i.v. q24h)) for empirical antibiotic therapy. On the second day after admission, the patient underwent extensive surgical debridement of the perianal abscess, revealing multiple pockets of necrotic tissue. The left hip and the proximal thigh were also debrided at multiple points where the undulations were noticeable, and then necrotic tissue was excised with drains put in place following the standard principles. Over 30 ml of slightly turbid pus was released, and one intraoperative tissue specimen was sent for bacterial culture.
Although the perianal redness and swelling subsided obviously 2 days after the procedure, the patient was still febrile (38.3℃) with his left upper thigh continuing to be red and swollen, aggravated by tenderness and crepitus. CT of the left thigh showed extensive swollen soft tissue and massive gas density visible in the muscle space extending to the knee . An MRI was obtained to further confirm that soft tissue damage and gas and fluid signals could be detected between the subcutaneous tissue and muscle spaces through the left upper thigh . Blood was collected again for a culture test.
Considering insufficient debridement and the risk of incorrect identification of pathogens, the Division of Gastrointestinal Surgery and Orthopedics performed debridement of the left upper thigh together on the 4th day after the primary operation. A large amount of inflammatory and necrotic fascia and muscle tissue was excised.VSD (Vacuum Sealing Drainage) equipment was used for closing the wound and constant drainage. Anti-infection and supportive treatment were continued after the operation, combined with 800,000 UI gentamycin in 3000 ml of 0.9% NaCl for constant irrigation. The debridement tissue was sent for bacterial culture again and a 16S rDNA sequencing test.
While the blood culture tests continued to be negative, the first sample taken intraoperatively was positive in the bacterial culture test, and later identified as coinfection of Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecium by conventional phenotype methods using the COMPACT VITEK2 identification system (BioMerieux Ltd., France) 1 day after the second debridement . Drug sensitivity tests determined that the isolated Escherichia coli was sensitive to amikacin, ampicillin, ampicillin-Sulbactam, aztreonam, cefazolin, cefepime, cefotetan, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, cefuroxime, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, imipenem, levofloxacin, meropenem, piperacillin, tobramycin, and trimethoprim, while the isolated Enterococcus faecium was sensitive to ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, erythromycin, high-level gentamicin, levofloxacin, linezolid, penicillin-G, tetracycline, tigecycline, and vancomycin. Although the specimen from the second surgery was negative in the bacterial culture test, the bacterial 16S rDNA from the patient sample was detected by PCR amplification with the 16S rDNA Bacterial Identification PCR Kit (Code No. RR176, TaKaRa, China). The sequence of the forward primer was 5′-GAGCGGATAACAATTTCACACAGG-3′, and the sequence of the reverse primer was 5′-CGCCAGGGTTTTCCCAGTCACGAC-3′. PCR results showed that there was an apparent PCR product of approximately 1600 bp representing the full-length 16S rDNA found in agarose gel . To clarify the classification of bacteria, DNA sequencing of this PCR amplicon was performed by the Sanger sequencing method . The chromatogram of 16S rDNA sequencing with different sequencing primers showed a single peak, indicating that one bacterial 16S rDNA fragment was present among PCR products . The bacteria were identified by searching and comparing the 16S rDNA sequences (see Additional file ) using the Silva database , which indicated that the bacteria have a 99% identity classification for Clostridium perfringens , and the phylogenetic tree was established by using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) offered by the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database and confirmed that the isolate was most closely related to Clostridium perfringens .
Due to the detection of Clostridium perfringens by 16S rDNA sequencing, the antibiotic regimen was then adjusted according to the results of drug sensitivity tests following bacterial cultures and DNA sequencing tests: meropenem (1 g i.v. q8h) and vancomycin (1 g i.v. q12h). The pain, redness, and swelling of the perianal area and left upper thigh continued to be relieved by this regimen. MRI indicated that although the soft tissue of the left thigh was obviously thickened, no obvious abnormal signal between/in the muscle and bone tissue was detected . Twelve days after the second debridement, another operation was performed again to remove the VSD equipment and close the wound. The blood examination taken on the 3rd and 5th days postoperatively showed no inflammation and the anti-infective treatment was then stopped. After another 3 days of close observation, the patient was discharged at 27 days of admission, and recovered well without adverse complaints at the time of 1-month follow-up.