A Japanese 11-month-old baby boy presented at our institution with symptoms including fever, weight loss, and gallop rhythm. His fever persisted for 3 days before presentation but no treatment was provided. He was born by vaginal delivery at 37 weeks of gestation with a weight of 2612 g (36th percentile) and a head circumference of 33.7 cm. There was no family history of aortic disease and sudden death. When he was 7-months old, he had a fever of unknown origin that persisted for 2 weeks. He was poor in weight gain and was 7.55 kg (6th percentile) at the age of 10 months; his body weight decreased by 0.57 kg in the 3 weeks before presentation.

On examination at the presentation, his height was 70.8 cm, his weight was 6.98 kg, and his head circumference was 43 cm. He was ill-appearing and febrile to 38.4 °C. His blood pressure was 124/62 mmHg and pulse 146/minute. There was a notable S3 gallop and systolic murmur at the apex (Levine scale grade III/VI); however, there were no signs of rales or peripheral edema. Other physical and neurological examinations were normal. A chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly, with 58% cardiothoracic rate. Echocardiography indicated left ventricular (LV) enlargement and dysfunction with LV diastolic dimension of 32 mm (130% of normal), LV ejection fraction 48%, moderate mitral regurgitation, and slight aortic regurgitation. Blood tests indicated the following: white blood cell count, 11.07 × 103/μl; hemoglobin, 10.6 g/dl; C-reactive protein, 5.59 mg/dl; creatine phosphokinase, 294 U/l; creatine phosphokinase-MB isozyme, 27 U/l; fibrin degradation products D-dimer, 2.1 μg/ml; brain natriuretic peptide, 2841 pg/ml; human atrial natriuretic peptide, 1360 pg/ml; and serum troponin T, 0.26 ng/ml. His blood culture at admission was negative.

As dilated cardiomyopathy was diagnosed, we initiated diuretics. However, his fever and high blood pressure (systolic blood pressure, 130–140 mmHg), which rarely present with dilated cardiomyopathy, persisted. To investigate the causes of high blood pressure, computed tomography was performed and revealed thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms on hospital day 3. It also revealed severe celiac artery stenosis and bilateral renal artery stenosis. From these findings, TA was diagnosed and 1 mg/kg per day prednisolone was consequently initiated as first-line therapy. His fever had resolved on day 5; his C-reactive protein levels returned to normal on day 10.

Although his general condition improved, deterioration of vascular lesions was evident, as shown by echocardiography, on day 15. Celiac artery occlusion, severe right renal artery stenosis, and new superior mesenteric artery stenosis were also observed on day 15. We increased the dose of prednisolone to 2 mg/kg per day for 1 week due to the possibility of active inflammation around vascular lesions. In addition, we attempted continuous intravenous infusion of lipo-PGE1 at 10 ng/kg per minute to suppress the progression of angiostenosis. We performed vascular echocardiography twice a week and confirmed that there was no progression of angiostenosis following initiation of lipo-PGE1. We terminated infusion of lipo-PGE1 on day 36 and performed cardiac catheterization on day 45. His right renal artery was not visualized by angiography, and his right kidney was fed by collateral arteries, while vascular echocardiography revealed patency of his right renal artery with severe stenosis. We also confirmed celiac artery occlusion and superior mesenteric artery stenosis to be the same as those observed in previous echocardiography findings. His cardiac function gradually improved. After his C-reactive protein levels returned to normal, 1 mg/kg per day of prednisolone was administered for 1 month, after which the dose was tapered every other 2 weeks. We observed him for 13 months after the termination of lipo-PGE1. The inflammatory findings remained negative and the diameters of abdominal aortic vessels were stable.