A 39-year-old young female with no history of heart disease was admitted with palpitation, shortness of breath for 2 years and aggravation for 6 months. On admission, her blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg and her heart rate was 68 beats/min without cardiac murmurs. Her lower limb were not swollen. Electrocardiogram and laboratory examinations were normal range.
Chest radiography revealed that her cardiac shadow was enlarged to the left. Echocardiography showed a mass of the pericardium. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) demonstrated that the distal segment of the LCX was significantly dilated with contrast agent filling and with huge thrombi in the pericardium. Volumetic reconstruction showed that distal segment of the LCX were remarkably dilated . The left anterior descending branch and left coronary trunk were normal. The patient underwent the coronary angiography and selective micro catheter angiography of the LCX, which revealed a distal fistula of the LCX communicating with the pericardium . The right coronary artery and the left ventriculography were normal. Therefore, a diagnosis of the LCX fistula complicated with false aneurysm was confirmed.
The patient was admitted to the department of cardiac surgery for the LCX repair, partial resection of pseudo aneurysm wall and for coronary aneurysm thrombectomy after all examinations were complete. During the operation, a mass with a size about 25 × 20 mm was found in the left rear of the left ventricle, which was located under the epicardium. Then cardiopulmonary bypass was established, a massive thrombi inside the pseudoaneurysm were observed after the left rear of the mass was opened . And the total amount of thrombi was about 250 g . After that, the CAF was explored. It was found that the CAF opened on the outer wall of the pseudoaneurysm, with a length of about 3 mm. Finally, the fistula was sutured with 4–0 silk thread and most of the pseudoaneurysm wall was resected. The excised lesions were sent for pathological examination. The pathological diagnosis was pseudoaneurysm and mixed thrombi. Follow-up has been carried out for six years, the patient was in good condition after surgery.