The present patient was a 4-day-old female infant. The mother had had a natural pregnancy. The patient had been born by vaginal delivery at a gestational age of 39 weeks 3 days with a birthweight of 3124 g. The passage of meconium was observed soon after the birth. The patient presented on day 4 of age to our neonatal intensive-care unit with abdominal distention and bilious vomiting after each feed. Her vital signs were stable, and she was slightly inactive and mildly dehydrated. Upper gastrointestinal series showed a normal appearance. Gastrografin enema showed that the transverse colon near the hepatic flexure was not delineated on the oral side. When pressure was applied, the string sign was observed . Microcolon was not found. Shortly after admission, exploratory laparotomy was performed under suspicion of intestinal stenosis caused by intussusception or volvulus.
Stenosis of the transverse colon was found 9 cm from the Bauhin valve. It was elastically hard, white, totally fibrotic, and had a ‘napkin ring’ appearance . The sonde passed through the stricture. We suspected organizing due to intussusception in the prenatal period. Partial resection and end-to-end anastomosis were thus performed .
A pathological examination of the resected specimen showed that the cells were mainly composed of spindle-shaped cells, with some round cells and slightly clear cells mixed in. They were circumferential, proliferating from the submucosa to within the muscle layer and narrowing. The mucosal surface was ulcerated. The mucous membrane was atrophied and atrophic. Calcification was observed in the muscle layer. There was no obvious epithelioid pattern . An immunohistochemical analysis revealed positive staining for vimentin, cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), and discovered on GIST-1 (DOG1), weak positive staining for c-kit, and negative staining for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, small muscle actin (SMA), and S-100 protein (S-100). The Ki-67 index was 30%, and the mitotic index was 115/50 high-power field (HPF).
Given the above, we suspected a malignant tumor of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). A further consideration, including an immunohistochemical analysis revealed positive staining for SMA, CD34, DOG-1, and SDHB and negative staining for c-kit, S-100, β-catenin, pan-tropomyosin resepter kinase (pan-TRK), analplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), and c-ros oncogene 1 (ROS1). The histology and immunohistological markers were characteristic of infantile myofibroma.
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was discharged home after 3 weeks. Whole-body magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and gastrografin enema performed 6 months after the operation showed no recurrence of the lesion and no other new lesions.