A 79-year-old male complained of persistent diffuse abdominal pain for 4 d.
Initially, the abdominal pain occurred abruptly after eating a big meal, 4 d prior to admission. The initial abdominal pain was mainly located in the right upper quarter abdominal area and then migrated to the whole abdomen. Additionally, the patient experienced nausea, vomiting, constipation, and fever. Recurrent abdominal pain was noted for the 4 d as well. Sonography-guided percutaneous catheter drainage of the left subphrenic abscess, as shown by contrast computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen, was performed. The bilirubin level was 76.0 mg/dL and volume of abscess drainage was around 600 mL. The abscess culture yielded Enterococcus faecalis and Enterobacter cloacae complex. The blood culture yielded no pathogen isolates. Biloma was confirmed. However, the patient still complained of epigastric pain after drainage.
The patient had a medical history of hypertension and had taken an antihypertensive drug regularly.
The patient’s personal and family histories were unremarkable.
Initial vital signs were a temperature of 37.8 °C, heart rate of 126 beats/min, blood pressure of 163/93 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 32 breaths/min. There was no apparent loss of consciousness. Physical examination showed icteric sclera, abdominal fullness, diffuse tenderness, and muscle guarding. Follow-up vital signs before repeat abdominal CT for persistent abdominal pain were a temperature of 37.5 °C, heart rate of 116 beats/min, blood pressure of 162/84 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min. Severe muscle guarding and diffuse tenderness were observed.
Abnormal laboratory findings included hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin: 3.0 mg/dL; reference range: ≤ 1.2 mg/dL), mildly elevated alkaline phosphatase (138 U/L; reference range: 40-129 U/L), hyponatremia (sodium: 127 mmol/L; reference range: 136-145 mmol/L), impaired renal function (creatinine: 1.59 mg/dL; reference range: 0.70-1.20 mg/dL), white blood cell count of 3200/μL (reference range: 3400-9500/μL), and 8% band form of white blood cells (reference range: 0.0%-4.2%).
Plain abdominal radiography showed ileus and contrast abdominal CT showed a dilated common bile duct (CBD) and left subphrenic abscess . Repeat contrast CT of the abdomen was performed for persistent abdominal pain after biloma drainage and showed bile leakage and gastric wall thickening . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed an edematous, hyperemic gastric mucosa with poor distensibility . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography after EGD showed a dilated CBD with one filling defect of about 10 mm in size .
The gastric mucosal culture yielded Enterococcus faecalis and the biopsy showed that the gastric submucosa and mucosa were infiltrated by clusters of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and plasma cells . According to initial CT and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, the etiology of the initial abdominal pain with fever was a CBD stone with cholangitis and spontaneous biloma. However, according to serial CT images and gastric mucosal culture, the persistent pain after biloma drainage was caused by PG. The etiology of PG was bile leakage after biloma drainage.