A 60-year-old postmenopausal woman presented with lump in lower abdomen of 2 months duration. Abdominal examination revealed a large, irregular, firm supra-pubic mass. On pelvic examination, the same mass was felt in the vagina. Cervix and uterus were not felt separately from the mass. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large, well defined heterogeneous abdomino-pelvic mass. Serum CA-125 level was 52.3 U/mL. Exploratory laparotomy was performed, which revealed a large, bosselated mass arising from the cervix. Body of the uterus, bilateral ovaries, tubes and other abdomino-pelvic organs were within normal limits. Total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with complete excision of the mass was done after identifying the ureters from pelvic brim to their entry into the urinary bladder. Her postoperative recovery was uneventful.
The patient was kept under close observation after initial treatment. Four months after surgery, on routine follow-up, vaginal cytology showed the malignant squamous component of MMMT. The recurrence was confirmed by colposcopy-guided biopsy from the vaginal vault. Physical examination and CT-scan did not reveal any evidence of disease elsewhere. This recurrence was treated with radical pelvic radiotherapy (RT) (external pelvic RT 60 Gy in 30 fractions plus 2 intracavitary applications of 6 Gy each). The patient is free of disease at eighteen months after the treatment of recurrence.
Gross examination of the surgical specimen revealed a 28 × 20 × 15 cm bosselated, mass arising from the cervix. The cervical canal was distorted because of the mass. On cut surface, the mass was fleshy, solid with cystic areas.
On hematomylin and eosin staining, the entire tumor showed cellular whorls dispersed amidst pale sarcomatous stroma. The cells in whorls were round to short spindle shaped and had moderate mitotic activity . Although no vessels were seen in the center of these whorls, the whorled appearance was reminiscent of an endometrial stromal sarcoma. Hence, the preliminary diagnosis of endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) was made. Additional sections however revealed that whorled areas had basaloid squamous carcinoma in the center . A panel of immunohistochemical tests was performed and whorled basaloid areas were positive for cytokeratin , epithelial membrane antigen and CD 10 but were negative for vimentin confirming their epithelial nature. The stromal component of the tumor was highlighted on vimentin stain . The stromal element was sarcomatous and showed diffuse vimentin and focal SMA positivity. SMA, S-100, calponin, inhibin, Mic-2, desmin and myoglobin were negative in the basaloid islands. No heterologous elements were seen. The final diagnosis was homologous malignant mixed mullerian tumor with basaloid squamous carcinoma.