A 46-year-old Asian man without any significant past medical history presented to an out-patient clinic complaining of fever, epigastric pain, and back pain. He was diagnosed as having gastric ulcer by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and prescribed a proton pomp inhibitor; however, his fever of approximately 38 °C and his back pain remained. Two weeks later, his back pain had worsened, and the laboratory data of the out-patient clinic showed an elevated C-reactive protein level (17.2 mg/dL); thus, he came to our hospital for further evaluation. His medication included only orally administered azelnidipine for hypertension. There was no significant family medical history. He denied smoking tobacco, alcohol consumption, and exposure to toxins. He worked at a ceremonial hall without any ill contacts. He had a fever of 37.9 °C, heart rate of 90 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate of 20 breaths/minute, blood pressure of 126/78 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. A physical examination including a neurological examination showed a well man without any specific abnormal findings. Blood tests at the first encounter revealed a white blood cell count of 10,300/μL with 70% neutrophils, 14% lymphocytes, and 16% monocytes, and the platelet count was 275,000/μL. His lactate dehydrogenase level was 299 IU/L (normal range, 119–229 IU/L), his alkaline phosphatase level was 983 U/L (normal range, 103–335 U/L), and his gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase level was 256 IU/L (normal range, 0–73 IU/L). His C-reactive protein level was 23.47 mg/dL (normal range, 0–0.29 mg/dL). Other results are shown in Table . A contrasted computed tomography (CT) scan showed edema around his gallbladder without gallstones or bile duct dilation, along with left adrenal enlargement without contrast, suggesting necrosis and slight pleural effusion . His right adrenal gland was contrasted normally. Contrasted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his adrenal glands was also performed, and the results showed necrosis of his left adrenal gland with a slight possibility of infarction and no specific evidence of hemorrhage. He was hospitalized for further investigation into the cause of the unilateral adrenal necrosis.
Lupus anticoagulant and don't break the value complex antibody were measured, and both were negative, which suggested a low possibility of antiphospholipid syndrome. He did not meet the criteria for diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus. We considered the possibility of adrenal insufficiency or pheochromocytoma and measured several types of adrenal hormones, such as serum cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hormone, plasma renin activity, plasma aldosterone activity, and urinary metanephrine and normetanephrine, but none of them explained our patient’s condition. The culture results from blood drawn at the first encounter were all negative. We performed CT-guided needle biopsy of his left adrenal gland, which revealed necrosis and the formation of fibrotic granulomatous tissue . There was no epithelioid granuloma, malignant lymphoma cells, or hemosiderin deposition, suggesting a low possibility of the involvement of a hemorrhagic etiology. The bacterial culture of this biopsy tissue was also negative. After the biopsy was finished, he was discharged. However, 1 week later, severe thrombocytopenia (5000/μL) appeared, and he was rehospitalized. His creatinine level had increased to 1.03 mg/dL from the initial value of 0.85 mg/dL. Bone marrow aspiration first resulted in a dry tap, but subsequent results showed increased megakaryocytes and hypercellular marrow with fibrosis classified as MF-1 according to the European consensus on bone marrow fibrosis staging . A contrasted CT scan showed new left axillary lymphadenopathy with a size of 15 mm, right pleural effusion, and increased ascites . Because our patient’s condition was worsening, we needed to start immediate treatment for any possible underlying causes, including bacterial infection and autoimmune disease, before obtaining the exact diagnosis. The laboratory data from the second hospitalization are shown in Table . The clinical course of this case is shown in Fig. . The initial treatment included ampicillin/sulbactam and a methylprednisolone pulse followed by orally administered prednisolone and intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (400 mg/kg for 5 days), considering the underlying causes mentioned above, such as severe bacterial infection or autoimmune diseases including antiphospholipid syndrome and immune thrombocytopenia; however, all of these treatments seemed to be ineffective. We also used recombinant thrombomodulin (380 U/kg) for 7 days to cope with the possibility of a thrombotic event or disseminated intravascular coagulation. Because the blood and adrenal gland biopsy culture results were both negative, we stopped the antibiotic treatment. On hospital day 9, we performed a left axillary lymph node needle biopsy, which showed no evidence of malignant lymphoma. With the edema, severe thrombocytopenia, fever above 37.5 °C, reticulin myelofibrosis (MF), mild lymphadenopathy, and progressive renal insufficiency and with other diseases excluded, we diagnosed this patient as having TAFRO syndrome according to the diagnostic criteria . The administration of intravenously administered tocilizumab (8 mg/kg) was begun on the same day with tapering prednisolone dose; his C-reactive protein and alkaline phosphatase levels gradually improved, along with his renal function and fever . For the anasarca, furosemide and potassium canrenoate were used and were highly effective.
Because the thrombocytopenia remained, we added eltrombopag, a thrombopoietin receptor agonist, on hospital day 14, followed by tocilizumab administered on hospital day 16. Then, his platelet count began to increase. Under the strong immunosuppressive treatment, he contracted methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis bacteremia on hospital day 20 and cytomegalovirus viremia on hospital day 31, which were successfully treated with vancomycin and ganciclovir, respectively. Tocilizumab was administered a third time on hospital day 47, and our patient was discharged on hospital day 48. After discharge, he remained afebrile and with an alkaline phosphate level within normal limits, and tocilizumab administration was no longer necessary. Eltrombopag administration was stopped because his platelet count increased and remained stable within normal limits. Nine months after the first treatment, this patient continues to do well. He is only being treated with low-dose prednisolone at approximately 5 mg per day and is still tapering carefully because of the presence of unilateral adrenal necrosis, considering the possibility of adrenal insufficiency.