A 32-year-old female had a fall from a two-wheeler and sustained an injury to the left knee. She presented to us with knee pain and an inability to bear weight. She had diffuse pain over the knee with a contusion on the anterior knee. She had posterior tibial sag and the posterior drawer test was positive. The varus and valgus stress tests were comparable with the opposite knee. The range of movement was from 0° to 90° with further movement painful. The dial test was negative at 30° and 90°.
The radiograph and the computed tomography scan were suggestive of posterior tibial rim fracture along with PCL avulsion fracture from the tibial insertion . The patient was planned for open reduction and fixation. The patient was operated on under regional anesthesia in a prone position with a tourniquet over the proximal thigh. A lazy S-shaped skin incision was placed over the popliteal fossa with a horizontal limb over the fossa and vertical limbs over the lateral distal femur and proximal medial tibia . The dissection was between the medial gastrocnemius and semimembranosus as suggested by Burke and Schaffer. Deep into this plane, the popliteus muscle was seen and elevated from the proximal tibia. The posterior capsule of the knee joint was identified along with the avulsed tibial fragment. The fragment was initially stabilized with a K wire . Then, four high tensile sutures (Fiber wire No. 2, Arthrex, Naples, Florida) were passed through the posterior capsule and PCL at their tibial insertion on the avulsed fragment . A knotless fixation was planned with two swivel lock PEEK anchors (4.9 mm, Arthrex, Naples, Florida). Two drill holes were made and the drill holes were tapped for the passage of anchors. The sutures that were passed through the capsule and PCL were then passed through the anchors, with two sets of sutures through each anchor. The anchor along with the sutures was threaded through the posterior tibial cortex with sutures in tension and the K wire was removed . The reduction was checked under the image and the tourniquet deflated. The wound was washed and closed in layers. A posterior knee plaster was applied with a proximal tibial posterior padding to prevent posterior sagging. The patient was started on isometric quadriceps exercises from day 1 and non-weight-bearing crutch walking was also started. At 2 weeks, the plaster was removed and sutures were also removed. A brace was applied with proximal leg PCL support and non-weight bearing was allowed along with isometric quadriceps and ankle range of movement exercises. At 4 weeks, partial weight bearing was allowed progressing to full weight bearing by 8 weeks. The patient was started on an open chain range of movement exercises of the knee and active straight leg rising. Night-time bracing was continued for 2 months. At 6-month and 1-year follow-up, the patient had no complaints and she achieved her full range of movement . There was no posterior tibial sag.