Female, 32 years old, caucasian, obstetric history of three pregnancies (three caesareans), the last complicated by preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension, with subsequent diagnosis of CKD (focal segmental glomerulosclerosis in renal biopsy). Undergoing immunosuppressive treatment with cyclophosphamide and corticosteroid therapy, showing good initial response but early relapse. She abandoned the consultation, without therapeutic guidance, between 2011 and November 2013, when she turned to the emergency department of the area of residence for hypertensive crisis, with subsequent need to initiate dialysis.  In March 2014, due to complaints of abdominal distension, she performed abdominal ultrasound that revealed a bicoronic/biamniotic twin pregnancy of 19 weeks. The dialysis strategy was optimised for four five-hour sessions per week and was referred to the Obstetrics/Nephrology service. At the first evaluation, at 21 weeks, both foetuses presented normal morphology, biometries in the 25th - 50th and 50th - 75th percentile, respectively, and normal amniotic fluid indices. She had ultrasound assessments every three weeks until 27 weeks, when it was decided to initiate more stringent monitoring and adjust the haemodialysis programme to six sessions per week, which was difficult to reconcile with the distance to the area of residence. This treatment was well tolerated clinically and haemodynamically, with blood pressure controlled with 30 mg daily nifedipine and stable analytical results. Following the routine second trimester examinations (PTGO 61/156/175 mg/dL), gestational diabetes was diagnosed, which was controlled with insulin therapy. She received corticosteroid therapy for foetal pulmonary maturation at 28 weeks and initiated supportive therapy with erythropoietin (1 x/week), calcium carbonate, ferrous sulphate and enoxaparin. Both foetuses presented growth in the 50th percentile, LA and umbilical artery flowmetry was normal. At 34 weeks and six days, due to the onset of labour, she underwent caesarean section. Two boys were born with 2220 g and 2260 g and Apgar scores of 8/9/10. In the postpartum period, she remained stable, with adjustment of the haemodialysis sessions to three times per week.
