We present a case of a 54-year-old Chinese man with a history of treated hypertension and diabetes mellitus, referred for suspected spontaneous left dural CCF. The patient complained of a chronically red left eye and double vision in the left gaze. Initial examination disclosed best corrected visual acuity 20/20 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye, associated with a left relative afferent pupillary defect and severely reduced color vision on Ishihara testing in his left eye only. Humphrey visual field assessment disclosed diffuse defects in the left eye, but was normal in the right eye. Slit lamp examination disclosed a red left eye with dilated corkscrew vessels, but no evidence of angle closure, blood in the Schlemm canal, or other causes of raised intraocular pressure. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 28 mmHg in the left eye, and 14 mmHg in the right, healthy eye. Fundoscopy disclosed dilated retinal veins on the left side, but no venous stasis retinopathy, or choroidal detachment. The remainder of the ophthalmic examination disclosed mild left abduction deficit, mild ptosis and 3 mm proptosis on the left side. Partial embolization of the angiographically confirmed left dural CCF resulted in incomplete clinical recovery: despite complete regression of the left optic neuropathy and of the left abduction deficit, the left eye remained red, associated with raised intraocular pressure requiring topical medication. Optical coherence tomography angiography of the anterior segment was performed, using a described technique , with optic disc imaging as well using the AngioVue (Optovue Inc. Fremont, CA, USA). Our study followed the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki, with informed consent obtained and ethics approval obtained from our local Institutional Review Board (CIRB Ref no: 2015/3078). OCTA showed engorged episcleral vessels, which were better delineated than using clinical evaluation alone . The OCTA was able to analyze the location and depth of the tortuous, abnormal vessels, as well as the increased flow detected on the B-scan cross-sectional OCTA scans . Posterior pole OCTA of the affected eye disclosed glaucomatous nerve damage and reduction in the peripapillary flow .