A 43-year-old man was admitted to the intensive care unit in our hospital due to multiple open traumas caused by a traffic accident. The patient had a history of hypertension. At admission, the patient presented a constant body temperature of 36.5°C. Physical examination showed no obvious abnormality in the heart, lungs, or abdomen. He suffered multiple lacerations and fractures of the right acetabulum and inferior ramus of the pubis, accompanied by pelvic extraperitoneal hematoma. On the first day of hospitalization, he underwent surgery for multiple injuries. Based on empirical therapy, cefuroxime (1.5 g, every 8 h) was administrated for infection prevention, and anti-infective therapy with cefoperazone–sulbactam (3 g, every 8 h) and levofloxacin (500 mg, daily) was conducted for common bacteria and traumatic wet lung. On day 2, the patient developed a fever (38.4°C), with an increase of procalcitonin (PCT; 31.47 ng/ml) and lactic acid (8.58 mmol/L) after the operation. The antibiotic treatment was changed to meropenem (1.0 g, every 8 h) plus teicoplanin (0.4 g daily). On day 14, P. aeruginosa was positive in the bacterial culture of wound tissues and was identified as a multiple-resistant strain with antibiotic susceptibility testing (AST; Kirby–Bauer method), thus amikacin (0.4 g/day) was added to the anti-infective regimen. Despite antimicrobial therapies, a P. aeruginosa-positive blood culture was still identified as bloodstream infection on day 16; the dose of amikacin was therefore adjusted. On day 21, the patient underwent thigh amputation, surgical debridement, and drainage due to recurrent vascular rupture and aggravated cyanosis. Five days later, due to the less effective anti-infective therapy, P. aeruginosa-positive blood culture along with fever still existed; therefore, the patient received moxifloxacin to replace the teicoplanin and amikacin. Despite this management, fevers continued, and infection was still under suspicion. Ceftazidime–avibactam (2.5 g/day) was then administrated to replace the meropenem. The culture was P. aeruginosa negative for the 26th-day blood sample but still positive for wound tissues.
Due to the uncontrolled infection, other pathogens were suspected. On day 26, tiny, nonhemolytic, and transparent colonies grew on the Columbia blood agar plate of four blood sample cultures , possibly representing M. hominis. Gram staining of the blood smear showed no bacteria. A subculture of blood and wound tissue samples on mycoplasma medium presents as fried-egg-type colonies after 5 days of incubation . Colonies were then identified to be M. hominis by the matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) and further confirmed by 16S rRNA sequencing (primers: 27F, AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG; 1492R, GGTTACCTTGTTACGACTT) and phylogenetic tree analysis (; GenBank Accession No. OQ642125 for a strain isolated from a wound tissue sample and OQ642126 for a strain isolated from a blood sample). On day 31, therapy with polymyxin B in a dose of 5 × 105 U/day was initiated instead of ceftazidime–avibactam due to its shortage. In addition to the initial isolates of M hominis, two subsequent cultures obtained in the following week were also positive. The AST with a commercial kit (broth dilution method, Zhongaisheng, Hebei, China) showed that M. hominis was susceptible to doxycycline, minocycline, and josamycin but resistant to azithromycin, clarithromycin, norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, roxithromycin, sparfloxacin, spectinomycin, and levofloxacin . Based on the results of AST, minocycline (100 mg, twice/day), meropenem plus teicoplanin were started instead of moxifloxacin on the 33rd day of hospitalization. On the 37th hospital day, the hematology data and PCT level returned to normal, and infection was controlled. After starting minocycline-based therapy for 6 days, repeated cultures from the blood were M. hominis negative. Details regarding the diagnosis and treatment are shown in .