A 29-year-old right-handed Ethiopian male patient presented with a 10-year history of exercise intolerance that worsened with mild-to-moderate exertion. In addition, he reported bilateral ptosis (drooping eyelids) since childhood. He also had difficulty ambulating, with intermittent loss of balance, especially at night. A permanent pacemaker was inserted in 2018 after he was diagnosed with third-degree AV block with an electrocardiogram (ECG). Pacemaker implantation resulted in substantial improvement in exercise tolerance. However, the patient subsequently developed new neurological symptoms, including dysarthria (slurred speech) and intermittent attention deficits, particularly during listening tasks. Moreover, he reported a decline in hearing ability. Family history was negative for similar presentations. Physical examination revealed general muscle wasting and bilateral symmetrical ptosis. Limitation of ocular movements in all quadrants was found on examination of cranial nerves 3, 4, and 6. On examinations of cranial nerve 8, he could not hear finger rubbing sounds from 2 cm, but there was no lateralization on Rhine and Webber tests. The muscle bulk was comparable in all four extremities, and power and tone were normal. However, dysmetria on the finger-to-nose test was noted. He was also unable to perform tandem gait. He was referred to the otolaryngology department for audiometry evaluation and was found to have mild bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.

Laboratory evaluations were within normal reference ranges, including a complete blood count (CBC), renal function tests (RFTs), serum electrolytes, and metabolic panels. Specifically, the CBC revealed white blood cells at 6500/μL, hemoglobin at 16.5 g/dL, and platelets at 193,000/μL. Fasting blood sugar was 95 mg/dL, and TSH level was 2.35 ng/dL.

Electrophysiological studies yielded normal results, including electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS).

Treatment and outcomes
The patient underwent permanent pacemaker placement, resulting in a marked improvement in exertional dyspnea. A multidisciplinary team currently follows him, including the cardiology, neurology, and ophthalmology departments.