A 46-year-old man of Macedonian ethnicity presented with a pruritic perianal lesion measuring up to 2cm without pain or bleeding. Our patient was diabetic and had a family history of diabetes and hypertension. Five months after his initial presentation, a colonoscopy and a biopsy were performed at Clinical Hospital Sistina - Adzibadem. The next month, our patient was admitted to our University Clinic of Digestive Surgery, where a physical examination revealed a perianal eczematous lesion measuring 6 × 4cm and enlarged inguinal lymph nodes. A second biopsy with a left lymphadenectomy was performed.
The tissue specimens were formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded at our Institute of Pathology. We used a routine hematoxylin-eosin stain and performed additional histochemical and immunohistochemical analysis, including staining with Alcian blue and for cytokeratin (CK)7, CK20, epithelial membrane antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, melan-A, androgen receptor and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2/neu).
Microscopic analysis of the biopsy specimens showed large Paget cells with abundant pale cytoplasm, and large nuclei infiltrating the basal part and the whole thickness of the squamous epithelium and adnexal epithelium. Occasional cells had a signet-ring appearance. His inguinal lymph node revealed reactive lymphadenopathy. A diagnosis of EMPD was made.
The perianal surgical skin excision measured 5.5 × 6.5 × 0.7cm and showed diffuse ulcerated eczematous plaques . Histopathology revealed identical Paget cells as viewed in the biopsy specimen, infiltrating the epidermis and adnexal epithelium with ulceration. In the basal epidermal layers there were some duct-like structures with small central lumina . There was intense mononuclear infiltrate in the dermal connective tissue. An immunohistochemical analysis on both biopsy and excision specimens revealed positive Paget cell expression for CK7, epithelial membrane antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen, androgen receptor and Her2/neu , and negative expression for CK20 and melan-A. Intracytoplasmic sialomucin stained positive for Alcian blue . A diagnosis of primary in situ PPD was made.
After two biopsy findings of EMPD, a wide surgical excision was performed . The patient was discharged in good condition and advised to attend a follow-up examination. After six months, a check-up revealed his skin area to be disease free.