A 13-year old male presented to an ED with complaints of “frequent eye blinking” and reoccurring episodes of “stiffening and abnormal movements of the hands and neck” and “flickering of the upper lips” that began 24 hours prior to his arrival. About one week prior to presenting at the ED, the patient had been discharged from a psychiatric hospital, and his discharge medications for his mood disorder (Mood Disorder Not Otherwise Specified) included quetiapine 500 milligrams (mg) by mouth (PO) daily (qd) and valproic acid (VPA) 500 mg PO at bedtime (qhs). His dosing regimen of quetiapine for the three months before that hospitalization had been 100 mg qd, and he had not previously been prescribed VPA.
The patient reported having insufflated two crushed tablets of quetaipine 500 mg on four separate occasions in the previous forty-eight hours. His desire to experience euphoria motivated him to abuse his prescription quetiapine. He reported having not taken his prescribed VPA in three days and also reported that he had not recently used any other medications, supplements, or illicit drugs. His symptoms began two hours after the last insufflation of quetiapine, the episodes of excessive eye-blinking and lip-flickering were intermittent, and the twitching of his eyelids was continuous.
At the time of presentation, the patient was fully alert and had a Glascow Coma Scale of 15. He was afebrile, tachycardic (115 beats/minute), tachypnic (18 respirations/minute), and had normal oxygen saturation without supplemental oxygen. Physical exam abnormalities included only active twitching of both upper eyelids and bilateral dilated pupils (4/5). During observation in the emergency department, the patient had two myoclonic episodes of the extremities and intense flickering of the eyelids that the patient reported were associated with him turning his head to the right. The episodes lasted about two minutes, and the patient was alert and oriented during the episodes. The patient reported feeling restless and had a constant desire to walk. Results from a 10-panel urine toxicology screen performed at admission were negative for common drugs of abuse, and lorazepam 1.5 mg intravenous (IV) was given to relax the patient. His restlessness worsened, however, and he was admitted for observation and treatment of neuroleptic toxicity. Diphenhydramine 50 mg IV was administered, and he was in stable condition within 24 hours. Quetiapine was discontinued, and the patient was discharged and referred for substance abuse evaluation and treatment. His primary care provider and psychiatrist were notified regarding the medication abuse.