A 30-year-old female was presented with severe left flank pain for one year. Laboratory data was within normal limits. Her physical examination was unremarkable, with a body mass index of 19 Kg/m2.
On April 8th, 2011, the computed tomographic angiography (CTA) and magnetic resonance angiography showed narrowing of the LRV in the aortomesenteric portion. On May 25th, 2011, a duplex ultrasound demonstrated the compressed LRV between the aorta and the SMA, varices of left gonadal vein arising from the LRV, and a peak velocity (PV) of 17 cm/s in the renal hilum and 106 cm/s in the aortomesenteric portion of the LRV (the PV ratio of 6.2) . On June 2th, 2011, left renal venography revealed obstruction of LRV outflow, perihilar varices, and an 8 mm Hg pressure gradient across the suspected narrowing in the LRV .
After failed conservative approach, the left renal venography was performed under local anesthesia to confirm and manage the narrowing of the LRV. A 10 mm × 40 mm SmartControl stent (Cordis, Johnson & Johnson, USA ) was deployed. The left renal venography showed unobstructed blood outflow, and full stent expansion without obvious protrusion of the stent in the inferior vena cava . The patient had nearly immediate resolution of her symptom and was discharged on postoperative day 5.
After one month of endovascular stenting, the patient began to experience recurrent left flank pain. On July 5th, 2011, the second CTA demonstrated an endovascular stent migration on the left of SMA . On July 15th, 2011, the third CTA demonstrated further migration of the endovascular stent on the left of SMA . Since there was a continuing migration of the stent on computed tomographic imaging within 10 days, the extravascular stent was proposed on July 26th, 2011. The endovascular stent was found migrated to the left of SMA and adhered to the vessel wall tightly, and the stent could not be moved. The varicose gonadal vein was seen arising from the LRV. Excessive fibrous tissue was found at the origin of the SMA, and excised for adequate decompression of the LRV . We estimated and cut the graft to an appropriate length to fit between the inferior vena cava and the gonadal vein or longer. After the left gonadal vein and adrenal central vein were ligated and transected , an externally reinforced polytetrafluoroethylene graft (REF F4008, Bard Peripheral Vascular, Inc. ) of 8 mm diameter was selected to form an extravascular stent around the LRV . The graft was wrapped around the LRV and fixed together at each ring . The graft was sewn to the adventitia of the abdominal aorta and the endovascular stent was sewn to the wall of the LRV to prevent from the further migration. The patient had nearly immediate resolution of her symptom and was discharged on postoperative day 7.
At 36 months’ follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic. The fourth, fifth and sixth CTA demonstrated the extravascular stent was patent and well positioned, and the endovascular stent remained to be on the left of the superior mesenteric artery at the first week, third month, and ninth month after extravascular stent placement respectively .