A 14-year-old girl had one episode of seizure five months prior to admission. She was diagnosed to be having multiple intracranial neurocysticercosis lesions and started on carbamazepine therapy. After three months of treatment, she noticed intermittent distortion of vision (metamorphopsia), seeing black spots and floaters in both the eyes. Subsequently, she developed progressive painless vision loss from both the eyes. There was no history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension or tuberculosis. Ophthalmological examination did not show orbital swelling, redness of eye, excessive lacrimation and other signs of ocular or orbital inflammation. There was no evidence of adnexal, orbital or extraocular muscle involvement. Intraocular pressure was normal on both sides. Though, the pupils were slightly dilated, reaction to light and accommodation was normal. Visual acuity was limited to perception of light in both the eyes. Bilateral detailed indirect ophthalmoscopic examination revealed evidence of subretinal cysts, retinal hemorrhage and retinal detachment. Surprisingly vitreous hemorrhage was also detected in both the eyes. Rest of the neurological examination was unremarkable.
Hemogram, serum biochemistry and x-ray chest were normal. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative. Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was strongly positive for Taenia solium. Ocular B-scan ultrasonography (USG) revealed septations and debris in vitreous in both eyes. It also showed cystic lesion with small peripheral solid nodular area in subretinal space in both eyes [Figure (a)]. Orbital computed tomography also depicted the vitreous hemorrhage with retinal detachment in both the eyes. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of orbits showed heterogeneous hyperintensity in posterior chamber of eyes [Figure (c), (d)]. Ocular B-scan USG, orbital computed tomography and MRI orbit were consistent with vitreous hemorrhage and retinal detachment in both the eyes (right more than left). Subretinal cyst was located at the posterior pole of both the eyes. MRI brain revealed multiple small cystic intraparenchymal lesions in bilateral cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres, basal ganglia, thalami and brainstem. MRI T1-weighted image showed isointense to hypointense lesions. Fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2-weighted images showed hyperintense lesions with surrounding edema. Postcontrast T1-weighted image showed multiple ring enhancing lesions [Figure (a-f)].
A clinical diagnosis of vitreous hemorrhage due to ocular cysticercosis was made and it was further supported by various imaging modalities. The patient underwent retinal surgery for cyst extraction. A complete cyst excision was possible from right eye, but on left side, cyst got ruptured during intra-operative procedure. Gross examination of pathological specimen revealed a thin walled, transparent, globular cyst with eccentrically placed small scolex [Figure (b)]. Histopathological examination (stained with hematoxylin and eosin) showed the invaginated scolex with suckers, spiral canal and hooks thereby confirming the cysticercus cellulosae. A short course of oral steroid was given to the patient after cyst excision. At the time of discharge from hospital, she was able to count finger at one foot from right eye, but still had only perception of light from left eye. She was continued on carbamazepine (200 mg thrice a day) for seizures. At one-year follow up, seizures are well controlled. Visual acuity (Snellen chart) is 6/60 in right eye and complete loss of vision in left eye. Ophthalmoscopic examination shows partial retinal re-attachment and optic disc pallor in the right eye, whereas optic disc atrophy is present in left eye.