A 44-year-old Chinese man presented with a 45-day history of diplopia. Before the onset of his condition, he reported no cold, nausea, dizziness, tinnitus, vomiting, headache, hearing impairment, or hair graying. Local hospital assessments previously identified panuveitis, choroidal detachment, DR, and bilateral macular edema. Macular OCT indicated both eyes had macular neuroepithelium thickening and elevation, along with intercystic low reflex and localized detachment of the neuroepithelium. Despite initiating treatment with corticosteroid eye drops and posterior subtenon injections of corticosteroids, his condition deteriorated progressively. The patient reported no prior trauma or eye surgery. He had managed type 2 diabetes for 15 years and received bilateral total retinal photocoagulation for DR two years earlier. Physical exam revealed BCVA: manual in both eyes, with intraocular pressure at 17 mmHg and 18 mmHg. Exam findings were bilateral conjunctival congestion, atrial flash (+), localized posterior iris synechiae, pupillary margin neovascularization, clear lens, grade II vitreous opacity, and white pompon-like opacities. Right eye fundus examination showed a disc-surrounding neovascular membrane, 360° peripheral retinal and choroidal bulges, dispersed old photocoagulation marks, neovascularization, and superior and inferonasal retinal hemorrhages, extending to the posterior pole. In both eyes, examination revealed the presence of circumferential peripheral retinal and choroidal protrusions. These were accompanied by scattered, pre-existing photocoagulation marks. UBM detected a detachment of the ciliary body in each eye. Utilizing B-mode ultrasonography, vitreous opacity, and detachments in the choroid, and retina were noted for both eyes. The axial length of the right eye is 22.68 mm, and that of the left eye is 22.50 mm.Furthermore, OCT identified a significant bulge in the peripheral retina and a lack of clarity in the macular area. FFA revealed twisted, enlarged retinal veins, pronounced dotted fluorescence, and hemorrhagic fluorescence shading in the retina, with patchy nonperfusion areas (refer to Fig. ). Orbital MRI and liver and kidney function tests were normal. Syphilis, HIV, and T-SPOT tests were negative. Intraocular fluid analysis ruled out microbial infection, with VEGF at 1614.3 pg/mL, BFGF at 478.3 pg/mL, IL-6 at 566 pg/mL, VCAM at 21845.2 pg/mL, and IL-8 at 135.7 pg/mL. HLA-DRB1 results indicated DRB1*04
He was therefore diagnosed with probable VKH. He was administered intravenous methylprednisolone at 0.5 g per day, gradually transitioning to oral corticosteroid therapy. Subsequently, the patient’s subretinal fluid resolved, and normal choroidal and retinal architecture was restored. Upon discharge, the BCVA was 20/250 in the right eye and 20/500 in the left eye (refer to Fig. ). Post-discharge, despite several adjustments, the patient’s blood glucose levels remained poorly controlled. Consequently, oral cyclosporine at 100 mg per day was added to his regimen. However, the patient experienced general weakness and dizziness, leading to the discontinuation of cyclosporine after 12 days. At the follow-up examination, there was an improvement in retinal and choroidal detachments, with a BCVA of 20/200 in both eyes. Nonetheless, fundus hemorrhage in the right eye had worsened (refer to Fig. ). The patient was then switched to cyclosporine from different manufacturers.