A 38-year-old man presented with decreased vision in both eyes for 2 years. The patient had undergone ICL (ICL V4 Visian, STAAR Surgical Co., Monrovia, California, U.S.A.) implantation in both eyes 6 years prior. Postoperatively, the uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) of both eyes was 20/32. The corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) was similar to the UDVA.
On examination, ICLs were in situ with anterior subcapsular cataracts in both eyes . Both eyes underwent anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT; CASIA SS-1000, Tomey Corp., Nagoya, Japan) imagining in the model of 3D. Then the ICL vault was manually measured from the back surface of the ICL to the front surface of crystalline lens, centered on the optic axis (shown as a white beam). The vault was shallow in the right eye and measured 72 μm through AS-OCT images. However, in the left eye, the ICL touched the anterior capsule, existing “0” vault . The endothelial cell density, calculated by the noncontact autofocus specular microscope (EM-3000, Tomey Corp., Nagoya, Japan), was 2587 cells/millimeter squared (mm2) in the right eye and 2531 cells/mm2 in the left eye.
The patient had planned explantation of the ICL with FLACS after obtaining written informed consent. Considering the unsatisfactory CDVA of the patient after ICL implantation, the surgeon suggested a monovision design for the patient with the implantation of monofocal IOLs rather than multifocal IOLs. And the LenSx laser system (LenSx Laser, Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, Texas, U.S.A.) was used for capsulotomy (5.1 mm diameter, 8 μJ energy) and chop nuclear pre-fragmentation (5.0 mm diameter, 6 chops, 8 μJ energy).
The surgery was performed first in the left “0” vault eye. Cavitation bubbles were trapped in the shallow space beneath the ICL around the capsulotomy area during the capsulotomy, developing from small bubbles into big ones . No additional cavitation bubbles appeared during nuclear pre-fragmentation.
Then, a 2.0 mm primary superior corneal incision was made with a keratome at 135 degrees (°). The sodium hyaluronate 1.7% ophthalmic viscosurgical device (OVD, Amvisc Plus, Bausch & Lomb, Inc.) was injected into the anterior chamber. At first, we attempted to remove the ICL directly without rotating it but failed with the rupture of the ICL. Next, we carefully rotated the ICL. After its vertical angle faced the incision, the ICL was grasped with forceps and extracted through the corneal incision. After the removal of the ICL, the capsulotomy was found to be incomplete between the coordinates of nine o’clock and two o’clock. A second capsulorhexis according to the laser tracks was safely made . The nuclear pre-fragmentation was unsuccessful and could not be tracked.
The phacoemulsification was manipulated in a standard stop-and-chop manner with the Stellaris system (Bausch & Lomb Laboratories, Rochester, New York, U.S.A.), followed by the implantation of the hydrophobic IOL (Tecnis ZCB00, Abbott Medical Optics Inc., Santa Ana, CA) in the capsular bag.
The surgery was performed on the right eye one and a half months later. Learning from the experience of the left eye surgery, we made a 3.0 mm temporal corneal incision in the right eye, and the ICL was extracted smoothly without rotation. This time, the capsulotomy was complete. Lots of small cavitation bubbles appeared, dispersing to the central area, and no big bubbles formed . The nuclear pre-fragmentation, however, failed again. Other steps of the surgery were the same as in the previous surgery and proceeded uneventfully. Both IOLs were well centered in the capsular bag at the end of the surgery.
However, it is worth noting that during the process of laser identification, the anterior ICL surface was accidently confused with the anterior capsule, not only in the shallow vaulted right eye, but also in the “0” vaulted left eye. Manual adjustment by the surgeon was needed to assign treatment zones to the anterior capsule surface in both eyes .
The patient was instructed to apply topical dexamethasone tobramycin for 2 weeks and pranoprofen for 1 month postoperatively. At the two-week follow-up for the right eye (two-month follow-up for the left eye), in both eyes, the UDVA was 20/32, and the near uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/25.