A 58-year-old man underwent laparoscopic radical resection of sigmoid carcinoma and ileostomy in the local hospital in June 2017. After the operation, he underwent intermittent chemotherapy six times. His physical condition recovered, and the re-examination showed no tumor recurrence. The patient was expected to undergo ileostomy takedown in the local hospital in June 2018 and April 2019, respectively, but the operation was not performed because of the COA, which was found by colonoscopy. The patient was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China in May 2019. To address the difficult and complicated post-surgery problems of this cancer patient, the medical team conducted a comprehensive and careful related examination and disease evaluation. The abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed postoperative changes of sigmoid carcinoma. The intestinal lumen above the anastomotic stoma was narrow and adhered to the anterior sacral fascia. The stoma was unobstructed after the right lower abdominal fistulation . Further barium enema examination suggested that the anastomotic stoma in rectum is completely closed and separated . Blind ends were present on both sides of the sigmoid colon and the rectum, and the bilateral blind ends were approximately 3.0 cm apart. The laboratory examination of the patients showed that there was no obvious abnormality in the general hemogram and no significant change in the level of tumor markers. Physical examination showed no obvious discomfort.
Despite the presence of COA with anastomotic separation, the examination results indicated that the blind end of the anastomotic site grew well. No obvious defect was found in the surrounding tissue. At the same time, the additional surgical operation would bring more trauma. Therefore, after speaking with the patient and his family, we planned to perform endoscopic operation on the patient to treat his disease. If endoscopic surgery cannot solve the problem, then surgery can be performed immediately or postponed as an alternative.
After the improvement of the preoperative examination, along with adequate preoperative communication and informed consent of patients, endoscopic surgery was proposed. In endoscopic surgery , we first observed the two blind ends of the anastomotic stoma through colonoscopy. On the one hand, the COA can be seen at about 8 cm through the anus side of colonoscopy. The closure line showed a fine line scar, and the intestinal wall at the blind end was soft. On the other hand, the colonoscope entered through the ileostomy side to reach the rectal segment. The front of the blind end of the bowel was found to also be truncated and closed with a white linear scar, and a titanium clip was placed at the proximal blind end. The intestinal wall of this blind end was also soft when touched. Second, the distance between the blind ends of both sides of the intestine was 3–4 cm, as measured by fluoroscopy at different positions. Subsequently, the colonoscope re-entered through the anal side. The hook knife (KDL-620LR; Olympus Optical) was used to slowly cut through the scar tissue layer by layer in the center of the blind end of the intestinal canal, and the yellow adipose tissue became visible. The direction of incision was determined to be parallel to the direction of the titanium clip at the proximal blind end, as shown by repeated fluoroscopic observation. The adipose tissue was carefully cut open, and the proximal intestinal muscular layer was still not visible after 4 cm of advance. Third, EUS-FNA (19 Ga, 1.10 mm; Boston Scientific) puncture needle was used to puncture along the direction of the titanium clip under fluoroscopy, and a small amount of contrast agent was injected to observe the flow direction and the visualization of the intestinal canal. The intestine was visualized after the needle touched the titanium clip, and a yellow zebra guide wire was placed after the needle entered the proximal intestine. Finally, colonoscopy was performed through one side of ileostomy to confirm that the guide wire was located in the proximal intestine tube. The dilation tube and balloon (M00558430; Boston Scientific) were inserted over the guide wire, and the incised bowel was gradually dilated to 12 mm under fluoroscopy. Subsequently, a 60 mm * 20 mm self-expandable full-coated metal stent (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) was placed over the guide wire to bridge both sides of the intestine, thereby achieving the repair of anastomotic closure with separation through the endoscopic operation. After completion of the operation, the patency of the stent was checked, no bleeding was found on the wound surface, and the anal canal was retained. Compared with the “drastic” surgical operation, this endoscopic surgery solved the intractable problem of COA with anastomotic separation with a more delicate and subtle operation and with minimal trauma. Endoscopic stent removal was performed on the patient 10 days later. The continuity of the bowel was observed intraoperatively, and an anal tube was placed in the proximal part of the anastomosis to observe the postoperative recovery.
One month later, stenosis was observed at the original anastomotic recanalization site during endoscopic examination, and scar-like hyperplasia was observed in the surrounding tissues. We successfully leaped over the narrow segment through inserting a new self-expandable full-coated metal stent of the same specification, and the stent expanded smoothly . After 1 week, the patient underwent stent removal and came to our hospital for follow-up and reexamination for several times after discharge. The anastomotic stenosis of the patient was gradually relieved. At 1 year after the endoscopic recanalization procedure for COA with anastomotic separation, the patient came to our hospital in June 2020 for ileostomy takedown. No related complications occurred during and after the operation. No obvious abnormality was found in the relevant post-operation laboratory and imaging examinations.
The follow-up situation at 3 months after discharge was as follows. The patient returned to a normal diet from a fluid diet and achieved normal exhaust and defecation. The results of colonoscopy showed that the anastomotic stoma healed well, and no obvious stenosis was found. At the same time, biopsy and pathological examination were carried out on the new tissue of the original anastomotic closure with anastomotic separation. The pathological results indicated that this site was normal intestinal mucosal tissue . Further endoscopic ultrasonography also confirmed the growth of normal intestinal mucosal tissues at the original anastomotic recanalization site .