43-year-old healthy woman consulted for left peripheral facial palsy associated with fever without a pattern, dry cough, dyspnoea with effort and asthenia of two weeks evolution. She received ambulatory treatment with amoxicillin-clavulanic and acyclovir without improvement of the picture. On physical examination, she presented ipsilateral hyperalgesia in the territory of the fifth cranial nerve, dysgeusia, hypoesthesia in the left dermatomes D6 to D12 and bilateral galactorrhea. In the admission laboratory, she presented erythro-sedimentation of 54 mm/h and negative viral serologies. A computed tomography (CT) of brain, thorax, abdomen and pelvis was performed with oral and intravenous contrast that showed multiple cervical, mediastinal and hilar bilateral adenopathies, the largest of which was a right hilar adenopathy of 28 mm maximum diameter. She was admitted to the general ward, where a lumbar puncture was performed with increased cellularity of the CSF with a predominantly mononuclear profile (90 cells) with no other pathological findings, with Xpert MTB/RIF and culture for common germs and mycobacteria negative, cytological study without atypia and serum ACE level within normal values. A computed tomography (CT) of brain and selar area was performed without pathological findings and of the spine with a change in the signal from the midline of D6 to D9 that covered almost the entire thickness of the cord, with reinforcement with intravenous contrast. After a week of admission, she recovered sensitivity in the left trunk and did not repeat febrile episodes or coughing, persisting facial palsy, dyspnoea and asthenia. She was referred for laparoscopic excisional biopsy of mediastinal ganglion, with flow cytometry of the sample without evidence of lymphoproliferative process, negative cultures and pathological anatomy with presence of numerous non-caseating granulomas compatible with sarcoidosis. During admission, the hypothalamo-pituitary axis was studied with mildly increased thyrotropic hormone with positive anti-thyrotropic antibodies, decreased follicle stimulating and luteinizing hormones, ultrasound of the breast and vagina without alterations and cytological study of the nipple secretion without atypia. The vitamin B12 dose was 188 pg/ml (VN 187-883) initiating oral replenishment. During the studies performed, elevated anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were found (1:1280) with the rest of the autoimmune panel negative, including antibodies against parietal cells. A high-endoscopy examination with gastric biopsy with inactive chronic gastritis with detection of Helicobacter pylori was performed, currently under treatment. She was evaluated in a multidisciplinary manner and classified as NS probable and initiated treatment with 0.5 mg/kg/day prednisone with improvement of the remaining neurological symptoms, and an MRI was performed three months later where the signal alteration was limited from D7 to D8. Spirometry evidenced a mild obstructive pattern without response to bronchodilators, nor pathological findings in the fibro-bronchoscopy. She had improvement of dyspnoea with the use of inhaled corticosteroids. A complete hormonal profile was repeated with normalisation of TSH and prolactin decreased (78 ng/ml), persisting galactorrhea. The patient is under multidisciplinary follow-up in our hospital.
