A 15-year-old averagely built male, having no significant medical history, presented to the casualty with a history of closed trauma of the right knee following self-fall while playing. The mechanism of injury was hyperextension of the knee joint with a valgus stress. On physical examination, the patient had difficulty to move and was unable to stand on his right lower limb. There was visible swelling over his right knee and distal third of thigh with no skin defect. The attitude of the affected limb was that of abduction and external rotation with visible deformity around the right knee. There was a limb shortening of about 3 cm of the right lower limb as compared to the normal limb. The pulsations of the popliteal, tibialis posterior, and dorsalis pedis arteries were positionally palpable.
An urgent color Doppler of the right lower limb was done which revealed positional variability in the pulsatality of the popliteal artery with compromised lumen and showing triphasic waveform in certain positions only. The anterior and posterior tibial arteries and dorsalis pedis artery also showed positional variability in the pulsatality with biphasic waveform in certain positions. Thus, the limb was maintained in the position where pulsations of the major arteries were felt . The capillary refill and toe movements were present. No motor or sensory defect was found. Plain AP and lateral X-ray of the right knee revealed a distal femur physeal fracture (Salter and Harris type I) with complete metaphyseal fragment displacement .
The patient was operated within 12 h after the injury. Under spinal anesthesia, patient was positioned supine. Closed reduction was attempted using a proximal tibial Steinman pin for skeletal traction and manipulation of the right lower limb. After a gentle continuous traction, manipulation was done in the form of downward pressure on the distal epiphysis and an upward pressure on the proximal metaphyseal fragment of the femur. The reduction was not achieved and hence the fracture site was opened up using a Lateral approach. After the fracture site was visualized, the proximal fragment was held using bone holding forceps and the distal fragment fixed using a clamp , and traction and manipulation was done to achieve anatomic reduction of the fracture site. Reduction was confirmed under fluoroscopy and fixed using three 2.5 mm K-wires in a crossing manner , 2 from lateral to medial side and 1 from medial to lateral side. For additional stability, a long leg splint was given anteriorly in 20–30 degrees flexion of the knee.
Post-operative radiographs revealed anatomic reduction of the physis of the distal femur with restoration of the normal axis of femur . Post-operative surgical outcome was satisfactory. Close monitoring of the patient was done for the first 24 h postoperatively and no signs of secondary vascular thrombosis were found. Patient was started with hamstring and quadriceps strengthening exercises postoperatively. The slab was kept for 6 weeks, following which the K wires were removed. A review X-ray done showed healing of the fracture , and partial weight bearing was initiated with the help of walker. On subsequent follow-up, after 4 and 8 months, correct limb axis alignment and no significant post-operative complications were found. After 6 months, the patient had become free of pain and had a complete range of movement in the right knee joint . There was no significant angular deformity or shortening in the right lower extremity.