A 58-year-old woman from Grenada presented with a chief complaint of nausea, vomiting, and jaundice after her primary care physician (PCP) discovered elevated LFTs on routine labs.
The patient had a 10-day history of fatigue, nausea, and intermittent non-bilious, non-bloody emesis. Four to five days before admission, she noticed that her eyes began to turn yellow, prompting her to visit her PCP. These symptoms were also associated with decreased appetite, weight loss of 10 lbs, and dark urine. She stated that she did not take her statin medication regularly, but she reported drinking a “green juice” for the past 3 d before admission. It consisted of watercress, garlic, and ginger. The patient denied abdominal pain, diarrhea, constipation, other changes in diet, or other use of supplements.
The patient’s past medical history was significant for chronic hypertension, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia. There was no history of excessive alcohol use.
The patient denied any family history of liver disease or autoimmune disorders.
On admission, the patient was hypertensive (blood pressure 168/98 mmHg), tachycardic (heart rate 77 beats per min), and afebrile (37.1 C F). She was alert and oriented. No asterixis was noted in her upper extremities. She had mild bilateral scleral icterus. An abdominal exam revealed an overweight, non-distended, non-tender abdomen with no masses, no hepatomegaly, no flank tenderness, and no fluid wave.
The laboratory work-up showed: Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 2500 U/L (reference range 10-49 U/L), serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 3159 U/L (reference range 8-34 U/L), alkaline phosphatase 714 U/L (reference range 46-116 U/L), serum lipase 61 U/L (reference range 12-53 U/L), total bilirubin 6.4 mg/dL (reference range 0.3-1.2 mg/dL), direct bilirubin 4.4 mg/dL (reference range 0.1-0.3 mg/dL), prothrombin time 12.7 s, and INR 1.07. Table portrays a trend from admission to discharge of pertinent values. Serological markers for hepatotropic viruses such as A, B, C, and E were all negative. She had no clinical signs of infection. Further infective work-up revealed negative serology for cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus 1 & 2, and human immunodeficiency virus. All tested autoantibodies, including antinuclear antibody (ANA), smooth muscle antibody, anti-mitochondrial antibody, liver soluble antibody, and anti-liver kidney microsome 1 antibody, were negative . The patient was tested for Wilson’s disease, for which her ceruloplasmin levels came back as slightly elevated at 62 mg/dL. We attributed this to her current inflammatory state.
An abdominal ultrasound with Doppler showed no significant parenchymal abnormalities with normal arterial and venous Doppler of the liver and spleen. The gallbladder was contracted with no definite evidence of cholecystitis . A follow-up magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) with and without contrast was then conducted to rule out biliary causes of acute hepatitis . The MRCP showed a biliary system with no filling defects, stones, or ductal dilation. All other organs were within normal limits.
The patient underwent a liver biopsy, which showed moderate to severe active hepatitis with focal confluent necrosis, consisting mostly of lymphocytes with few eosinophils, plasma cells, and neutrophils with scattered acidophil bodies. Her biopsy was negative for cholestasis, granulomas, or malignancy . Differentials from the pathology report include drug/toxin/herbal/supplement-induced injury and infection (including viral hepatitis E), and less likely immune-mediated injury given negative autoimmune workup (negative ANA, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-mitochondrial antibody, anti-liver kidney microsome-1 antibody, and anti-soluble liver antigen antibody).