A 72-year-old woman suffered from repeated fever, nausea and vomiting for 3 years following pancreatoduodenectomy, which had been aggravated for 2 d prior to her presentation at the hospital.
The patient presented with a complaint of repeated fever, sometimes accompanied by nausea and vomiting following pancreatoduodenectomy for 3 years. No associated abdominal pain, diarrhea, or melena was observed. Similar symptoms appeared repeatedly, once every 1-2 mo, with fever symptoms that gradually resolved 3-5 d after antibiotic treatment. Two days later, she became febrile again. The use of oral moxifloxacin tablets could not control the infection, and her body temperature reached 39.8 °C.
The patient underwent pancreatoduodenectomy with child reconstruction for adenocarcinoma of duodenal papilla 3 years prior. Histological analysis revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma at stage T2N0M0, Ia. The patient recovered well and was followed-up regularly. No evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis was noted within 3 years after surgery. Multiple cysts of the liver were detected over more than 40 years but were asymptomatic. She also had hypertension, which was controlled with medication for more than 20 years.
The patient’s temperature was 39.8 °C, heart rate was 92 bpm, and blood pressure was 145/92 mmHg. Physical examination revealed yellowish skin and icteric sclera. The abdomen was soft with no abdominal pain or rebound pain.
Laboratory findings revealed a white cell count of 8900/µL (reference value, 4000 to 10000/µL), neutrophil ratio of 90%, serum C-reactive protein concentration of 126 mg/dL (reference value, < 8 mg/dL), serum gamma glutamic transpeptidase concentration (GGT) of 158 IU/L (reference value, 8 to 50 IU/L), serum alkaline phosphatase concentration (ALP) of 576 IU/L (reference value, 40 to 150 IU/L), serum total bilirubin (TBIL) level of 95 µmol/L (reference value, 3 to 22 µmol/L), serum direct bilirubin (DBIL) level of 76.5 µmol/L (reference value, 0 to 7 µmol/L), serum aspartate aminotransferase concentration (AST) of 55 IU/L (reference value, 15 to 40 IU/L), and serum alanine aminotransferase concentration (ALT) of 115 IU/L (reference value, 7 to 40 IU/L). In the past 3 years, blood culture was positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli 7 times and 4 times, respectively.
Preoperative computed tomography (CT) showed several asymptomatic hepatic cysts . Abdominal CT performed 2 mo postoperatively did not reveal signs of hepatic cyst infection, such as an enhanced thickened wall, edema of the perilesional hepatic parenchyma or a significant increase in cyst diameter . Abdominal CT performed 5 mo postoperatively and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) performed 9 mo postoperatively both showed that the cyst on the lateral side of the right liver had significantly decreased in size, and the wall of the cyst was slightly thickened. The interior cyst appeared slightly enlarged, but it had a thin smooth wall and homogenous contents, and no edema was observed in the surrounding liver tissue. Three years postoperatively, a CT plain scan showed that the cyst on the lateral side of the right liver had disappeared and that the cyst on the inner side of the right lobe had obviously increased in size. Mild dilatation of the intrahepatic bile duct was also noted .
Enhanced CT revealed that the cyst on the inner side of the right lobe had obviously increased in size, had a thick wall and was surrounded by edema, with less pleural and peritoneal effusion . The cyst showed obvious infection. The blood culture was positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae at this time.