A 56-year-old woman, 70 kg, of Algerian origin was referred to us in August 2003 presenting with fatigue, proximal and bilateral muscular weakness (muscle testing score of 69 points compared to a score of 88 in healthy individuals), apprehension to grasp, and difficulties in getting dressed. Additional symptoms included effort dyspnea, swollen hands, and purple erythema of her eyelids. Appendicitis, sciatica, tachycardia, hypertension, and asthma were listed in her medical history. Her creatine phosphokinase (CPK, muscle enzymes) levels were six times the normal (N) level. Auto-antibodies measurements were initially not performed.
A muscle biopsy was performed, and showed characteristic patterns of dermatomyositis with perifascicular atrophy, evidence of injury to capillaries and perifascicular myofibers, and inflammatory infiltrates in the perimysial region (predominantly CD4+). She was diagnosed as having dermatomyositis in November 2003 and prednisone treatment (1 mg/kg per day) was initiated. A repeated search for malignancy was negative. A diagnosis of a mild interstitial pneumonitis together with the presence of anti-Jo1 antibodies further confirmed the suspicion of aSS. Her gamma globulin levels were normal.
Since treatment response was incomplete, immunosuppressant therapy with azathioprine (2 mg/kg per day), which was replaced after 9 months by MTX (15 mg per week), was introduced. However, both were poorly tolerated and she developed cytopenia. Therefore, infusions with IVIg (2 g/kg per month) were initiated for six months, in addition to steroids.
In September 2006, due to lack of response to these different therapies, RTX (2 g every 6 months) was introduced and our patient reported an improvement in her articular and muscular pain. Yet, because of the development of hypogammaglobulinemia, RTX was discontinued in October 2011. Of importance, no immune deficit had been present prior to the introduction of RTX.
She was readmitted in December 2012 with a muscle weakness score of 75.5 points (over 88 points in healthy individuals) . Her CPK levels were normal, but probing for anti-Jo-1 antibody was positive. In addition, a lung scan revealed the presence of interstitial basal lung infiltrate . Testing of pulmonary function showed a reduction of single-breath diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO; 48%), with a total lung capacity (TLC) of 72%, and forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)/vital capacity (VC) at 73%. A slight muscle inflammation of her thighs was also evidenced by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In terms of treatment strategy, a bolus injection of IVIg (2 g/kg) was administered, but she developed adverse effects, including headache and distal paresthesia, after which she refused to receive another IVIg infusion. Her treatment adherence was poor and in addition to refusing to try a different IVIg formulation, she had also resumed the corticosteroid treatment in November 2012. In fact, she expressed wishes against hospitalizations and stopped all the treatments.
An immunologic evaluation showed hypogammaglobulinemia (4.4 g/l), with reduced total immunoglobulin G (IgG) (4.2 g/l), and a reduction in each subclass of IgG: IgG1 2.48 g/l (N >3.82 g/l), IgG2 1.65 g/l (N >2.41), IgG3 0.14 g/l (N >0.2), and IgG4 0.038 g/l (N >0.18 g/l). Her IgA (0.5 g/l, N >0.7) and IgM levels (0.34 g/l, N >0.4) were also decreased. Her IgE levels were normal.
She was seen again in May 2014, when her general health had deteriorated due to the discontinuation of steroids, RTX, and IgG treatment. In particular, she complained about severe fatigue and presented with swelling of the proximal interphalangeal joints of her right index and middle finger. An MRI scan of her right hand revealed an advanced and destructive arthropathy associated with significant synovitis of the proximal interphalangeal joints of the first, second, and third rays and, to a lesser extent, of the fourth and fifth rays . Her metacarpal phalangeal joints were not affected, but an erosive synovitis of the dorsal scapholunate articulation and beginning erosion of the lunate were observed. Her radioulnar joint was not affected.
At this point, her muscle weakness score was 70/88, with a muscle strength of +3 as measured bilaterally at her middle trapezius, major gluteal, and psoas muscles. Her muscle disability was rated 18/75 (score ranging from 0 no disability to 75 maximum disability) . An MRI of her thighs did not reveal any significant evolution of myopathy since the previous examination in 2012. In particular, there was no important inflammatory signal of the muscle and no sign of amyotrophy.
Likewise, a thorax scan confirmed the stabilization of the abnormalities reported in November 2012, with mostly the basal regions being affected. Pulmonary function testing was also indicative of overall stability compared to 2012: single-breath DLCO was 46%, TLC 70%, and FEV1/VC 73%. Whereas DLCO, TLC (−30%), and functional respiratory deficit (25%) were unchanged, a slight decrease of forced expiratory flow (FEF)25–75 was noted.
Of importance, she complained of frequent infections of the upper airways, including pharyngitis, sinusitis, bronchitis, and otitis for the past 2 years. Consistent with these recurrent infections, an immunologic evaluation confirmed a persistent hypogammaglobulinemia (5.0 g/l), with reduced total IgG (4.1 g/l), and reduction of each subclass of IgG: IgG1 2.3 g/l, IgG2 1.48 g/l, IgG3 0.11 g/l, and IgG4 0.04 g/l. This picture was evocative of a persistent common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) secondary to RTX. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 22.7 mg/l and her CPK level was 489 UI/l.
Treatment with Gammanorm® (SCIg) was initiated in July 2014 (2 g/kg per month divided into two infusions per week). After 3 and 6 months, respectively, of treatment, she reported diffuse pain, which was present since discontinuation of Cortancyl® (prednisone), and general fatigue. Arthritis of her proximal and metacarpal phalangeal joints was still present, but her muscle weakness score had improved to 75/88 and muscle disability was rated 12/75 . Of importance, no novel infectious episode was reported. In fact, Gammanorm® (SCIg) was well tolerated and she confirmed a slight improvement in her general health state.
In January 2015, MTX (15 mg/week) was reintroduced and a significant clinical improvement was achieved by April. Notably, her serum CRP (3.3 mg/l) and CPK (63 UI/l) returned to normalized levels despite persisting fatigue, along with arthritis of her metacarpal and proximal interphalangeal joints (arthritis confirmed at a consultation in May 2015). Nevertheless, the normalization of her immunodeficiency and the significant improvement in the state of her general health remained stable, as reassessed in November 2015.
Finally, in May 2016, joint manifestations had disappeared and fatigue had regressed significantly. No infection had been observed during the past 18 months. Her muscle weakness score had also improved to 82/88 and muscle disability was rated 9/75. Her CRP and CPK levels were normal. As shown by immunologic evaluation, hypogammaglobulinemia had resolved and all subclasses of IgG were normalized.
Moreover, the results of a thorax scan indicated a slight improvement in basal lung infiltrate, alongside pulmonary function testing: DLCO of 55%, TLC of 75%, and a FEV1/VC 74%.