The parents of a previously healthy 2-year-old child came to our hospital with complaints of malaise, lethargy, vomiting, loose stools, yellowing of the sclera and skin, dark urine and white stools, which have been observed in the child for 4 days. Possible contact with infectious patients, use of drugs and other potentially toxic substances was not detected. The objective status of the child during hospitalization was characterized by elevated body temperature (37.7°C), marked lethargy, icteric coloration of the skin and mucous membranes, hepatomegaly. Heart rate (HR) – 123/min., respiratory rate – 24/min., SpO2-98%. The examination revealed an increase in total bilirubin to 129.6 μmol/l, direct fraction to 116.24 μmol/l, increased levels of transaminases: ALT - 4.5 mmol/l/h, AST - 3.3 mmol/l/h. Taking into account the clinical data, viral hepatitis was suspected, an appropriate examination and symptomatic therapy were prescribed.

Specific studies revealed positive titers of IgM HAV and IgM EBV (VCA), negative results of examination for markers of HBV (HBsAg), HCV (IgM+G), cytomegalovirus (IgM) and leptospirosis (PCR). An ultrasound examination revealed an increase in the size and increased echogenicity of the liver. Taking into account the detected markers, the disease was considered to be viral hepatitis A with EBV co-infection.

During the first three days of inpatient treatment, the child’s condition remained stable, vital functions were within normal limits. In laboratory tests, there was a tendency to decrease the elevated levels of bilirubin and transaminases. On the fourth day of stay, a disturbance of consciousness appeared in the form of stupor (on the Glasgow coma scale (GCS) - (E3V4M5)=12b). The appearance of neurological symptoms was associated with deterioration of coagulation hemostasis indicators (Prothrombin index (PI), Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)), a decrease in the concentration of protein in blood serum. The worsening of the condition was considered as ALF. The treatment included antibacterial therapy (cefotaxime 50 mg/kg/day), corticosteroids (dexamethasone 0.6 mg/kg/day), parenteral nutrition, replacement therapy (fresh-frozen plasma), albumin 20%, glutargin 80 mg/day, thioctic acid 10 units/kg/day, canavit up to 5 mg/day, respiratory support (ventilation). Over the next two days, the child’s condition worsened due to ALF. Disturbances of consciousness progressed to severe coma (according to the FOUR (E0M0B0R1) scale = 1 point, without drug sedation), peripheral edema developed, hemorrhagic contents appeared through the nasogastric tube, intestinal peristalsis was suppressed, oligo-anuria developed, laboratory tests showed progression anemia, an increase in the level of indirect bilirubin, indicators of coagulation hemostasis worsened (Table 1). On the 6th day of hospital stay, the child had a cardiac arrest (asystole), which did not recover after resuscitation measures.

