A 55-year-old Chinese female was admitted to our hospital complaining of exertional dyspnea for more than 10 years. She had been developing truncal obesity and facial rounding over the past 2 years, without evidence of acne, hirsutism or wide purple striae. The patient had a family history of hypertension and was diagnosed with hypertension 10 years prior to admission, and she had been using irbesartan, metoprolol and nifedipine XR since then. She was also diagnosed with hyperlipidemia and prescribed with statins for 5 years. The patient reported no history of alcohol or drug abuse, in particular, no history of steroid use.
Physical examination on admission showed elevated blood pressure (164/104 mmHg) and normal heart rate (74 beats per minute). The patient’s height, body weight and waist circumference were 156 cm, 51 kg and 88 cm, respectively, with a body mass index (BMI) of 20.96 kg/m2. She had a plethoric moon-shaped face, centripetal obesity, buffalo hump, accompanied by ecchymosis and slight edema at both lower limbs. Neurological examination was unremarkable except for slight muscle weakness of the lower-extremities.
Routine laboratory examinations showed normal complete blood cell count and hepatorenal parameters, whereas the level of serum triglyceride was slightly elevated. The fasting plasma glucose level was 7.33 mmol/L, and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) was 6.6% . Endocrinological examinations showed that circadian rhythm of cortisol disappeared, and the level of ACTH was less than 1.00 ng/L . Twenty-four-hour urine free cortisol (24 h UFC) elevated to 634.8μg/24 h (reference range: 20.26-127.55μg/24 h). The next morning (8 a.m.) serum cortisol level after an overnight 1 mg dexamethasone suppression test (DMST) was 787.5 nmol/L, indicated lack of normal suppression . The diagnosis of ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome was therefore established.
For differential diagnosis, aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR) was measured after discontinuation of irbesartan and nifedipine XR for at least 2 weeks as they might lead to false-negative result. Plasma and urinary catecholamine concentrations were detected as well. The diagnosis of primary aldosteronism (PA) was excluded since both plasma renin activity (PRA) and aldosterone concentration (PAC) were within normal limits along with an ARR value of 2.59 ng/dL: ng/mL.h. Pheochromocytoma was also ruled out based on laboratory findings .
Three adrenal nodules were found with adrenal contrast-enhanced CT. One on the right side was 2.5 cm in diameter, and the other two on the left side with diameters of 2.3 cm and 0.6 cm, respectively . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of sellar region revealed normal findings. Bone mineral density measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scans showed that the T score of lumbar spine, femoral neck and the total hip was − 3.0, − 3.2 and − 3.3, respectively, which indicated osteoporosis. In order to locate the functional lesions in this patient, AVS was performed and the concentrations of plasma aldosterone and cortisol were measured from both adrenal veins (AV) and inferior vena cava (IVC). Adrenal venous catheterization was successful, and the hormone levels were shown in Table . The adrenal vein to inferior vena cava cortisol (AV: IVC) gradient was 13.57 on the right side and 13.88 on the left side. The left and right AV to IVC gradient of aldosterone were 5.58 and 6.79 respectively. Moreover, the cortisol/aldosterone ratio (CAR) in adrenal veins was 292.52 on the right and 359.29 on the left, along with a left-to-right odds ratio of 1.23 . In combination with the results of AVS, which indicated non-lateralization, this patient was diagnosed with CS induced by bilateral adrenal excessive cortisol secretion.
The patient was treated with metoprolol succinate, rosuvastatin, insulin, calcium and vitamin D supplements during the investigation. Considering her poor cardiac function, a two-step operation was planned. Laparoscopic right adrenalectomy was performed, followed by left adrenalectomy after a two-month interval. Pathological findings of the removed right adrenal mass indicated a yellow adenoma with 2.5 cm in diameter, surrounded by atrophic adrenal tissue .
Overnight 1 mg DMST was repeated 2 weeks after surgery, which demonstrated no inhibition on the serum cortisol at 8 a.m. on the following day, despite significantly decreased cortisol level post-operation . Therefore, it can be inferred that the autonomous cortisol secretion from left adrenal masses was persistent. The left adrenal gland was then removed and two adenomas were confirmed by pathological examination . The 8 a.m. plasma cortisol after 3 days of bilateral adrenalectomy was 37.30 nmol/L. Hydrocortisone replacement therapy (from 20 mg t.i.d to 20 mg q.d.) was administered after surgery. At 1 year after the operations, the patient lost 4 kg of body weight and the waist circumference reduced to 71 cm. Changes of other laboratory examinations at the last follow-up compared with the first admission were shown in Table .
An electronic literature search in PubMed was performed to screen the case reports relating to ACTH-independent Cushing’s syndrome caused by bilateral cortisol-secreting adenomas. Searching words included “Cushing’s syndrome” and “bilateral adrenocortical adenoma”. All reference lists from the main reports and relevant reviews were screened manually for additional eligible studies. The results were limited to full-text articles published in English. Extracted data included the first author’s name, year of publication, country, preoperative diagnostic technique, patient characteristics (gender, age at onset and at diagnosis), lesions size, operative method and tumor cut surface.
A total of 231 papers were identified, of which, 15 available reports were included in the review . The clinical features in these patients were summarized as following: 1) this disorder seemed predominated in females (male: female ratio 1: 14), with an adult onset (the mean age was 39.6 ± 8.6 years; ranged from 24 to 53 years); 2) the size of bilateral adrenal adenomas ranged from 1.0 to 5.0 cm in diameter, the majority of which were solitary in both sides (12 out of 15, 80%); 3) most of the bilateral adrenal lesions were found to occur synchronously, except that three cases occurred at different periods [, ]; 4) the surrounded adrenal cortex of resected adenomas was atrophic in most cases; 5) although no recurrence was reported postoperatively, long-term outcomes remain unclear with the longest follow-up duration of 123 months .
All preoperative diagnoses were established based on endocrinological studies and imaging findings, while the methods used to determine the functional lesions were different. Nine patients underwent adrenocortical scintigraphy with different radio-imaging agents, all of which revealed bilateral adrenal uptake. AVS was performed in eight cases to evaluate the hypersecretion of cortisol, and only two of them applied cortisol gradient adjusted by plasma aldosterone [, ]. All patients underwent surgical resection of adenomas, including ten bilateral total adrenalectomy [, –], three unilateral partial adrenalectomy with contralateral total adrenalectomy [, , ], one bilateral partial adrenalectomy and one bilateral subtotal adrenalectomy . All patients received glucocorticoid replacement therapy postoperatively. It is noteworthy that glucocorticoid therapy was reported to be withdrawn during follow-up in patients who underwent bilateral subtotal adrenalectomy or partial adrenalectomy [–].