A 35-year-old black woman presented to our hospital two weeks ago with fever, night sweats, facial erythema, and painful oral ulcers. She denied joint or respiratory symptoms. Physical examination revealed normal vital signs, pallor, tender cervical adenopathy, and no hepatosplenomegaly.

Eighteen months earlier, she had been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis by another medical service, with asymmetric polyarthritis of the hands, ankles, and knees associated with an hour of morning stiffness. Prednisone and methotrexate were initiated, but the latter was discontinued a few months later due to nausea and vomiting, and tofacitinib (JAK inhibitor) was prescribed. Tofacitinib was administered for about 6 months and discontinued 2 months before hospitalization due to financial issues. She was then maintained on low-dose prednisone.

Laboratory tests collected at admission revealed serum creatinine (Cr) of 3.74 mg/dL, urea 108 mg/dL, hemoglobin (Hb) 10.9 g/dL, leukocytes 2,620/mm3, platelets 137,000/mm3, total bilirubin 0.21 mg/dL, AST 191 U/L, ALT 110 U/L, ferritin 5,628 ng/mL, DHL 777 U/L, albumin 1.9 g/dL, and normal levels of complement. Baseline serum creatinine was not available. Urinalysis revealed 222,000 leukocytes/mL, 110,000 red blood cells/mL, and 10.3 g/L protein. Further testing during the investigation showed negative IgG and IgM for toxoplasmosis, HIV, HTLV, syphilis, hepatitis B and C; a homogeneous pattern of FAN > 1:1280, anti-dsDNA > 1:320, and anti-ENA and rheumatoid factor negative. Ultrasound revealed normal-sized kidneys with diffuse and increased echogenicity. The typical panel of autoantibodies with a compatible clinical presentation supported the diagnosis of SLE. As this was a patient who had never had a documented renal exacerbation and with atypical signs of lupus activity such as adenopathy, painful oral ulcers, and elevated liver enzymes, investigation of other causes of acute lymphadenopathy and glomerulopathy was initiated while a 3-day course of 1 g intravenous methylprednisolone was initiated.

In the following days, the patient developed progressive anaemia (Hb 9.0 g/dL on day 2 and 7.7 g/dL on day 7) and progressive renal insufficiency. Intermittent haemodialysis was initiated on day 6, and a renal biopsy was performed. The examination showed 11 glomeruli, all with degenerated and hypertrophic podocytes. One glomerulus showed segmental collapse of the capillary walls. The renal interstitium showed dilated tubules filled with hyaline cylinders, mild fibrosis and tubular atrophy. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated segmental and irregular deposits of IgM (++/4+) and C3 (traces). In electron microscopy, discrete mesangial deposits and sparse subepithelial deposits associated with retraction and tortuosity of the capillary wall were observed.

Further investigation of viral agents resulted in negative serology for EBV, CMV IgG positive and CMV IgM serology and serum PCR negative for CMV. However, IgM and IgG serology as well as serum PCR for parvovirus B19 were positive. APOL1 gene sequencing was performed, revealing a homozygous G1 genotype.

Prednisone treatment was initiated at 1 mg/kg (70 mg/day) with clinical and laboratory improvement in the following days. The last dialysis was performed on the eighth day after admission to hospital, and Cr has been decreasing since then (4.2, 3.1 and 2.4 mg/dL on days 10, 13 and 15, respectively). The urinary protein creatinine (UPC) in a single urine sample on day 9 was 2.31 g/g. After discharge, at her first outpatient appointment (18 days after admission), she had a Cr of 1.09 mg/dL. A gradual reduction of prednisone was initiated and after 3 months the dose was 30 mg/day. Thereafter, laboratory tests revealed a Cr of 0.69 mg/dL, albumin of 4.3 g/dL, haemoglobin of 16.2 g/dL, a UPC of 1.24 g/g and a 24-hour urine protein of 0.93 g.
